Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, Vol. 13: Gregory the Great (II), Ephraim Syrus, Aphrahat
Philip Schaff & Henry Wace (eds.), various translators (1890)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/selectlibraryofn13scha
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

Brigham Young University


^^u^if^ Ace ^

No -Z%U^ No.*


I


-•^^>


.;i^^^j^'-


GO

', ^ao A SELECT LIBRARY


NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS


OF


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
Second Scrie0/

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH PROLEGOMENA AND EXPLANATORY NOTES.


VOLUMES I.-VIl.
UNDER THE EDITORIAL SUPERVISION OF


PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D., and HENRY WAGE, D.D.,

Professor of CJucrch History m the Principal of Kin^^s College^

Union Theological Seminary, New York. London.

IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PA TRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE

AND AMERICA.


VOLUME XIII.

PART II.

GREGORY THE GREAT.

EPHRAIM SYRUS.

APHRAHAT.


Wf^


NEW YORK :

THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.

OXFORD AND LONDON:

PARKER & COMPANY.

1898.


\ ,.' 'V ?'' ''^'> ""> ^'


Copyright, 1898,
By THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.


• • • • ^ *■ *■

• c • * • « • « c


SELECTED EPISTLES


OF.


GREGORY THE GREAT,

BISHOP OF ROME,


(BOOKS IX.— XIV.)


TRANSLATED, WITH NOTES AND INDICES,


BY THE LATE


REV. JAMES BARM BY, D. D.


GENERAL LITERATURE

OF

GREGORY'S' LIFE AND TIMES.


Barmby (James), D.D., Gregory the Great ; part of " The Fathers for English readers," Lond., 1879, 8".

re-issue. Lond., 1892, 8'.

(Qy.), Gregorius I., Pope, in Dictionary of Christian Biography, Vol. II, Lond,, 1880.

BlANCHl-GioviNl (A.), Pontificato di San Gregorio il Grande. Milano, 1844, 8°.

Callias Caryon (A.), Apologie pour S. Gregoire evecque de Rome premier du nom, autrement dit, Gregoire
le Grand ... a Sedan, 1603, sm. 8^

Du Moulin (P.), the Elder. La vie et religion de deux bons papes Leon premier et Gregoire premier ...

Sedan, 1650, 12*.
EWALD (P.), Die alteste Biographie Gregors I. (p. 17 of Histor. Aufsatze dem Andenken an G. Waitz.)

Hannover, 1886, 8®.

GUETTEE (F. R.), La Papaute moderne condamnee par le Pape Saint Gregoire le Grand. ... Extraits des

ouvrages de St. Gregoire ... Paris., 1S61, 8°.

Joannes, diaconus : S. Gregorii Migni vita. (Patrol. Lat. ed. Migne, tom. 75, col. 59.) Paris., 1849, 8°.

Lau (G. J. T.), Gregor I. der Grosse nach seinem Lebea und seiner Lehre geschildert. Leipzig, 1845, 8".

Leblanc (H. J.), Utrum B. Gregorius Magnus litteras humaniores et ingenuas artes odio persecutus sit

disputationem proponebat ... H. J. L. Parisiis, 1852, S^.

Luzarche (V.) [Editor], Vie du Pape Gregoire le Grande. Legende fran9aise [en vers]. Publiee pour la

premiere fois par V.L. Tours, 1857, 8".

Maggio (G.), Prolegomeni alia storia di Gregorio il Grande e de' suoi tempi. Prato, 1879, 8''.

Maimbourg (L.), Histoire du Pontificat de S. Gregoire le Grand. Paris, 1686, 4^

Paulus, diaconus Aquileiensis dictus Winfridus : S. Gregorii Magni vita auctore Paulo diacono monacho

Cassinensi (Patrol. Lat. ed. Migne, tom. 75, col. 41.) Paris., 1849, 8"».

Pfahler (G.), of EUwangen. Gregor der Grosse und seine Zeit. Bd. I. [No more published.]

Frankfurt am Main, 1852, S".

PlNGAUD (L.), La politique de Saint Gregoire le Grand. These ... Paris. Paris, 1872, 8°.

Pozzo (F. dal), Istoria della vita e del pontificato di S. Gregorio Magno Papa ... Con un ragionamento sopra

gli sludi ecclesiastici. Rome, 1758, 4"*.

Sainte-Marthe (Denys de), Histoire de S. Gregoire le Grand, ... Tiree principalement de fes Ouvrages.

a Rouen, 1697, 4*.

Saxton (Rev. A. J.), Saint Gregory the Great (Penny Biographical series). Lond. [1892I, 8°.

Simrock (C.) [Editor], Eine schone merkvvurdige Historie des heiligen Bischofs Gregorius auf dem Stein

genannt. Berlin [1838?), S".

Snow (T. B.), abbot of St. Mary's, Liverpool. St. Gregory the Great. His work and his spirit. (Heroes

of the Cross.) Lond., 1892, S".

Stute (J. P.), Gregorius Magnus Papa Lutheranus; sive Der Lutherische Pabst. Contra Papistas, imprimis

Monachos Parienses Ordinis S. Benedicti, S. Marthe, Bellarminum, ... aliosque ex S. Gregorii libris

et epistolis vindicatus ... Lipsiae, 1715, 4<*.

Welin (L. G.), Hesp.: Legend om Pafven Gregorius den Store. Prags. J. H. Schroder. Stockholm, 1848, 8".

WiGGERS (G. F.), De Gregorio Magno ejusque placitis anthropologicis commentatio prior [ — posterior].

Rostochii, 1838—40, 4®.
Zyp£ (F. vander), Sanctus Gregorius Magnus „• ex ... Dei familia Benedictina oriundus ... Ipris, 16 10, 8"*.


REGULA PASTORALIS.


IMPORTANT MSS.


1. Troyes 504. End of the 6th or beginning of the 7th cent. In uncials and majuscules. Formerly in the

library of the College des Oratoriens de Troyes. (Migne, no. I.)

2. Corvey no. 93. (Codex Corbeiensis, Migne, no. 2.) [The library at Corvey has now been dispersed.]

3. Chartres 65 (6.) of the 9th cent. (St. Pere.)
4-6. St. Gallen 216 — 217, 219. All of the 9th cent.

7. St. Germain 12260. of the 9th cent.

8. St. Germain 12261. of the 9th cent.

9. Laon 187. of the 9th or loth cent. (St. Vincent.)

10. Oxford, Bodl. Laud misc. 263. of the 9th or loth cent.j (probably the lOth).

11. Codex Belvacensis, written about the middle of the loth cent. (Migne.)

12. Rouen 500 (A. 260.) of the nth cent. (Cathedrale de Rouen.) ,

13. Chartres 114 (62.) of the 12th cent. (Chapitre.)

14. Rouen 501 (A. 368. ) of the 12th cent. (St. Ouen de Rouen.)

15. Troyes 752. of the 12th cent. (Clairvaux.)

16. Oxford, Bodl. Hatton 20. In English minuscule of the loth cent. , containing the Anglo-Saxon version

made by King Alfred. It formerly belonged to Worcester [cathedral].

EDITIONS.

1. ... lib' Regule pastoral'. [Ulric Zell ? Cologne, 1470?] 4°.

2. ... liber regule pastoral*. [M. Flach : Strasburg, 1475?] 4°.

3. ... liber cure pastoralis. n. pi. 1482, 8°.

4. Pafloralis. Venetiis per Hier. de Paganinis, 1492, 4°.

5. Paftorale. Argentine, 1496, 4*'.

6. Paftorale. in vrbe Bafilienfi (Mich. Furter) 1496, 4°.

7. Liber cure pafloralis ... Parrhisiis per Vdalricu' gering & Magiflru' Berchtoldu' renbolt focioru', 1498, 4°.

8. in Gregorii Magni opera, beneficio Bertholdi Renbolt. In edibus J. Parvi : Parrhisiis, 1518, fol.

9. Do. ed. Franc. Regnault. Rothomagi (Paris), 1521, fol.

10. Pastoralis diui Gregorii ; At fol. cciii. of Opera ... Paris., ex officina Claudii Chevalon, 1523, fol.

11. in opera ... I533> fol*

12. Do. " Basil., 1550.

13. Do. cura Huldrici Coccii. Basil., ap. Froben. 1564, fol.

14. Pastoralia ; at col. 869, tom. I. of Opera ... ed. Toannes Gillotius Campanus. Paris., 1571, fol.

15. Pastoralis; at fol. 2, tom. II. of opera, Antverpiae. 1572, fol.

16. [another ed. of no. 14.] Paris., 1586.

17. Liber pastoralis curae ; at p. 143, tom. III. of opera ... ed. Petrus Tossinianensis episc. Venusinus.

Romae, ex typis Vaticanis, 1588-93, fol.

18. in Opera, Sixti V. ... jussu emendata ... [by R. Rodulphus, bp. of Venosa.] Fa is., iro5, fol.

19. in Opera ... Romae, 161 3, 8'^.

20. Do. Diac', 1615.

21. Do. emendata ... [by P. Rodulphus]. Antve.pioe, 1615, fol.

22. Do. Paris., 1619.

23. ... Cura Pastoralis ... opera ... Matthias Abbatis Admentensis ... in banc formam recusa. Monaci, 1622, 12°.

24. De cvra pastorali liber vere aureus, accurate emendatus ... ^ Vet. MSS. ... ab eximijs aliquot Acad. Oxoni-

ensis theologis ; editus a leremia Stephano ... Londini, 1629, 8°.

25. Liber pastoralis curae ; at p. 169 of • Septem tubae orbis Christiani ... , opera J. M. Horstii ... '

Coloniae Agrippinse, 1635, 4°.


REGULA PASTORALIS. vii


26. m Opera. Pans., ,640.

27. Do. ed. Petr. Gussanvillaeus. Paris., 1675, fol.

28. Regulse pastoralis liber; at col. 1—102 of torn. II. of opera ... studio & labore monachorum ord. Sancti

Benedicti e congr. S. Mauri ... Pj^r. 1701: fol.

29. ... Regulre pastoralis liber ... juxta editionem Parisiensium Monachorum Ord. S. Benedicti per B. Campag-

nolani ... emendatus, variisque lectionibus illustratus . Veronze, 1739, 12".

30. m Opera ed. Gallicciolli. Venetiis, 1768—76, 4°.

31. Regul^ pastoralis liber; in torn. 13 of * Sanctae ... catholicae ecclesiae dogmatum et morum ex selectis

veterum patrum operibus Veritas demonstrata, &c.' By A. M. Cigheri. P'lorentise, 1791, 4".

32. — [another ed.] in vol. I. of Biblio-theca Pastoralis .« Oemponte, 1845, ^2^

33. — Novam editionem curavit E. W. Westhoff. Monasterii Westphalorum, 1846, 8".

34. — [another ed.] col. 13, tom. III. of opera in Migne's Patrologia, tom. 75—9. Parisiis, 1849, la. S''.

35. — [another ed.] Romae, 1849, 12°.

36. — [another ed.] Ex Benedictinorum recensione. Praemissa est vita S. Gregorii a Paulo Diacono conscripta.

[Edited by G. Leonhardi] Lipsiae, 1873, 8^

37. — [another ed.] in vol. 20 of * Sanctorum Patrum opuscula selecta. Edidit ... H. von Hurter.

Oeniponti, 1874—85, 16°.

38. S. Gregorii Magni Regulse Pastoralis Liber. S. Gregory on the Pastoral charge ; the Benedictine text, with

an English translation by ... II. R. Bramley. Oxford, 1874, 8°.

38*. The book of Pastoral rule, and selected epistles, of Gregory the Great, bp. of Rome ; transl. , with introduc-
tion, notes, and indices, by the Rev. J. liarmby, D.D. (Pt. I.) (A select library of Nicene and post-Nicene
fathers of the Christian Church. 2nd Sen, vol. XII.) Oxford & New York, 1895, la. 8°.

39. King Alfred's West-Saxon Version of Gregory's Pastoral Care. With an English translation. Edited for

the Early English Text Society, by H. Sweet. Lond. , 1871, 2, 8°.

40. Le Livre de S. Gregoire le Grand ... du soin et du devoir des pasteurs. ... Nouvelle traduction [by J. le C.

C. de S. ..., i.e. Jean Le Clerc, Curede Soisy.] Paris, 1670, 8°.

41. Die Pastoralschriften des hi. Gregor des Grossen und des hi. Ambrosius von Mailand, Ubersetzt von.

C. Haas. Tiibingen, 1862, 8°.

42. II libro della Regola Pastorale di S. Gregorio Magno volgarizzamento inedito del secolo xiv. , tratto da

un Manoscritto della Biblioteca Ambrosiana da A. Ceruti, ... Milano, 1869, 8°.

[Amongst Rawlinson's MSS. in the Bodleian [MS. Rawl. D. 377, fol. 86] are 2 specimen leaves of an
edition, giving the Latin text, with King Alfred's translation, designed by E. Thwaites ;

Oxford? c. 1700,4°.]

LITERATURE.

Dewitz (A.), Untersuchungen iiber Alfreds des Grossen west-sachsische Ubersetzung der " Cura pastoralis"
Gregors und ihr Verhaltnis zum Originale. Inaug.-Diss. ... Breslau. Bunzlau, 1889, 8°.

Fleischhauer (K. W.), Ueber den Gebrauch des Conjunctivs in Alfred's altenglischer Uebersetzung von
Gregor's Cura Pastoralis. Inaug.-Diss. ... Gottingen. Gottingen, 1885, 8°-

GiESCHEN (K. L.), Die Charakteristischen Unterschiede der einzelnen Schreiber im Hatton MS. der Cura
Pastoralis. Inaug.-Diss. ... Greifswald. Greifswald, 1887, 8°.

Glossarium zum Werke des heil. Gregorius : Liber regulse pastoralis, aus einer Handschrift des zehnten
Jahrhunderts in der Stiftsbibliothek zu St. Florian, aus geschrieben von F. Kurz. Aus dem xxxvii. Bde der "
Jahrbiicher der Literatur besonders abgedruckt. Wien, 1827, 8°.

Wack (Gustav), Uber das Verhaltnis von Konig Aelfreds Ubersetzung der Cura Pastoralis ... zum Originale.
Inaug.-Diss. ... Greifswald. Greifswald, 1889, S**.


REGISTRUM EPISTOLARUM.

IMPORTANT MSS.

1. Cologne 92. of the 8th cent. Held by'Ewald to be the best of all the MSS.

2. St. Petersburg 6 F. i. 7. (Formerly at Corvey ; then at St. Germain-des-Pr^s.) 8th cent. The first in

the list of MSS. given by Migne.

3. Berlin theol. 322. of the 9th cent.

4. Dusseldorf B. 79. of the 9th cent.

5. Munich 14641. of the 9th cent.

6. Paris 11674. (St, Germain 282.) of the 9th cent.

7. Vienna 934. of the 9th cent.

8. The Escurial d. I. I. (the Codex Emilianus). Written in West-Gothic minuscule, and finished in 992.

9. Bamberg 601. of the loth cent.

10. Cologne 94. of the loth cent.

11. Paris 2279. (Formerly in the library of St. Martial de Limoges ;) of the lOth cent.

12. St. Gallen 670. of the loth cent.

13. Trier 171. of the loth cent.

14. Monte Cassino 71. Written in a Lombardic hand of the end of the llth cent,

15. Wolfenbuttel 155. (75.) of the nth cent.

16. Cologne 95. of the 12th cent. ,

17. Vatican 619. of the 12th cent.

EDITIONS.

1. Liber Ep'larum beati Gregorii Pape ... (Augustae Vindel., G. Zainer, c. 1472) fol.

2. Epiftole ex Regiftro : (cum vita Gregorii praefixa). Venetiis per Laz. Soardum, 1505, fol.

3. Do. Parisiis, 1508, 4°.

4. in Gregorii Magni opera, beneficio Bertholdi Renbolt. In edibus J. Parvi : Parrhisiis, 15 18, fol,

5. Do. ed. Franc. Regnault. - Rothomagi (Paris), 1521, fol.

6. ... epiftole ex Regiftro fa'cti Gregorii pape ; At fol. ccclvi. of Opera ...

Paris., ex officina Claudii Chevalon, 1523, fol.

7. L>o. 1533, fol.

8. Registrum Epistolarura. Lugduni, 1539, 40.

9. Do. ed. Guillart. Paris., 1542, fol.

10. i7t Opera ... tom. II. Basil, 1550.

11. in Opera ... cura Huldrici Coccii. Basil., ap. Froben., 1564, fol.

12. Epiftolae ex Regiftro ; col. 433 — 825 of Vol. IL of Opera ... ed. loannes Gillotius Campanus.

Paris., 1 57 1, fol.

13. Registrum Epistolarum. - Venetiis, 1571.

14. Epistolae ex Registro ; fol. 168^ of Vol. IL of Opera, Antverpiae, 1572, fol.

15. Do. Venetiis, 1583.

16. [another ed. of No. 12]. Paris., 1586.


REGISTRUM EPISTOLARUM.


IX


17. Registrum Epistolarum ; Vol. IV. of Opera ... ed. Petrus Tossinianensis episc. Venusinus.

o . ^ o .' XT ' J r, Romae, ex typis Vaticanis, 1588—93.

18. tn Opera, Sixti V. ... jussu emendata ... [by R. Rodulphus, bp. of Venosa]. Paris. 160? fol

19. m Opera ... t. ' ^ „ *
„ *^ Romae, 161 3, 8°.

20. Do. ^^^ . •^'

21. Do. emendata ... [by P. Rodulphus.1 a^* • / ^^'
^ ^ •' f 'J Antverpiae, 1611;, fol.

22. Do. -n ■ \

^ Pans., 1619.

23. Do. , -n . ^

Pans., 1640.

24. Epistolae; col. 1027, Vol. V. Conciliorum, studio Ph. Labbei et G. Cossartii. Paris., 1671, fol.

25. in Opera ... ed. Petr. Gussanvillaeus, tom. II. pp. 359—1150. Paris.*' 1675! fol!

26. Do. ... studio & labore monachorum ord. Sancti Benedict! h congregatione Sancti Mauri ' tom * II *

col. 477-1317. p,;.; ,705^ f,;;

27. in Opera ... ed. GalHcciolli, tom. 7-9. Venetiis, 1768-76, 4°.

28. tn Opera ... tom. 75—79 of Migne's Patrologia, tom. IIL, col. 441. Parisiis, 1849, la. 8°.

29. Gregorii I. papae Registrvm epistolarvm. Tomi I. pars I. Liber i.— iv. Edidit Pavlvs Ewald. Tomi I.

pars II. Libri v.-vii.'Tomi II. partes I., II. Libri viii.-xiv. Post Pavli Ewaldi obitvm edidit Lvdovicvs
M. Hartmann. (Mon. Germ. Hist.— Epistolarum tomi I., II.) Berl., 1887—95, 4°

30. — ; Uebersetzt ... von M. Feyerabend. 6 vols. Kempten, 1807-9!

[See also no. 38* in list of editions of " Cura Pastoralis.'T
The text in Migne's ed. is a reprint of the edition by the monks of St. Maur, of 1705.

By far the best edition of the Epistolae yet attempted is that begun by Ewald, who died after editing
pt. I., bks. I. — IV. The work is being continued on the same scale by L. M. Hartmann.

LITERATURE.

Antonii Dadini Alteserrae Antecessoris Tolosani, Notae et observationes in xii. libros epistolarum B. Gregorii

P^P^"- Tolosre, 1669, 4^

Baumgarten (P. M.), Ueber eine Handschrift der Briefe Gregors I. [B. M., King's libr. 6 C. x.l (Neues

Archiv d. Gesselsch. f. a. deutsch. Gesch. xv., 1890, p. 60.)
Bembus (Matthseus), Pastor vigilans : sive ars regendi animas ex epistolis D. Gregorii Magni excerpta

Colon. 1618, 2P.

EwALD (P.), Studien zur Ausgabe des Registers Gregors I. (Neues Archiv, iii., 1878, pp. 433 625.)

Hartmann (L. M.), Ueber zwei Gregorbriefe. (Neues Archiv, xvii., 1892, p. 193.)

Zur Chronologic der Briefe Gregors I. ( xv., 1890, p. 411.)

Zur Orthographic Papst Gregors I. ( xv., 1890, p. 529.)

JAFFE (Ph.) [Editor]. S. Gregorius I., ed. P. Ewald : pp. 143—219, of vol. L, and p. 738 of vol. II., of Regesta
pontificum Romanorum, ed. P. Jafife. Lipsiae 1881; 6 a°

James (Thomas), Vindiciae Gregorianae, sen restitutus innumeris paene locis Gregorius ex variis MSS. vt maf^no
labore, ita Singulari fide collatis. Genevse 1621; ^a°

Kellet (F. W.), Pope Gregory the Great and his relations with Gaul. (Cambridge historical essays.)

Lond. 1889, 8°.
Lampe (Fel.), Qui fuerint Gregorii Magni papae temporibus in imperii Byzantini parte occidentali exarchi et
qualia eorum iura atque officia. Diss. ... Berlin. Berlin 1802 la 9P

Maasen (F.), Ueber eine Sammlung von Schreiben Gregors I, n. Verordnungen der Kaiser u. Koni^e.

Wien, 1877, 8°.
Mommsen (Th.), Zu den Gregorienbriefen. . (Neues Archiv, xvii., 1892, p. 189.)

Pflugk-Harttung (J. v.), Papst Gregor d. Gr. (Miinciiener allgem. Zeitung, 1888. Beilage no. 209—215.)

Savini (F.), Se il Castrum Aprutiense delle lettere di s. Gregorio Magno fu I'odiema Teramo e se la voce

Aprutium servi nel primitivo medio evo a denominare la citti di Teramo, ovvero solo 11 suo territorio.

(Archivio storico Italiano Ser. v. tom. X. 1892, p. 3.)
Wisbaum (W.), Die wichtigsten Richtungen und Ziele der Thatigkeit des Papstes Gregors des Grossen. Inaug.

Diss. ... Bonn. Koln (1884), 8°.

Wolfsgruber (C), Die vorpapstliche Lebensperiode Gregors d, Gr. Nach seinen Briefen Dargestellt. Progr. ...

Schotten. Wien, 1S86, 4«.

Gregor der Grotze ... Saulgau, 1890, 8^

WoLLSCHACK (Th.), Die Vcrhaltnisse Italiens, insbesondere des Langobardenreichs, nach dem Briefwechseb

Gregors I. Progr. ... Horn. Horn, 1888, 4°.


BOOK IX.


EPISTLE I.

To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis {Cagliari).

Gregory to Januarius, &c.

The preacher of Ahiiighty God, Paul the
apostle, says, RebicJze not an elder (i Tim. v. i).
But this rule of his is to be observed in cases
where the fault of an elder does not draw
through his example the hearts of the younger
into ruin. But, when an elder sets an example
to the young for their ruin, he is to be smitten
with severe rebuke. For it is written, Ye are
all a snare to the yoiciig {\s2\. xlii. 22). And
again the prophet says, The sinner being an
Jmndred yeaj^s old is accursed (Isai. Ixv. 20).
But so great wickedness has been reported to
us of thy old age that, unless we were humanely
disposed, we should smite thee with a definitive
curse. For it has been told me that on the
Lord's day, before celebrating the solemnities
of mass, thou wentest forth to plough up the
crop of the bearer of these presents, and after
ploughing it up didst celebrate the solemnities
of mass. Also, after the solemnities of mass
thou didst not fear to root up the landmarks
of that possession. What punishment ought
to follow such deeds all who hear of them
know. We had, however, been in doubt as to
so great perversity in thee as this; but our son
Cyriacus the abbot % having been questioned
by us, declared that when he was at Caralis
he knew it to be the case. And, seeing that
we still spare thy gray hairs, bethink thee at
length, old man, and restrain thyself from such
levity of behaviour, and perversity of deeds.
The nearer thou art approaching death, the
more careful and fearful oughtest thou to
become. And indeed a sentence of punish-
ment had been launched against thee ; but,
since w^e know thy simplicity accompanying
thy old age, we meanwhile hold our peace.
Those, however, by whose advice thou hast
done these things we decree to be excommu-
nicated for two months ; but so that, if within
the space of two months anything should
happen to them after the manner of humanity
they be not deprived of the blessing of the
viaticum. But do thou henceforth be cautious
to stand aloof from their counsels, lest, if thou


* See V. 2, note i.


be their disciple in evil whose master thou
oughlest to have been in good, we no longer
spare either thy simplicity or thy old age.

EPISTLE XL

To Vitalis, Guardian {Defensorem) of
Sardinia.

Gregory to Vitalis, &c.

What we have learnt about our brother the
bisho]) Januarius the bearers of these presents,
as well as the copies of our letters, will
sufficiently inform you ; and so let thy Ex-
perience judiciously carry into effect the
excommunication which we have decreed to
be pronounced on his perverse counsellors,
that they may learn by falling not to walk
unwarily.

Moreover, we have sent back by Redemptus
the guardian {defensorem)^ the bearer of these
presents, the wheat which had been sent to us
under the name of a present. Let thy ex-
perience see that neither thou nor he who
brought it presume to partake of anything
out of it as a bounty % but restore the
whole of it without abatement to the several
persons, or to all of them together, and send
me their receipts for the value ; for, should
I ascertain that anything has been done other-
wise than as I direct, I will visit the offence
with no slight severity.

EPISTLE III.

To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
{Cagliari).

Gregory to Januarius, &c.

The most distinguished lady Nereida has
complained to us that your Fraternity does
not blush to exact from her a hundred solidi
for the burial of her daughter, and w^ould bring
upon her the additional vexation of expense
over and above her groans of sorrow. Now,
if the truth is so, it being a very serious thing
and far from a priest's office to require a price
for earth that is granted to rottenness, and to
wish to make profit out of another's grief, let
your Fraternity refrain from this demand, and
be no more troublesome to her, especially as
she tells us that Hortulanus, to whom she


■ Inpretio commodi. On commodum, see I. 44, p. 90, note 4-


VOL. XIII.


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


asserts she bore this daughter, had formerly
been munificent to your Church in no small
degree. Now as to this abuse, we ourselves,
after we had by God's permission acceded
to the dignity of the episcopate, forbade it
entirely in our Church, and by no means
permitted the evil custom to be taken up
anew, remembering that, when Abraham de-
manded for a price a sepulchre for the burial
of his wife's body from the sons of Emor, that
is from Ephron the son of Seor, the latter
refused to accept a price, lest he should appear
to have made profit out of a corpse {Ge?i. xxiii.).
If then a man that was a pagan shewed such
great consideration, how much more ought we,
who are called priests, not to do this thing ?
Wherefore I admonish you that this abuse,
which comes of avarice, be not ventured on
any more, even in the case of strangers. But,
if at any time you allow any one to be buried
in your Cluirch, and the parents, relations, or
heirs of such person should of their own
accord wish to offer something for lights, we
do not forbid it to be accepted. But we
altogether forbid anything to be asked for or
exacted, this being a very irreligious pro-
ceeding, lest (which God forbid) the Church
should haply be spoken of as venal, or you
should seem to take joy in men's deaths, if you
endeavour in any way whatever to seek profit
out of their corpses.

With regard to other cases included in the
petition of the aforesaid Nereida, we exhort
thee, if possible, to settle them by an amicable
arrangement, or certainly not to omit sending
an instructed person to the court, deputed by
us, for which purpose we have sent to your
parts Redemptus our guardian {dejensoreni)^
the bearer of these presents, that he may
compel the parties to appear for trial, and
carry out with summary execution what may
be adjudged.

EPISTLE IV.

To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
{Ca^iiari).

Gregory to Januarius, a Bishop of Sardinia.

We knew before the letter of your Fraternity
reached us what our enemies had effected in
Sardinia. And, having for some time feared
that this would be so, we now groan with you
on \\hat we foresaw having come to pass.
But, if attention had been paid to what we
wrote to our most excellent son Gennadius 3,
as well as to yourself, telling you that this
would be so, the enemy would either not have
come into your regions, or, when. they came,


3 Crennadius was- Exarch of Africa


they would have incurred the danger which
they have caused. Even now, then, let what
has happened sharpen your vigilance for the
future. For we, too, by no means omit what-
ever we are able to do for good, the Lord
helping us.

Know, moreover, that the abbots whom,
now a considerable time ago, we sent to
Agilulph, has by the mercy of God arranged
a peace with him, so far as was directed in
writing by the most excellent Exarch. And
so, till such time as the agreements for the
confirmation of this peace shall be drawn up,
lest perchance our enemies during the present
delay should be inclined to come again into
those parts, do you cause watches of the walls
to be kept up, and careful attention given in
all places. And we trust in the power of our
Redeemer that the incursions or plots of our
adversaries will not injure you anew.

As to your saying in your letter that many
persons lay complaints against you before us,
this is true ; but among various things nothing
has distressed us so much as what our most
beloved son, the abbot Cyriacus, has reported
to us ; namely, that on the Lord's day before
mass you caused a crop of corn to be ploughed
up in the field which is in the possession of
Donatus, and, as if that were not enough, went,
after the sacrifice was finished, in person to the
place, and dug up the boundaries 5. For this
reason I exhort thee to consider with anxious
attention the ofiice which thou bearest, and to
avoid entirely whatever may injure thy reputa-
tion or thy soul, and let no one persuade thee
to do the like again. For know that thou
hast not undertaken the care of earthly things,
but the leadership of souls. On this, there-
fore, thou oughtest to fix thy heart, thy
anxiety, thy entire devotion, and to give thy
diligent thought to the winning of souls, that
when thou shalt render to the Lord at His
coming the talents that He has delixered to
thee multiplied, thou mayest be counted
worthy to receive from Him the fruit of
retribution, and to be exalted among His
faithful servants in eternal glory. Know,
however, that what I now say m the way of
reproach or blame comes not from asperity,
but from brotherly love, since I desire thee
to be found a priest before Almighty God,
not in name only, which tends only to punish-
ment, but also in desert, which looks to
recompense. For, we being one member in
the body of our Redeemer, as I am rent
asunder in thy fault, so also am I rejoiced in
thy good conduct.


4 Probably the Abbot Probiis. See IX. 43, g

5 See also IX. i.


EPISTLE VI.


Furthermore, with regard to your desire that
we should depute a person from our side (a
nostro latere)^ to whom you may communicate
in detail tlie cases that are to be referred
to us, write whatever you will to our most
beloved son Peter and to Theodore the
counsellor {consiliario), that, when it has been
communicated to us through them, whatever
reason may commend may be settled, the
Lord revealing the way. Moreover, concern-
ing our brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus^,
cognizance will be taken, when peace with the
aforesaid Agilulph shall have been fully con-
firmed, and whatever the order of reason may
dictate will be done.

EPISTLE V.
To Marcellus, Pro-consul of Dalmatia?.

Gregory to Marcellus, &c.

We have received the letter of your Great-
ness, in which you speak of having incurred
our displeasure, and of your wish to be in
favour with us through direct satisfaction. And
indeed we have heard such things of your
Greatness as ought never to have been com-
mitted by a faithful man. For all assert that
you are the author of all that great mischief in
the case of Maximus, and that the spoiling of
that Church, and the perdition of so many
souls, and the audacity of that unheard-of pre-
sumption, had their beginning through you.
And indeed, with regard to your seeking to be
in favour with us, it is fitting that with your
whole heart and soul, and with tears, as becomes
you, you should satisfy our Redeemer for such
things as these : for, unless satisfaction is made
to Him, what certain good can our forgiveness
or favour do thee? But while we observe thee
to be still implicated in the ruinous conduct of
pretenders, or in the advocacy of those who
have gone astray, we see not of what sort your
satisfaction is either to God or men. For
then your Greatness may know that you openly
and evidently satisfy God and men, when you
bring back both what is devious to rectitude
and what is presumptuous to the rule of
humility. If this is done, you may know that
you will thus be in favour both with God and
men.

EPISTLE VI.

To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
( Cagliari).

Gregory to Januarius, &c.
The Jews who have come hither from your
city have complained to us that Peter, who

6 A bishop in Sardinia, see I. 6i. What his case was does not
appear.

7 See III. 47, note 2.


has been brought by the will of God from
their superstition to the worship of Christian
faith, having taken with him certain disorderly
persons, on the day after his baptism, that is
on the Lord's day of the very Paschal festival,
with grave scandal and without your consent,
had taken possession of their synagogue in
CaraHs, and placed there the image of the
mother of our God and Lord, the venerable
cross, and the white vestment {hirrum) with
which he had been clothed when he rose from
the font. Concerning which thing also the
letters of our sons, the glorious Magister
uiilihcm Eu] aterius, and the magnificent
governor, pious in the Lord, concur in
attesting the same. And they add also that
this had been foreseen by you, and that the
aforesaid Peter had been prohibited from


venturmg on


It. On learning this we alto-


gether commended you, since, as became a
truly good priest, you wished nothing to be
done whence just blame might arise. But,
since by not having at all mixed yourself up
in these WTong doings you shew that what
was done displeases you, we, considering
the bent of your will in this matter, and still
more your judgment, hereby exhort you that,
having removed thence with fitting reverence
the image and the cross, you should restore
what has been violently taken away ; seeing
that, as legal enactment does not suffer Jews
to erect new synagogues, so also it allows
them to keep their old ones without dis-
turbance. Lest, then, the above-named Peter,
or others who have afforded him assistance or
connivance in the wrongfulness of this dis-
orderly proceeding, should reply that they
had done it in zeal for the faith, in order that
a necessity of being converted might thereby
be imposed on the Jews, they should be
admonished, and ought to know, that modera-
tion should rather be used towards them;
that so the will not to resist may be elicited
from them, and not that they should be
brought in against their will : for it is written,
/ will sacrifice to thee willingly (Ps. Iviii. 8) \
and, Of my own will I will confess to him
(Ps. xxvii. 7). Let, then, your Holiness, taking
with you your sons who with you disapprove
of these things, try to induce good feeling
among the inhabitants of your city, since at
this time especially, when there is alarm from
the enemy, you ought not to have a divided
people. But, being anxious with regard to
ourselves no less than with regard to you, we
think it right to give you to understand that
when the present truce is over, the king
Agilulph will not make peace with us ^.


8 For references to the truce now in course of ne^^otiation


S 2


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


Whence it is necessary for your Fraternity
to see to fortifying your city or other places
more securely, and to give earnest attention
to providing stores of provisions therein, that,
when the enemy, with God incensed against
him, shall come thither, he may find no harm
that he can do, but may retire discomfited.
But we also take thought for you as far as we
can, and press upon those whose concern it
is that they should prepare themselves for
resistance, since, as you regard our tribula-
tions as yours, so we in like manner count
your afflictions as our own.

EPISTLE VIL

To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
{Cagliari),

Gregory to Januarius, &c.

It has been laid down by the plain definition
of the law that those who go into a monastery
for the purpose of entering on monastic life
are no longer at liberty to make wills, but that
their property passes into possession of the
same monastery 9. This being known to
almost all, we have been greatly surprised
by the notification of Gavinia, abbess of the
monastery of Saints Gavinus and Luxorius,
to the eft'cct that Sirica, abbess of her monas-
tery, after receiving the oflice of government,
had made a will leaving certain legacies. And
when we enquired of the Solicitude of your
Holiness why you endured that property be-
longing to the monastery should be detained
by otht^rs, our common son Epiphanius, your
archpresbyter, being present before us, replied
that the said abbess had up to the day of her
death refused to wear the monastic dress, but
had continued in the use of such dresses as
are used by the presb} teresses ^ of that place.
To this the aforesaid Gavinia replied that the
practice had come to be almost lawful from
custom, alleging that the abbess who had been
before the above-written Sirica had used such
dresses. When, then, we had begun to feel no
small doubt with regard to the character of the
dresses, it appeared necessary for us to con-
sider with our legal advisers, as well as with
other learned men of this city, what was to be
done with regard to law. And they, having
considered the matter, answered that, after an
abbess had been solemnly ordained by the


(a.d. 598-9), with the Lombard King Agilulph, cf. IX. 4, 42,

43. 98-^

9 Cf. I. 44, p. 92, note 2.

* Presbyterce. So the wives of presbyters who had been
married before their ordination were called. So in Canon XIX.
of the second council of Tours, "Si inventus fuerit presbyter
cum sua presbytera," and Canon XXI. of Council of Auxerre,
" Non licet presbytero, post acceptam benedictionem, in uno lecto
cum pre.sbytera sua dormire." Or deaconesses may possibly be
meant, one designaiion of whom in Greek, was npea^vTidei.


bishop, and had presided in the government
of a monastery for many years until the end of
her life, the character of her dress might attach
blame to the bishop for having allowed it so to
be, but still could not prejudice the monastery,
but that her property of manifest right belongs
to the same place from the time of her entering
it and being constituted abbess. And so since
she [i.e. the abbess Gavinia] asserts that a
guest-house {xe?iodochiu7?i) retains possession
unduly of the property unlawfully devised, we
hereby exhort you, both the monastery and
the guest-house itself being situate in your
city, to make provision with all care and
diligence, to the end that, if this possession
is derived from no previous contract, but from
the bequest of the said Sirica, it be restored to
the said monastery without dispute or evasion.
But, if by any chance it is said to have accrued
from another contract, either let your Fra-
ternity, having ascertained the truth between
the parties, determine as legal order may seem
to demand, or let them by mutual consent
choose arbitrators, who may be able to decide
between their allegations. And whatever be
appointed by them, let it be so observed under
your care that no grudge may remain between
the venerable places, which ought by all means
to be cherished in mutual peace and concord.
Wherefore all other things which are detained
unoer the will of the above-named Sirica,
seeing that none of them is permitted by legal
sanction, must needs be carefully restored
to the possession of the monastery through
the priestly care of your Fraternity : for it is
plainly laid down by the imperial constitutions
that what has been done contrary to the laws
should not only be inoperative, but also be
held as not having been done at all.

EPISTLE VIIL
To THE Bishops of Sardinia.

Gregory to Vincentius, Innocentius, Marini-
anus, Libertinus, Agatho, and Victor, Bishops
of Sardinia.

We have learnt that it is the custom of your
island after the paschal festival, for you to go,
or to send your representatives to your Metro-
politan, and for him, whether you know the time
or not, to give you directions by a written an-
nouncement concerning the following Easter.
And, as report goes, some of you, neglecting to
do this according to custom, pervert the hearts
of others also to disobedience. It is added
also that some of you, when seeking parts
beyond sea in cases that arise touching their
churches, venture to travel without the know-
ledge of their aforesaid metropolitan, or letters
from him, such as canonical order prescribes.


EPISTLE X.


5


We therefore exhort your Fraternity that, con-
forming to the custom of your churches, as
well with respect to the announcement of
Easter, as also if need should compel any
of you to travel anywhere for business of your
own, you should ask leave of your said metro-
politan according to the rule imposed upon
you ; except that, if (as we hope will not be
the case) you should happen to have a case
against your said Metropolitan, then those who
are in haste on this account to seek the judg-
ment of the Apostolic See have licence to do
so, as you know is allowed in the canons by
the institution even of the ancient Fathers.

EPISTLE IX.
To Callinicus, Exarch of Italy*.

Gregory to Callinicus, &c. •

In the midst of what you have announced
to me of your victories over the Sclaves, know
that I have been refreshed with great joy that
the bearers of these presents, hastening to be
joined to the unity of holy Church from the
island of Capritana 3, have been sent by your
Excellency to the blessed Peter, Prince of the
Apostles. For hereby you will the more pre-
vail over your enemies, if you recall under the
yoke of the true Lord those whom you know to
be the enemies of God ; and you will prosecute
your causes among men with all the more
effect as with sincere and devout mind you
maintain the causes of God.

Now as to your having desired that a copy
should be shewn me of the orders that has
been sent to you for the defence of the schis-
matic, your to me most sweet Excellency
ought to have considered carefully how that,
although that order has been elicited, you are
still not therein enjoined to repel those who
come to the unity of the Church, but only, at
this unsettled time, not to compel those who
are unwilling to come. Whence it is necessary
for you with all speed to inform our most
pious Emperors of these things, to the end
that they may be aware how that in their
times, through the succour of Almighty God

2 Callinicus had recently succeeded Romanus at Ravenna as
Exarch of Italy. The main purport of this letter to him is to
secure his hoped-for co-operation in bringing back the Istrian
and Venetian schismatics to Catholic couimunion. See I. i6,
note 3 ; also II. 46, 51. The predecessor ot Callinicus, viz.
Romanus, had given great dissatisfaction to Gregoiy by his con-
duct with regard to the schismatics (see II. 46) ; but better things
are expected from the new Exarch. See also below, Ep. XCIII.,
&c. As to the case of Maxinius of Salona, briefly referred to
at the end of the letter, see III. 47, note 2.

3 Capritana was a small island in the Adriatic, not far from
the shore of Venetia. containing the episcopal see of Capsula,
or Cahorla. More about the desire of the ciiurch of this island
to return to communion with Rome will be found in the letter
which follows to Marinianus, bishop of Ravenna.

4 Mention of a previous order from the emperors, during the
exarchate of Romanus, to Gregoiy himself, bidding him retrain
from compelling the Istrians to return to communion, will be
found in II. 46.


and your exertions, schismatics are hastening
to return of their own accord. What I have
decided as to the ordering of things in the
island of Caritana, your Excellency will learn
through our most reverend brother and fellow-
bishop Marinianuss. But I would have you
know that this has caused me no slight dis-
tress ; that your Majordomo, who took charge
of the petition of the bishop who was wishing
to return, declared that he had lost it, and that
afterwards he was got hold of by the adver-
saries of the Church : which proceeding, in
my opinion, was due not to his neglect but to
his venality. Wherefore I wonder that your
Excellency has not in any way visited his
fault in him. And yet I soon blamed myself
for wondering at this, for where the lord
Justinus gives advice, there heretics cannot
be arraigned.

Moreover you tell us that you wish to keep
the anniversary of Peter, Prince of the apostles,
in the city of Rome. And we pray Almighty
God to protect you with His mercy, and grant
you a fulfilment of your desires. But 1 beg
that the aforesaid most eloquent man may
come with you, or that, if he does not come,
he may retire from attendance on you. Or
certainly, if your Excellency should be unal)le
to come owing to business that may arise, let
him either communicate with the unity of
holy Church, or I beg that he may not be a
sharer of your counsels. For I hear of him
as a good man, were he not in most mis-
chievous error. As to the cause of Maximus,
inasmuch as we can no longer stand against
the importunity of your Sweetness, you will
learn from Castorius, the notary, what we have
determined.

EPISTLE X.
To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

The bearers of these presents, the most
distinguished men, Vicedominus and Defen-
sor^, came to us asserting that a certain
bishop, by name John, coming Irom Pannonia,
had been constituted in the castle which is
called Novas, to which castle their island,
which is called Capritana, had been appended
as a diocese 7. They add that, the bishop
having been violently withdrawn and expelled
from this same castle, another had been or-
dained there : concerning whom, however,


5 See the letter following. . .

6 So, with initial capitals as proper names, in the Benedictme
Edition. Perhaps rather, " the steward (^vicedominus) and the
guardian {defensor).

7 Erat quasi per diocesitn conjuncta. The meaning is, that
the castclluni Novce on the main land had been made the epis-
copal see of a diocese of the island of Capritana. though not
properly within its limits. Cf. IX. 9, note 3.


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


they allege that it has been resolved that he
ought not to have lived in the aforesaid castle,
but in his own island. They say further that,
while he abode with them there, he was un-
willing to remain in schismatical error, and
together with all his people presented a peti-
tion to our most excellent son Callinicus the
Exarch, desiring to be united, with all those that
were with him, to the Catholic Church, as we
have already said. But they say that, being
persuaded by the schismatics, he afterwards
recanted, and that now all the population of
the aforesaid island are deprived of the pro-
tection of a Bishop, since, while desiring to be
united to holy Church, they cannot now re-
ceive him who has turned to the error of the
schismatics ; and they desire to have another
ordained for them. But we, inasmuch as it is
necessary to investigate all things strictly and
thoroughly, have taken the precaution of or-
dering as follows ; namely that thy Fraternity
should send to the said Bishop, and admonish
him to return to the unity of the Catholic
Church and to his own people. If, after ad-
monition, he should scorn to return, the flock
of God ought not to be deluded in the error
of its pastor; and therefore let thy Holiness
in that case ordain a Bishop there, and let
him have the said island for his diocese, till
such time as the Histrian Bishops shall return
to the Catholic Faith ; so that each Church
may have the rights of its own diocese pre-
served to it, and that a population destitute of
a pastor may not be without the protection
and oversight of government. In all these
things, however, it becomes thy Fraternity to
take vigilant heed that this same people which
comes back to the Church be very studiously
admonished, to the end that it may be firmly
fixed in its return, lest through wavering
thoughts it fall back into the pit of error!
But take care to request the most excellent
Exarch, in his despatches, to notify these same
things to the most pious ears of tlie Emperors,
since, although the order which has been con-
veyed to him appears to have been elicited
from them, yet he is not forbidden in that
order to allow such as wish it to return to the
Church, but only, at the present time, to
compel the unwilling. Let, then, our afore-
said son take into his charge the management
of this affair, to the end that he may so frame
his reports, that whatever he may ordain may
not be dubious We have, however, ourselves
also written to our common son Anatolius^
bidding him notify these things fully to the
most pious princes.


,-r^7^T ^^^^ '"'"^ Gregory's aj>ocrisiarius at Constantinoole.
\^\. Vll. 30. *^


I have received repeated and pressing letters
from my most excellent son, the lord Exarch
Callinicus, in behalf of Maximus9. Over-
come by his importunity, I see nothing further
to be done but to commit the cause of Max-
imus to thy Fraternity. If, therefore, this
same Maximus should come to thy Fraternity,
let Honoratus, archdeacon of his Church,
appear also ; that thy Holiness may ascertain
if he was rightly ordained, if he fell into no
simoniacal heresy, if there was nothing against
him in respect of bodily transgressions, if he
did not know himself to be excommunicated
when he presumed to celebrate mass ; and
whatever may seem right to thee in the fear of
God do thou determine, that we, under God,
may give our assent to thy ordering. But, if
our aforesaid son should hold thy Fraternity
in suspicion, let our most reverend brother
Constantius, bishop of Milan, come also to
Ravenna, and sit with thee ; and do you de-
cide together on the said cause : and whatever
may seem good to both of you, hold it for
certain that it will seem good to me. For, as
we ought not to be obstinate towards the
humble, so we ought to shew ourselves strict
towards the proud. Let, then, your Fraternity,
as you have learnt in the pages of holy Scrip-
ture, decide in this business wiiatever you may
consider just.

EPISTLE XI.

To Brunichild, Queen.

Gregory to Brunichild, Queen of the Franks \
With what firmness the mind of your Excel-
lency is settled in the fear of Almighty God
you shew in a praiseworthy manner, among
the other good things that you do, by your
love also of His priests ; and great joy for
your Christianity is caused us, since you study
to advance with honours those whom you love
and venerate as being truly Christ's servants.
For it becomes you, most excellent daughter,


9 See III. 47, note 2.

I Four Vatican MSS. and Cod. Colbert give a date to this
epistle, viz,_"rnensepctobris, indictione prima," i e. t 'Ct a u. 597.
The Benedictine editors assign it, from certain internal ewueUce
to the following year, and have therefore placed it in this ninth
Book of the Epistles. There is this additional reason lor placing
it later than a.d. 597. Its first purpose is to reply to a request
from queen Brunechild that a pallium should be sent to Syagrius,
bishop ot Augustodunum {Autuii). Now Autun was in the
kingdom of Burgundy, which was reigned over at that time
by Brunechild's younger grandson Theoderic II. But it was not
till the year 599, according to Gregory of Tours (yY/ji'. 1-7-anc. xi.
19), that she had been expelled from the kingdom of Austrasia.
and aken up her residence with Tiieoderic. She had previously
been guardian of her elder grandson 'i'heodehert II , who reigned
over Austrasia, having his capital at Metz, and she was more
likely to have sought tlie pall for the bishop Autun alter she had
become the virtual potentate of the Burgundian kingdom than
previously ; and indeed she seems to be evidently addressed
as ruling the country to which the letter refers. The date as-
signed to this epistle uy the Benedictine editors, viz. Indiction 2
(i.e. Ironi September 598 to September 599). is consistent with
tliese circumstances.


EPISTLE XI.


it becomes you to be such as to be able to
subject yourself to a lord above you. For
in submitting the neck of your mind to the
fear of the Ai mighty Lord you confirm your
dominion also over subject nations, and by
subjecting yourself to the service of the
Cr>-'ator you bind your subjects the more de-
votedly to yourself. Wherefore, liaving re-
ceived your letters, we signify to you tliat
your Excellency's earnest desire has greatly
pleased us, and we have been desirous of
sending the pallium to our brother and fellow-
bishop Syagrius ^, inasmuch as the disposition
of our most serene lord the Emperor is also
favourable, and, so far as we have been
informed by our deacon, who was the repre-
sentative of our Church at his Court, he is
altogether desirous that this thing should be
granted 3, and many good reports have reached
us of our aforesaid brother both on your testi-
mony and that of others ; and especially we
learnt what his life is from John the Region-
arms ^ on his return to us. And hearing wliat
he did in the case of our brother Augustine,
we bless our Redeemer, because we feel that
he fulfils in his deeds the meaning of his
name of priest.

But there have been many hindrances which
have meanwhile prevented us from doing this
thing. P^irst indeed, that he who had come to
receive this pallium is implicated in the error
of the schismatics s ; further, that you wished
it to be understood that it was sent, not on
your petition, but from ourselves. But there
was this besides ; that neither had he who
desires to use it requested it to be granted
him by a special petition addressed to us :
and it was by no means right for us to con-
cede so great a matter without his request ;
especially as an ancient custom has obtained,
that the dignity of the pallium shall not be
given except when the merits of a case demand


2 Bishop of Augustodunum [Autun), one of the bishops to
whom Augustine had carried commendatory letters from Gregory
on his progress to England (VI. 54). The see of Augustodunum
was under the metropolitan jurisdiction of Lugdunuin {Lyons);
and Brunechild, for some reason, appears to have desired to have
it invested with peculiar dignity. Sue afterwards founded a
church, a nunnery, and a hospital there (see XIII. 6). It is to be
observed that the sending of the pallium to a bishop did not in all
cases imply metropolitan jurisdiction. It did not in this case.
See Epistle CVIII. to Syagrius, in which he is told that the
Metropolitan of Lyons was to retain his position unimpaired ;
only that the bishop of Autun was thenceforth to be next to him
in place and dignity.

3 We observe here the requirement of the Emperor's consent
for sending the Pallium to a see not previously thus dignified.

4 It seems not to be known with any certainty what the title
Reg-ionarius, thus used absolutely, implies, though no doubt
some honourable function. John the Deacon {Vit. S. Gre^or.)
speaks of Gregory's father Gordianus, a layman, as having been
a Regionarius. As to Notarii 7-egionarii, Sub-diaconi regionarii,
Defensores regionarii, cf. VIII. 14.

5 Meaning those who were out of communion with Rome
with regard to "The Three Chapters." see I. 16, note 3. There
were some in Gaul, as well as in I stria and elsewhere, who long
refused assent to the condemnation of the Chapters by the fifth
Council. Cf. IV. 2, 3, 4, 38, 39 ; XVI. 12.


it, and to one who urgently requests it. Still,
lest we should seem perchance to wish, under
pretext of any excuse, to put off the desire of
your Plxcellency, we have provided for the
pallium being sent to our most beloved son
Candidus the presbyter, charging him, with
befitting precaution, to deliver it in our stead.
Hence it is requisite that our above-written
brother and fellow-bishop Syagrius must hope
for it, when he has of his own motion drawn
up a petition with some of his bishops ; and
this he must give to the aforesaid presbyter, to
the end that he may be in a position to obtain
properly the use of the same pallium with the
favour of God.

Li order, then, that the charge you bear may
be of fruit to you before the eyes of our Creator,
let the solicitude of your Christianity be dili-
gently on the watch, and suffer no one who is
under your dominion to attain to holy orders by
the giving of money, or the patronage of any
persons whatever, or by riglit of relationship ;
but let such a one be elected to the episcopate,
or to the office of any other sacred order, as
his life and manners have shewn to be worthy ;
lest if, as we do not expect, the dignity of the
priesthood should be venal, simoniacal heresy,
which was the first to come up in the Church,
and has been condemned by the sentence of
the Fathers, should arise in your parts, and
(which God forbid) should weaken the powers
of your kingdom. For it is a serious matter,
and a wicKcdness beyond what can be told,
to sell the Holy Spirit, who redeemed all
things.

But let this also be your care, that, since,
as you know, the excellent preacher entirely
forbids a novice to accede to the ruling po-
sition of priesthood, you sufter no one to be
consecrated bishop from being a layman. For
what sort of master will he be who has not
been a disciple .? Or what kind ot leadership
can he supply to the Lord's flock who has not
been previously subjected to a shepherd's dis-
cipline ? If, then, any one's life should be
such as to shew him worthy of being promoted
to this order, he ought first to serve in the
ministry of the Church, to the end that by the
experience of long practice he may see what
to imitate, and learn what to teach ; lest per-
chance the newness of his charge bear not the
burden of government, and occasion of ruin
arise from tlie immaturity of his promotion.

Moreover, how your Excellency conducted
yourself towards c ur brother and fellow-bishop
Augustine, and hew great charity, through the
inspiration of God, you bestowed upon him,
we have learnt from the relation of divers of
the faithful ; for which we return thanks, and
implore the mercy of Divine Power to keep


8


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


you here under its protection, and cause you
to reign, as among men, so also after a course
of many years in life eternal.

Furthermore, those whom the error of the
schismatics severs from the unity of the Church,
strive ye, for your own reward, to recall to the
unity of concord. For on no other ground
are they enveloped so far in the blindness of
their ignorance but that they may escape
ecclesiastical discipline, and have licence to
live perversely as they please, since they under-
stand neither what they defend nor what they
follow. But as for us, we venerate and follow
in all respects the synod of Chalcedon, from
which they take to themselves the clouds of a
pestiferous excuse ; and, if any one should
presume to diminish or add anything with
regard to the faith thereof, we anathematize
him. But they are so impregnated with the
taint of error that, giving credence to their
own ignorance, they reject the universal
Church, and all the four patriarchs, not with
reason, but with malicious intent ; so that he
who was sent to us by your Excellency, when
he was asked by us why he stood separated
from the universal Church, acknowledged that
he did not know. But neither what he said nor
what else he gave ear to had he the power of
knowing. As to this also we no less exhort
you, that you should restrain the rest of your
subjects under the control of discipline from
sacrificing to idols, being worshippers of trees,
or exhibiting sacrilegious sacrifices of the heads
of animals ; seeing that it has come to our ears
that many of the Christians both resort to the
churches and also (horrible to relate !) do not
give up their worshipping of demons. But,
since these things are altogether displeasing
to our God, and He does not own divided
minds, provide ye for their being salubriously
restrained from these unlawful practices ; lest
(God forbid it !) the sacrament of holy baptism
serve not for their rescue, but for their punish-
ment. If therefore you know of any that are
violent, if of any that are adulterers, if of any
that are thieves, or bent on other wicked
deeds, make haste to appease God by their
correction, that He may not bring upon you
the scourge due to unfaithful races, which, so
far as we see, is already hfted up for the
punishment of many nations ; lest, if— as we
do not believe will be the case — the wrath
of Divine vengeance should be kindled by the
doings of the wicked, the plague of war should
destroy the sinners whom the precepts of God
recall not to the way of rectitude. We must,
then, needs make haste, with all earnestness
and continual prayer, to betake ourselves to
the mercy of our Redeemer, wherein there is
a place of safety and great security for all.


For whoso steadfastly abides there, him danger
crushes not, nor fear alarms.

We have sent the volume, as you desired us
by letter, to our aforesaid most beloved son
Candidus the presbyter, to be offered to you,
being in haste to be sharers in your goofl
purpose. May Almighty God keep you under
His protection, and by His outstretched arm
defend your kingdom from unbelieving nations,
and bring you after long courses of years to
eternal joys. Given in the month of Octoberj,
the first indiction ^.

EPISTLE XII.
To John, Bishop of Syracuse.

Gregory to John, &c.

One coming from Sicily has told me that
some friends of his, whether Greeks or Latins
I know not, as though moved by zeal for
the holy Roman Church, murmur about my
arrangements [i.e. of divine service], saying,
How can he be arranging so as to keep the
Constantinopolitan Church in check, when in
all respects he follows her usage ? And, when
I said to him. What usages of hers do we
foUow ? he replied ; you have caused Alleluia
to be said at mass out of the season of Pente-
cost 7; you have made appointment for the
sub-deacons to proceed disrobed ^, and for
Kyrie Eleison to be said, and for the Lord's-
Prayer to be said immediately after the canon.
To him I replied, that in none of these things
have we followed another Church.

For, as to our custom here of saying the
Alleluia, it is said to be derived from the
Church of Jerusalem by the tradition of the
blessed Jerome in the time of pope Damasus
of blessed memory; and accordingly in this
matter we have rather curtailed the former
usage which had been handed down to us here
from the Greeks.

Further, as to my having caused the sub-
deacons to proceed disrobed, this was the
ancient usage of the Church. But it pleased
one of our pontiffs, I know not which, to
order them to proceed in linen tunics. For


6 See note i.

7 I.e. the fifty days between Easter and Whitsuntide. It
appears from St. Augustine (see Migne, Patrolog. note z« loc.)
that it was the custom everywhere to sing the Alleluia between
Easter and Pentecost, but tluit its use at other times varied.
The point of what Gregory here says seems to be that the Roman
custom oi saj'ing it at other times had not been derived from the
Greeks ; but that, on the contrary, it was said at other times less
frequently at Rome than among the Greeks.

y Frocedere spoliatos: i.e. to proceed to the altar for cele-
bration witliout linen tunics on. The verb procedere and the
noun processio are commonly used by Gregory and others in the
special sense ot approacliiug the altar for mass. It would seem
from what is here said that the subdeacons at mass had not been
originally distmgui.->hed by a vestment, and that some pope
before Gregory had first vested them at Rome, lie, as further ap-
pears, had disrobed the subdeacons ; and his point here is, that
his doing so was not an imitation of the Greeks, but a return.
to ancient usage.


EPISTLE XVIII.


have your Churches in any respect received
their tradition from the Greeks ? Whence,
then, have they at the present day the custom
of the subdeacons proceeding in linen tunics,
except that they have received it from their
mother, the Roman Church ?

Further, we neither have said nor now say
the Kyrie Eleison, as it is said by the Greeks :
for among the Greeks all say it together; but
with us it is said by the clerks, and responded
to by the people ; and as often as it is said,
Christe Eleison is said also, which is not said
at all among the Greeks. Further, in daily
masses we suppress some things that are
usually said, and say only Kyrie Eleison,
Christe Eleison, so as to devote ourselves a
little longer to these words of deprecation.
But the Lord's prayer {orationem Dominicafn)
we say immediately after the prayer {jnox post
precetn) for this reason, that it was the custom
of the apostles to consecrate the host of obla-
tion to i^ad) that same prayer* only. And it
seemed to me very unsuitable that we should
say over the oblation a prayer which a scho-
lastic had composed, and should not say the
very prayer 9 which our Redeemer composed
over His body and blood \ But also the
Lord's Prayer among the Greeks is said by
all the people, but with us by the priest alone.
AVherein, then, have we followed the usages
of the Greeks, in that we have either amended
our own old ones or appointed new and profit-
able ones, in which, however, we are not shewn
to be imitating others ? Wherefore, let your

9 The word found here is tradiii'o>ie7n : but, because of the
undoubted reference to the Lord's Prayer {dotninica oratid),
and of the verb cojuposuit, it is conjectured that the reading
ought to be oraiicneui.

I This whole passage in the original is; — "Orationem vero
Dominicam idcirco mox post precem dicimus, quia mos aposto-
lorum iu.t ut ad ipsam solumniodo oraiionein oblationis hostiam
consecrarent. Et valde mihi inconveniens visum est ut precem
quam sch )lasticus composuerat super oblationem diceremus, et
ipsam traditiouem (Qy. for orationem ?) quam Redemptor noster
composuit super ejus corpus et sanguinem non diceremus." It
is to be observed that, for lack of suitable words in English,
the translation does not retain the distinction in the original
httw &en J>rece^i and orationem, the former denoting the prayer of
consecration in the Canon, exclu>^ive of the Lord's Prayer, the
latter the Lord's Prayer itself, which Gregory appended to it.
By the scholasticus, to whom he assigns the composition of the
former, is meant apparently the liturgist, whoever he might be,
who had compiled the Canon of the Mass. It would thus seem
that, according to the Roman use before the time of Gregory, the
Lord's Prayer did not occur at all " over the oblation," or " over
the Body and Blood," i.e. (as the expression must be taken to
mean) between consecration and distribution, though, of course,
it may have been used before or after. Such omission was un-
doubtedly peculiar. Among other authorities for the general
usage, S. Augustine (Ep. CXLIX. ad Paulin.) affirms that
nearly every Church concludes the whole petition (i.e. the prayer
of consecration of which he has been speaking) with the Lord's
Prayer : — "Quam totam petitionem fere omnis Ecclesia Oratione
Dominica conchidit." In saying '^ /ere omms," he may possibly
have had t!ie Roman Church in view. As to wliat is said by
S. Gregory of tiie custom of the Apostles, the most obvious
meining of which is, that they used no prayer of consecration
but the Lord's Prayer, we have no means of ascertaining wlience
be derived this tradition, or what the value of it might be.
It does not, of course, imply that the words of institution were
not said over the elements by the Apostles, but only that they
used no other prayer for the purpose of consecration. Ways
have been suggested, though not satisfactory, for evading the
apparent meaning ot the statement.


Charity, when an occasion presents itself, pro-
ceed to the Cnurcli of Catana; or in the Church
of Syracuse teach those who you believe or
understand may possibly be murmuring with
respect to this matter, holding a conference
there, as though for a different purpose, and so
desist not from instructing them. For as to wliat
they say about the Church of Constantinople,
who can doubt that it is subject to the Apostolic
See, as both the most pious lord the emperor
and our brother the bishop of that city con-
tinually acknowledge ? Yet, if this or any
other Church has anything that is good, I am
prepared in what is good to imitate even my
inferiors, while prolnbiting them from things
unlawful. For he is foolish who thinks him-
self first in such a way as to scorn to learn
whatever good things he may see

EPISTLE XVII.
To Demetrian and Valerian.

Gregory to Demetrian and Valerian, clerks
of Firmum i^Feruio).

Both the ordinances of the sacred canons
and legal authority permit that ecclesiastical
property may be lawfully expended for the
redemption of captives. And so, since we
are informed by you that, nearly eighteen
years ago, the most reverend Fabius, late
bishop of the Church of Firmum, paid to the
enemy eleven pounds of the silver of that
Church for your redemption, and that of your
father Passivus, now our brother and fellow-
bishop, but then a clerk, and also that of your
mother, and that you have some fear on this
account, lest what was given should at any
time be sought to be recovered from you ; —
we have thought fit by the authority of this
precept to remove your suspicion, ordaining
that you and your heirs shall henceforth
sustain no annoyance for recovery of the debt,
and that no process shall be instituted against
you by any one ; since the rule of equity re-
quires that what has been paid with a pious
intent should not be attended with burden or
distress to those who have been redeemed.

EPISTLE XVIII.
To Rom ANUS, Guardian {Vefensorem).

Gregory to Romanus, &c.

Our care for the purpose before us prompts
us to commit the looking after ecclesiastical
interests to active persons. And so, since we
have found thee, Romanus, to have been a
trusty and diligent guardian, we have thought
fit to commit to thy government from this
present second indiction the patrimony of the
holy Roman Church, which by the mercy of


10


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


God we serve, lying in the parts about Syra-
cuse, Catana, Agrigentum, and Mile {partibus
Milensibus). Hence it is needful that thou go
thither immediately, that, in consideration of
the divine judgment, and in memory also of
our admonition, thou mayest study to acquit
thyself so efficiently and faithfully that thou
mayest be found to incur no risk for negligence
or fraud, which God forbid should be the case.
But act thus all the more in order that thou
mayest be commended to divine grace for thy
faithfulness and industry. Moreover, we have
sent orders according to custom to \h^ faviilia
of the same patrimony 2, that there may be
nothing to hinder thy carr)ing out what has
been enjoined thee.

EPISTLE XIX.

To THE Husbandmen [Co^onos) OF the
Syracusan Patrimony 3.

Gregory to the Coloni, &c.

I would have you know that we have
arranged for you to be put under the care of
our guardian {defensoris). And accordingly
we order you to obey him without any re-
luctance in what he may see fit to do, and
enjoin on you to be done, for the advantage of
the Church. We have given him such power
as to enable him to inflict strict punishment
on those who may attempt to be disobedient
or contumacious. And we have likewise
charged him that he delay not with instant
attention to recover to ecclesiastical jurisdic-
tion any slaves who are in hiding outside their
limits, or any one by whom boundaries have
been invaded. For know that he has been
warned on his peril, that he presume not ever
under any kind of excuse to do any wrong or
robbery in regard to what belongs to others.

EPISTLE XXHI.
To John, Bishop of Syracuse.

Gregory to John, &c.

Our son the glorious exconsul Leontius has
made a serious complaint to us of our brother
and fellow-bishop Leo ; and his complaint has
altogether disturbed us, since a bishop ought
not to have acted so precipitately and lightly.
This case we have conmiitted, to be thoroughly
enquired into, to our Guardian {defensoris)


a See the following Epistle XIX. For the meaning o^familia
here see note 3 to tlie same epistle. Gregory sent at the same
time letters (vvliicli have not been translated) to three influential
laymen in Sicily, desiring them to assist and support Romanus
in the exercise o! his authority. Four other letters (23, 24, 26, 27)
are translated, as intimating the kind of duties devolving on
Romanus in connexion with his government of the Patrimony.

3 For the rnerinmg of Coloni, see I. 44. The body of them
is called xh.^ fam'lia of the patrimony in the preceding epistle
to Romanus (Ep. XVill.).


Romanus when he comes to you. Furdier,
the messenger who was sent by him {i.e. by
LeoTitiiis) complains of your Fraternity, tiiat
in the defence of the illustrious physician
Archelaus the interests of our brother and
fellows-bishop, the Metropolitan Domitian,
suffer damage 1 And indeed your Fraternity
ouglit justly to protect your sons, or it may be
in this case the interests of holy Church,
and to give no occasion for evil-speaking to
adversaries. I doubt not, however, even while
thus speaking, that you do take heed to this ;
yet we have enjoined on the same Romanus,
when he comes to you, to arrange witn you
what is right with regard to this case also

EPISTLE XXIV.
To Romanus, Guardian {Defensoretn).

Gregory to Romanus, &c.

Our son Theodosius, abbot of the Monastery
founded by the late Patrician Liberius in Cam-
pania, is known to have intimated to us that
the late illustrious lady Rustica. about one and
twenty years ago, in the will that she made,
appointed in the first place Felix, her husband,
to be her heir, and delegated to him the
foundation of a Monastery in Sicily ; but on
this condition, — that if he should not witliin
the space of one year pay all the legacies be-
queathed to her freedmen, or establish the
aforesaid Monastery as she desired, then the
holy Roman Church should have undisputed
claim to the portion which she was understood
to have in the farm of Cumas, and that it
should lend aid for paying the above legacies,
and for the construction of the said monastery.
Hence, seeing that, as is said, the bequeathed
property has not so far been made over in full
to this same monastery, and some part of the
possession is up to this time detained by her
heirs, let thy Experience thoroughly enquire
into and examine the case. And in the first
place indeed, if under the conditions of the
will any heirship comes in wherein our Church
may have a plea, we desire thee to investigate
and clearly ascertain it, and act for the ad-
vantage of the poor, as the order of the busi-
ness may require ; and then to be instantly
solicitous for the due establishment of that
cell, and the recovery of the bequeathed
property, to the end that the pious desire of
the testatrix may be fulfilled in both respects,
and the unjust detainers of the property may
learn from just loss the guilt of their undue


4 This Domitian was bishop of Melitina and Metropolitan
of Armenia, being a relation of the Emperor's, see III. 67. 'I'he
physician Archelaus is commended in an ep'Stli not translated
(V. 32) to Cyprian, the previous rector patrimonii in Sicily,
for protection in some question about propert>.


EPISTLE XXXIII.


n


retention. With all vivacity, then, we desire
thee both to enquire into this case and, with
the help of the Lord, to bring it to an issue,
that the pious devotion of the ordainer may at
length take efiect. But we desire thee also, as
far as justice allows, to succour this monastery
in all ways, that lay persons who ought to have
rendered the succour of their assistance may
not, as is asserted, have power of doing hurt
in the name of the founder.


EPISTLE XXVL
To RoMANUs, Guardian {Defensor eni),

Gregory to Romanus, &c.

Although the law with reason allows not
things that come into possession of the Church
to be alienated, yet sometimes the strictness
of the rule should be moderated, where regard
to mercy invites to it, especially when there
is so great a quantity that the giver is not
burdened, and the poverty of the receiver is
considerably relieved. And so, inasmuch as
Stephnnia, the bearer of these presents, having
come hither with her little son Calixenus
(whom she asserts that she bare to her late
husband Peter, saying also that she has la-
boured under extreme poverty), demanded of
us with supplication and tears that we should
cause to be restored to the same Calixenus
the possession of a house in the city of Ca-
tana, which Ammonia, her late mother-in-law,
the grandmother of Calixenus, had offered by
title of gift to our Church ; asserting that the
said Ammonia had not power to alienate it,
and that it belonged alti'gether to the aforesaid
Calixenus, her son ; which assertion our most
beloved son Cyprian, the deacon, who was
acquainted with the case, contradicted, saying
that the complaint of the aforesaid woman had
not justice to go on, and that she could not
reasonably claim or seek to recover that house
in the name of her son ; but, lest we should
seem to leave the tears of the above-named
woman without eftect, and to follow the way
of rigour rather than embrace the plea of pity,
we command thee by this precept to restore
the said house to the above-named Calixenus,
together wiih Ammonia's deed of gift with
respect to this same house, which is known
to be there in Sicily; — since, as we have said,
it is better in doubtful cases not to execute
strictness, but rather to be inclined to the side
of benignity, especially when by the cession
of a small matter the Church is not burdened,
and succour is mercifully given to a poor
orphan.

Given in the month of November, Indic-
tion 2.


EPISTLE XXVII.

To Romanus, Guardian {Defensorem).

Gregory to Romanus, &c.

It has come to our ears that certain men,
having altogether too little discernment, de-
sire us to become implicated in their risks,
and wish to be so defended by ecclesiastical
persons, that the ecclesiastical persons them-
selves may be bound by their guilt. Where-
fore I admonish thee by this present in-
junction, and through tliee our brother and
fellow-bishop, the lord John, or others whom
it may concern, that with regard to eccle-
siastical patronage of people (whether you
should have received letters from me, or none
should have been addressed to you), you should
bestow it with such moderation that, if any
have been implicated in public peculations,
they m.ay not appear to be unjustly defended
by us, lest we should in any way transfer to
ourselves, by venturing on indiscreet deience,
the ill repute of evil doers : but so far as be-
comes the Church, by admoPiishing and ap-
plying the word of intercession, succour whom
you can ; so that you may both give them aid,
and not stain the repute of holy Church.

EPISTLE XXXIII.
To Andrews.

Gregory to Andrew.

On hearing that your Glory had been se-
verely afflicted with grief and sickness, I con-
doled with you exceedingly. But learning
presently that the malady had entirely left
you, I soon turned my sorrow into joy, and
returned great shanks to Almighty God tor
that He smote that He might heal, afflicted
that He might lead to true joys. For hence it
is written, Whom the Lord loveth he chasieneth,
ajui scourgeth every so?i wJiom he receiveth (Heb.
xii. 6). Hence the Truth in person says, My
Father is the husha7idman, and every brafich in
me that beareth not fruity he will take azvay ;
hut every branch that beareth fruity he will
purge it^ that it rnay bring foj'ih more fruit
(Joh. XV. I, 2). For the unfuitful branch is
taken away, because a sinner is utterly rooted
up. But the fruitful branch is said to be
purged, because it is cut down by discipline
that it may be brought to more abundant
grace. For so the gram of the ears of corn,
beaten with the threshing instrument, is stiipt
of its awn and chaff. So the olives, pressed
in the oil-press, flow forth into the fatness of
oil. So the bunches of grapes, pounded
with the heels, liquify into wine. Rejoice,
therefore, good man, for that in this thy

5 Andreas Scholasticus, so addressed V. 4?-


12


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


scourge and this thy advancement thou seest
that thou art loved by the Eternal Judge.

Furthermore, I beg that my daughter Glo-
riosa, your wife, be greeted in my name.
Now may Almighty God keep you under
heavenly protection, and comfort you both
now with abundance of gifts and hereafter
with the retribution of reward.

EPISTLE XXXVI.

To FORTUNATUS, BiSHOP OF NeAPOLIS

(Naples).

Gregory to Fortunatus, &c.

Having learnt what zeal inflames your Fra-
ternity in behalf of Christian slaves whom
Jews buy from the territories of Gaul, we
apprize you that your solicitude has so pleased
us that it is also our own deliberate judgment
that they should be inhibited from traffic of
this kind. But we find from Basilius, the
Hebrew, who has come here with other Jews,
that such purchase is enjoined on them by
(Hvers judges of the republic, and that Chris-
tians along with pagans come to be thus pro-
cured. Hence it has been necessary for the
business to be adjusted with such cautious
arrangement that neither they who give such
orders should be thwarted, nor those who say
they obey them against their will should bear
any expense unjustly. Accordingly, let your
Fraternity with watchful care provide for this
being observed and kept to; that, when they
[i.e. the Jewish dealers] return from the afore-
said province, Christian slaves who may hap-
pen to be brought by them be either handed
over to those who gave the order, or at all
events sold to Christian purchasers within
forty days. And after the completion of this
number of days let none of them in any way
whatever remain in the hands of the Jews.
But, should any of these slaves perchance fall
into such sickness that they cannot be sold
within the appointed days, care is to be taken
that, when they are restored to their former
health, they be by all means disposed of as
aforesaid. For it is not fit that any should
incur loss for a transaction that is free from
blame. But since, as often as anything new
is ordained, it is usual so to lay down the rule
for the future as not to condemn the past in
large costs, if any slaves have remained in
their hands from the purchase of the previous
year, or have been recently taken away from
them by you, let them have liberty to dispose
of them while they are with you. So may
there be no possibility of their incurring loss
for what they did in ignorance before the pro-
hibition, such as it is right they should sustain
after being forbidden.


Further, it has been reported to us that the
above-named Basilius wishes to concede to
his sons, who by the mercy of God are Chris-
tians, certain slaves, under the title of a gift,
with the view that, under cover of the oppor-
tunity thus afforded, they may serve him as
their master all but in name ; and that, if
after this any should perchance have believed
that they might fly to the Church for refuge
in order to become Christians, they may
not be reclaimed to freedom, but to the
dominion of those to whom they had before
been given. In this matter it befits your
Fraternity to keep becoming watch. And,
if he should wish to give any slaves to his
sons, that all occasion of fraud may be re-
moved, let them by all means become Chris-
tians, and let them not remain in his house ;
but, when circumstances may require that he
should have their services, let them be com-
manded to render him what, even in any case,
from his sons, and for God's sake, it is fitting
should be supplied to him.

EPISTLE XLI.
To JuLiANUS, Scribo\

Gregory to Julianus, &c.

If in secular ofiices order and the discipline
handed down by our ancestors is observed, who
may bear to see ecclesiastical order confounded,
to disregard such things when heard of, and
postpone their amendment by improperly con-
doning them ? And indeed you do well to love
charity and to persuade to concord. But, since
we are compelled by consideration of our posi-
tion, and for God's sake, by no means to leave
uninvestigated the things that have come to
our knowledge, we shall take care, when Maxi-
mus comes, to require a strict account from
him of the things that have been said about
him. And we trust in the guardianship of our
Creator, that we shall not be turned aside by
either the favour or the fault of any man from
maintenance of the canons and the straight
path of equity, but w^illingly observe what is
agreeable to reason. For if (which God forbid)
we neglect ecclesiastical solicitude and vigour,
indolence destroys discipline, and certainly
harm will be done to the souls of the faithful,
while they see such examples set them by their
pastors. But with regard to your saying in
your letter that the good will of the palace
and the love of the people are not alienated
from him, this circumstance does not recall
us from our zeal for justice, nor shall it cause
our determination to enquire into the truth to


fi Cf. II. 32, note 7 ; V. 30, note 8. On the subject of tho
epistle, see III. 47, note 2.


EPISTLE XLIX.


13


fail through sin of ours. Every one, then,
should strive, magnificent son, to concih'ate to
himself the love of God. For without divine
favour what can I say that human love will do
for us hereafter, when even among ourselves it
harms us the more ?

EPISTLE XLIL
To Agilulph, King of the Lombards.

Gregory to Agilulph, &c.

We return thanks to your Excellency, that,
hearkening to our petition, you have concluded
such a peace as may be of advantage to both
parties, as we had confidence in you that you
would. On this account we greatly commend
your prudence and goodness, since in choosing
peace you have shewn that you love God, who
is its author. For, if unhappily peace had not
been made, what else could have ensued but,
with sin and danger on both sides, the shed-
ding of the blood of miserable peasants 7,
whose labour profits both ? But, that we may
feel the advantage to us of this peace, as it has
been made by you, we beg you, greeting you
with paternal charity, that as often as oppor-
tunity offers itself, you would enjoin by letters
on your dukes in divers places, and especially
those who are constituted in these parts, that
they keep this peace inviolate, as has been
promised, and not seek for themselves any
occasions whence either any contention or
any ill-feeling may arise, to the end that we
may be able to give thanks still more for your
good will. We received the bearers of these
presents, as being in very truth your own
people, with the affection that was becoming,
since it was right both to receive and dismiss
with charity men who are wise, and who an-
nounced that by the favour of God peace had
been concluded.

EPISTLE XLIII.
To Theodelinda, Queen of the Lombards.

Gregory to Theodelinda, &c.

How your Excellency has laboured earnestly
and kindly, as is your wont, for the conclusion
of peace we have learnt from the report of our
son, the abbot Probus. Nor indeed was it
otherwise to be expected of your Christianity
than that you would in all ways shew your
assiduity and goodness in the cause of peace.
Wherefore we give thanks to Almighty God,
who so rules your heart with His loving-kind-
ness that, as He has given you a right foith, so
He also grants you to work always what is
pleasing in His sight. For you may be assured,
most excellent daughter, that for the saving of

7 RusHcorum. Cf. I. 44, p. 88, note i, and Prolegoin., p. viii.


so much bloodshed on both sides you have
acquired no small reward. On this account,
returning thanks for your goodwill, we implore
the mercy of our God to repay you with good
in body and soul here and in the world to
come.

Moreover, greeting you with fatherly affec-
tion, we exhort you so to deal with your most
excellent consort that he may not reject the
alliance of the Christian republic. For, as I
believe you know yourself, it is in many ways
profitable that he should be inclined to betake
himself to its friendship. Do you then, after
your manner, always strive for what tends to
goodwill and conciliation between the parties,
and labour wherever an occasion of reaping a
reward presents itself, that you may commend
your good deeds the more before the eyes of
Almighty God.

EPISTLE XLIX
To Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch ^.

Gregory to Anastasius, &c.

I received the letters of thy Fraternity, rightly
holding fast the profession of the faith ; and I
returned great thanks to Almighty God, who,
when the shepherds of His flock are changed,
still, even after such change, guards the faith
which He once delivered to the holy Fathers.
Now the excellent preacher says. Other founda-
tion can no man lay than that is laid, which is
Christ Jesus (i Cor. iii. 2). Whosoever, then,
with love of God and his neighbour, holds
firmly the faith that is in Christ, he has laid
for himself the same Jesus Christ, the Son of
God and man, as a foundation. It is to be
hoped therefore that, where Christ is the
foundation, the edifice also of good works
may follow. The Truth also in person says.
He that e?ifereth not by the door into the sheep-
fold^ but climbeth up some other 7vay, the same is
a thief afid a robber ; but he that entereth i?i
by the door is the shepherd of the sheep (J oh.
x. i). And a little after He adds, / a/n the
door. He, then, enters into the sheep-fold
through the door who enters through Christ.
And he enters through Christ who tiiinks and
preaches what is true concerning the same
Creator and Redeemer of the human race,
and holds fast what he preaches ; who takes
upon him the topmost place of rule for the
office of carrying a burden, not for the desire
of the glory of transitory dignity. He also
watches wisely over the sheep-fold of which he
has taken charge, lest either perverse men tear
the sheep of God by speaking froward things,


8 This was the younger Anastasius, who succeeded the
patriarch of the same name to whom previous epistles are ad-
dressed.


14


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


or malignant spirits ravage them by persuading
to vicious delights.

Of a truth we remember how the blessed
Jacob, w^ho had served long for his wives,
said. This twe?ity years have I been with thee ;
thy ewes and thy she goats have not been barren.
The rains of thy flock have I not eaten, nor shewn
ufito thee that which had been seized by a beast.
T made good every loss ; whatever had been lost
by theft, from me didst thou require it. By day
and nioht I was consumed by drought and frost ;
sleep ked fro?n mine eyes (Gen. xxxi. 38). If,
then, he who feeds the sheep of Laban labours
and watches thus, on what labour, on what
watches, should he be intent who feeds the
sheep of God ? But in all this let Him
instruct us who for our sake became a man,
who vouchsafed to become what he had made.
May He pour both into my weakness and into
thy charity the spirit of His own love, and in
all carefulness and watchfulness of circum-
spection open the eye of our heart.

But for men of a right faith being advanced
to sacred orders thanks are to be paid without
cease to the same Almighty God, and prayer
ever made for the hfe of our most pious and
most Christian lord the Emperor, and for his
most tranquil spouse, and their most gentle
offspring, in whose times the mouths of heretics
are silent ; since, though their hearts seethe
with the madness of perverse thought, yet in the
time of the Catholic Emperor they presume not
to speak out the bad things which they think.

Furthermore, in speaking of your main-
tenance of the holy councils, your Fraternity
declares that you maintain the first holy
Ephesine synod. But, seeing that from the
account given in an heretical document which
has been sent me from the royal city, I have
found that, according to it, certain Catholic
positions had been censured along with here-
tical ones, because some suppose that to have
been the first Ephesine synod which was got
together at some time or other by the heretics
in the same city, it is altogether necessary that
your Charity should apply to the Churches of
Alexandria and Antioch for the acts of this
synod, and find how the matter really stands.
Or, if you please, we will send you hence what
we have here, preserved from of old in our
archives. For that synod which was held
under pretence of being the first Ephesine
asserts that certain positions submitted to it
were approved, which are the declared tenets
of Coelestius and Pelagius. And, Ccelestius
and Pelagius having been condemned in that
synod, how could those positions be approved,
the authors of which were condemned 9 ?

9 Cf. VI. 14.


Further, since it has come to our ears that
in the Churches of the East no one attains to
a sacred order except by giving of bribes, if
your Fraternity finds it to be so, offer your
first oblation to Almighty God by restraining
in the Churches subject to you the error of
simoniacal heresy. For, to pass over other
considerations, what manner of men can they
be in sacred orders who are raised to them
not by merit, but by bribes ? May Almighty
God guard thy Love with heavenly grace, and
grant to you to carry with you to eternal joys
multiplied fruit and overflowing measure from
those who are committed to your charge.

EPISTLE LV.

To Fantinus, Guardian {Defe?tsorem\
OF Panormus {Palermo).

Gregory to Fantinus, &c.

A little time ago we wrote to Victor, our
brother and fellow-bishop, that — inasmuch as
certain of the Jews have complained in a
petition presented to us that synagogues with
their guest-chambers, situated in the city of
Panormus, had by him been unreasonably taken
possession of — he should keep aloof from
their congregation until it could be ascertained
whether this thing had been justly done, lest
perchance injury should appear to have been
alleged by them of their own mere will. And
indeed, having regard to his priestly office, we
could not easily believe that our aforesaid
brother had done anything unsuitably. But,
since we find from the report of Salarius, our
notary, who was afterwards there, that there
had been no reasonable cause for taking pos-
session of those synagogues, and that they had
been unadvisedly and rashly consecrated, we
therefore enjoin thy Experience, since what
has been once consecrated cannot any more
be restored to the Jews, that it be thy care to
see that our aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop
pay the price at which our sons, the glorious
Venantius the Patrician, and Urbicus the
Abbot, may value the synagogues themselves
with the guest-chambers that are under them
or annexed to their walls, and the gardens
thereto adjoining ; that so what he has caused
to be taken possession of may belong to the
Church, and they may in nowise be oppressed,
or suffer any injustice. Moreover, let books
or ornaments that have been abstracted be in
like manner sought for. And, if any have
been manifestly taken away, we desire them
also to be restored without any ambiguity.
For, as there ought to be no licence for them,
as we have ourselves already written, to do
anything in their synagogues beyond what is
decreed by law, so neither damage nor any


EPISTLE LX.


15


cost ought to be brought upon them contrary
to justice and equity

EPISTLE LVIII.
To Martin, Scholasttcus\

Gregory to Martin, &c.

Seeing that questions arising in civil affairs
need, as is known to thy Greatness, very full
enquiry, let thy wisdom consider with what
care and vigilance the causes of bishops should
be investigated. But, in the letter which thou
hast sent us by the bearer of these presents on
the questions with respect to which thou wert
sent to us by our brother and fellow-bishop
Crementius, thou hast given only a superficial
account of them, and hast been entirely silent
about their root. But, had their origin and
intrinsic character been manifest to us, we
should have known what should be decided
about them, and would then settle the mind
of our aforesaid brother by a plain and suitable
reply. This, however, is altogether displeasing
to us, that thou givest us to understand that
some of the bishops have gone to the court ^
without letters from their primate, and that
they hold unlawful assembhes. But since, as
we have before said, the origin and nature of
the questions are entirely unknown to us, we
cannot pronounce anything definitely, lest, as
would be very reprehensible, we should seem
to pass sentence about things imperfectly
known. Hence it was very needful that, for
our complete information, thy Greatness should
have proceeded hither to reply to our ques-
tions during the time of thy lingering in Sicily.
Nevertheless, now that thou hast seen our
brother and fellow-bishop John, we believe
that in him thou hast seen us also. And so,
since he has been at pains himself also to
write to us about the same questions, we have
written in reply to him what seemed to us right.
And, since he is a priest of ripe and cautious
judgment, if you are willing to treat with him on
the questions which he has been commissioned
to entertain, we are sure that you will find in


I On the designation Scholasticus, see II. 32, note 2 ; V. 36,
note 9. The occasion of this and the following epistle appears
to have been as follows. Crementius, who was at that time
primate of the province of Bizacia in Africa, had been accused
by other African bishops. The Emperor, appealed to by them,
had desired Gregory to take cognizance of the case ; but his
interference had been objected to in Africa, where, as appears
elsewhere, there was still jealousy of the claims of the Roman
See. Gregory had commissioned John, Bishop of Syracuse, to
investigate the matter, and to him Crementius (who now professed
— though Gregory doubted his sincerity — to defer to the Roman
bishop) had sent the lawyer Martin to state his case. The latter
seems to have been directed to go on to Rome too, but had
not done so. Both Martin and John had subsequently written to
Gregory on the subject, and to them he now replies. Some three
years seem to have afterwards elapsed without anything more
being done: see XII. 32, where Gregory urges tlie bishops
of the province to investigate the old charges against their
primate in synod : but with what result docs not further appear.

^ Ad co7Jtitatuin ; referring to the suffragans of Crementius
having complained to the Emperor against their primate.


him what is both advantageous and reason-
able.

EPISTLE LIX.
To John, Bishop of Syracuse 3.

Gregory to John, &c.

I have received your Fraternity's letter,
wherein you inform me that the most eloquent
Mai tin has come from the African province
and communicated something to you privately.
And indeed your Fraternity, as often as you
find occasion, ceases not to shew your love
towards the blessed apostle Peter. Where-
fore we give thanks to Almighty God, that
where you are, there we are not found absent.
Nevertheless, your Holiness, is not yet fully
cognizant of the case in hand. For the Byza-
cene primate ^ had been accused on some
charge, and the most pious Emperor wished
him to be judged by us according to canonical
ordinance. But then, on the receipt of ten
pounds of gold, Theodorus the inagistennilitmii
opposed this being done. Yet the most pious
Emperor admonished us to commission some
one, and do whatever was canonical. But,
seeing the contrarieties of men, we have been
unwilling to decide this case. Now, moreover,
this same primate says something about his
own intention. And it is exceedingly doubt-
ful whether he says such things to us sincerely,
or in fact because he is being attacked by his
fellow-bishops : for, as to his saying that he is
subject to the Apostolic See, if any fault is
found in bishops, 1 know not what bishop is
not subject to it. But when no fault requires
it to be otherwise, all according to the principle
of humility are equal. Nevertheless, do you
speak with the aforesaid most eloquent Martin
as seems good to your Fraternity. For it is
for you to consider what should be done ; and
we have rephed to you briefly on the case,
because we ought not to believe indiscriminately
men that are even unknown to us. If, how-
ever, you, who see him before you in person,
are of opinion that anything more definite
should be said to him, we commit this to your
Charity, being sure of your love in the grace
of Almighty God. And what you do regard
without doubt as having been done by us.

EPISTLE LX.

To ROMANUS AND OTHER GUARDIANS {defcfl-

sores) OF THE Ecclesiastical Patrimony.

Gregory to Romanus the guardian, Fantinus
the guardian, Sabinus the sub-deacon, Sergius


3 See preceding episUe, note i. On this John's election to
the See of Syracuse on Gregory's strong recommendation after
the death of Maximianus, see V. 17.

4 Viz. Crementius. See preceding epistle.


i6


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


the guardian, Boniface the guardian {a pari-
bus ^)^ and the ?)ix patroni.

Since, even as cautious foresight knows how-
to block the way against faults, and to avoid
what is hurtful, so neglect opens the way to
excesses, and is wont to incur what ought to
be guarded against, we ought to bestow very
careful attention, and see alike to the reputa-
tion and to the safeguard of our brethren and
priests. Now it has come to our ears that
certain of the bishops, under pretext, as it
were, of help, associate themselves in one
house with women. And so, lest hereby just
occasion of detraction should be given to
scoffers, or the ancient enemy of the human
race should take advantnge of an easy matter
of deceit, we enjoin thee by the tenor of this
mandate that thou study to shew thyself
strenuous and solicitous. And, if any of the
bishops included within the limits of the
patrimony committed to thee are living with
women, do thou entirely put a stop to this,
and for the future by no means suffer any
women to reside with them, except such as the
censorship of the sacred canons allows, that is
a mother, an aunt, a sister, and others of this
sort, concerning whom there can be no ill
suspicion. Yet they do better, if they refrain
from living together even with such as these.
For we read that the blessed Augustine refused
to live even with his sister, saying. Those who
are with my sister are not my sisters.

The caution, then, of a learned man ought
to be a great instruction to us. For it is a
mark of uncautious presumption for one that
is less firm not to fear what a strong man is
afraid of. For he wisely overcomes what is
unlawful who has learnt not to use even what
is allowed him : and indeed we bind none in
this matter against their will, but, as physicians
are accustomed to do, we prescribe carefulness
for health's sake, even though it be for the
time distressful. And therefore we impose no
necessary obligation ; but, if any should choose
to imitate a learned and holy man, we leave it
to their own will. Let, then, thy Experience
act with zeal and solicitude for the observance
of what we have ordered to be prohibited.
For, if hereafter it should chance to be found
otherwise, know that thou wiit incur no slight
risk with us. Furthermore, let it be thy care
to exhort these same bishops, our brethren,
that they admonish those who are subject to
them, to wit those who are constituted in
sacred orders, to observe in all ways after
their example what they themselves observe;
this only being added, that these, as canonical
authority has decreed, are not to leave wives


5 See I. 25, note 3.


whom they ought to govern chastely. Given
in the month of March, Indiction 2.

EPISTLE LXL

Here begins the epistle of Rechared, King
of the Goths, addressed to the blessed Gregory,
Bishop of Rome ^.

Rechared to the holy lord and most blessed
pope, the bishop Gregory.

At the time when the Lord in His compas-
sion caused us to be dissociated from the
impious Arian heresy, and the holy Catholic
Church gathered us into her bosom ameli-
orated in the path of faith, it was then the
desire of our mind to seek with delight and
with the whole bent of our mind so very
reverend a man ; thee who art powerful above
all other bishops, that he might commend
in all ways a thing so worthy and acceptable
to God for us men. But, whereas we are
engaged in many cares of government, being
occupied by divers occasions, three years
passed without the desire of our mind being
satisfied. And after this we chose, for the
purpose of sending them to thee, some abbots
of monasteries, who should proceed to thy
presence, and offer gifts sent by us to Saint
Peter, and bring us word more distinctly of
thy holy reverence's health. But, as they
hastened on their way, and were almost in
sight of the shores of Italy, it befell them that
they struck on certain roclss near Marseilles,
and were scarcely able to deliver their own
souls. And now we have entreated a pres-
byter whom thy Glory had sent as lar as the
city of Malaca {civilatem MaHcitaua?n) to
come into our sight. But he. detained by
bodily infirmity, has in no wise been able
to reach the soil of our kingdom. But, as we
know most certainly that he was sent by thy
Holiness, we have sent a golden cup orna-
mented on the outside with gems for thy
Holiness (as I trust thou wilt vouchsafe to do)
to offer as worthy of the apostle who shines
the first in dignity. For I also beg thy High-
ness, when an opportunity is found, to seek
us out by thy sacred golden letters. For how
much I truly love thee I believe is not hidden,
the Lord inspiring thee, from the fecundity
of thine own breast. It is sometimes the case
that those whom tracts of land or sea divide
the grace of Christ glues together as if visibly.
For to those who do not see thee at all in
person fame discloses thy goodness.


6 The genuineness of this letter is considered doubtful. It
may have been a forgery founded on Epistle CXXil. in this
book from Gregory to Reccared. The Latin in the original
is in many parts incorrect and ungramnialical ; being such indeed
Reccared's was not unlikely to be. Other letters relating to
the conversion of Reccared aie I. 43 ; IX. 121, 122.


EPISTLE LXV.


17


Further, I commend with all veneration to
thy Holiness in Christ, Leander, the priest
of the church of Hispalis, since through him
thy benevolence has been made clearly mani-
fest to us ; and when we talk of thy life with
this same bishop, we reckon ourselves as your
inferiors in regard to your good deeds. I am
delighted to hear of thy health, most reverend
and most holy man ; and I beg of thy Chris-
tian prudence that thou wouldest commend
frequently in thy prayers to our common Lord
us and our people, who are ruled after God
under our government, and have been ac-
quired by Christ in your times ; that hereby
true charity to God-ward may establish in
well-being those whom the breadth of the
world separates.

EPISTLE LXIL
To RoMANus, Guardian {Defensorein).

Gregory to Romanus, &c.

It has come to our ears that the tonsura-
tores"^ in Sicily, with wicked presumption, take
to themselves the name of defensores^ and that
they not only are of no utility for the interests
of the Church, but also take occasion hence
to commit many irregularities. Consequently
we enjoin thy Experience by this present
authority to enquire diligently into this. And,
if thou findest any, besides those who have
letters to empower them in such business^,
usurping henceforth this title, put a stop to
this thing by strict correction. If, however,
thou shouldest discover any who have proved
themselves active and faithful in ecclesiastical
affairs, thou must send us a full and particular
report of them, that we may judge whether
they are worthy of a letter 9.

Furthermore, we desire thee to make a
thorough examination of the accounts of For-
tunatus ; and, when he has satisfied all the
debts that appear against him, allow him no
longer to have to do with the patrimony, or
with any action of our Church, seeing that,
as we have heard, he has conducted himself
in such a manner that he ought not henceforth
to have any communication with our people.

Furthermore, it has been reported to us
that one Martianus, who has assumed to him-
self the name of a defensor, has declined to
pay obedience to our brother and fellow-
bishop John, to whom we had committed the
charge of our patrimony. Inquire therefore ;
and, if it is true, let him be sent into exile,


7 " Tonsuratores dici potuere qui erant praepositi colonis seu
possesseribus praediorum Ecclesise Romanse, qui erant tonsurati
in signum subjectionis, more Romanorum." Alteserra.

^ i.e. letters of appointment under the hand of the bishop
■of Rome. See V. 29, XI. 38, for the form of such letters.

9 See note above.

VOL. XIII.


that his disobedience to him from whose
Church he has seized for himself a false title
of honour, and who is promoting the interests
of the same, may not go unpunished. But,
if there are also any others disobedient to the
orders of our said brother, thou wilt by all
means visit them with strict punishment.

EPISTLE LXV.

To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
( Cagliari).

Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Sardinia.

It has come to our ears that some of your
clerics, inflated with a spirit of elation (which
is a serious thing to be said), neglect obe-
dience to the commands of your Fraternity,
and occupying themselves rather in the services
and labours of others, desert the business of
their own Church in which they are needed.
For this reason we greatly wonder why you
do not keep up the rule of discipline, and
restrain them, when wandering dissolutely
at large, with a rein of strict control to the
requirements of the office they have under-
taken. It is said also that some of these
contumacious clerks, in order to obtain sup-
port against you, resort to the patronage of
our guardian {defensoi-is) Vitalis. Wherefore
we have sent a letter to him, telling him not
to dare henceforth to support any one of your
clerks against you unreasonably; but, if any
case of fault should arise which is not a
serious one but merits pardon, to approach
you rather as an intercessor than as a sup-
porter of the culprit. Be on your guard, then,
that no such report shall hereafter reach us
of your subjects despising you.

We have learnt also that a certain widow
left her substance to the monastery of St.
Julian, and that this substance has been
plundered by one of your clerks who used
to direct the actions of the deceased woman
while she lived, and that he now evades mak-
ing restitution. We therefore exhort thee that,
if what is said should prove to be true, you
cause him to be constrained by strict proceed-
ings, to the end that he may make haste to
restore without diminution the property left
to the monastery, and be compelled to give
up, even with the loss of his reputation, that
which, preserving the purity of his honour, he
ought not to have dared to take. But what
a cause for shame it is that we should appear
as admonishing your Fraternity to restrain your
clerk under the vigour of discipline, this I
believe that you yourself feel in your own
heart.

Also against worshippers of idols, and sooth-
sayers, and diviners, we very earnestly exhort


i8


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


your Fraternity to be on the watch with
pastoral vigilance, and publicly among the
people hold forth against the men who do
such things, and recall them by persuasive
hortation from the contagion of so great
sacrilege, and such temptation of divine judg-
ment, and peril in the present life. If, how-
ever, thou shouldest find them unwilling to
amend and correct themselves from such
doings, we desire thee to lay hold of them
with fervent zeal, and, in case of their being
slaves, to chastise them with blows and tor-
ments, whereby they may be brought to
amendment. But, if they are freemen, they
should be directed to penitence by suitable
and strict confinement; so that they who
scorn to listen to salutary words reclaiming
them from peril of death may at any rate be
brought back by bodily torments to the de-
sired sanity of mind. We have also been
informed that, you having committed the care
of your patrimony to certain laymen, they,
after having been detected in depredations
on your peasants and flight in consequence,
both refuse to restore the property which,
as not being subject to your control, they
indecently retain as though it were in their
own power, and also scorn to render you an
account of their doings. If this be so, it is
fitting that the matter be strictly investigated
by you, and the case between them and the
peasants of your Church be thoroughly ex-
amined. And whatever fraud may be dis-
covered in them let them be compelled to
make restitution for with the penalty ap-
pointed by the laws. But for the future your
Fraternity must take care that ecclesiastical
property be not committed to secular men not
living under your rule, but to approved clerics
holding ofiice under you ; in whom if any
wrong doing should be found, you may be
able to correct what has been unlawfully done,
as in the case of persons under you, whom
the obligation of their condition convenes
before you rather than excuses.

EPISTLE LXVII.

To CONSTANTIUS, BiSHOP OF MiLAN ^

Gregory to Constantius, &c.

Maximus, the prevaricator of the Church of
Salona, after he had failed to obtain anything
through the greater powers of the world, has
betaken himself to the lesser ones ; and by a
superfluity of prayers and by attestation to his
good works he strives to prevail with us. This
being so, I have thought it would be inhuman
in me, if he who says that he fears me much

* See III. 47, note 2.


were quite unable to find me in some degree
more indulgent. And I have therefore decided
that our most reverend brother and fellow-
bishop Marinianus should take cognizance of
his cause in the city of Ravenna. If, however,
by any chance his person is suspected, we
desire that your Fraternity also, if it is not too
laborious for you, should take the trouble of
repairing to the same city, and sit together
with our aforesaid brother in the same trial.
Whatever, then, may seem good to each of
your Holinesses, know that it will seem good
to me ; and your judgment I accept as my
own ; and what things you both think should
be remitted, be assured that I remit ; taking,,
however, careful heed that we may not appear
to be either sinfully remiss or austere to the
injury of Holy Church. We have enjoined the
execution of this matter on the Chartulary
Castorius, that he may fully report to us all
that has been done.


EPISTLE LXVIIL
To EiJSEBius OF Thessalonica.

Gregory to Eusebius of Thessalonica, Urbicus
of Dyrrachium, Andrew of Nicopolis, John of
Corinth, John of Prima Justiniana, John of
Crete, John of Larissa and Scodra, and many
other bishops.

We are constrained by the care of govern-
ment which we have undertaken to extend
vigilantly the solicitude of our office, and to
instruct the minds of our brethren by addresses
of admonition, that no wrongful presumption
may avail to deceive the ignorant, nor any dis-
simulation to excuse those who know. Be it
known then to your Fraternity that John,
f@rmerly bishop of the city of Constantinople,
against God, against the peace of the Church,
to the contempt and injury of all priests, ex-
ceeded the bounds of modesty and of his own
measure, and unlawfully usurped in synod the
proud and pestiferous title of oecumenical, that
is to say, universal. When our predecessor
Pelagius of blessed memory became aware of
this, he annulled by a fully valid censure all
the proceedings of that same synod, except
what had therein been done in the cause of
Gregory, bishop of Antioch, of venerable
memory ; taking him to task with most severe
rebuke, and warning him to abstain from that
new and temerarious name of superstition ;
even so as to forbid his deacon to go in pro-
cession ^ W4th him, unless he should amend so
great a wickedness. And we, adhering in all
respects to the zeal of his rectitude, observe


2 Procedere; i.e. proceed to the Holy Table for celebration.
Cf. Vil. 34, note 7.


EPISTLE LXXVIIl.


19


his ordinances, under the protection of God,
irrefragably, since it is fitting that he should
walk without stumbling along the straight way
of his predecessor, whom the tribunal of the
eternal Judge awaits for rendering an account
of the same place of government. In which
matter, lest we should seem to omit anything
that pertains to the peace of the Church, we
once and again addressed the same most holy
John by letter, bidding him relinquish that
name of pride, and inchne the elation of his
heart to the humility which our Master and
Lord has taught us. And having found that
he paid no regard, we have not desisted, in
our desire of concord, from addressing the like
admonitions to our most blessed brother and
fellow-priest Cyriacus, his successor. But
since it is the case, as we see, now that the
end of this world is near at hand, that the
enemy of the human race has already appeared
in his harbingers, so as to have as his pre-
cursors, through this title of pride, the very
priests who ought to have opposed him by
living well and humbly, I exhort and entreat
that not one of you ever accept this name,
that not one consent to it, that not one write
it, that not one admit it wherever it may have
been written, or add his subscription to it ;
but, as becomes ministers of Almighty God,
that each keep himself from this kind of
poisoned infection, and give no place to the
cunning lier-in-wait, since this thing is being
done to the injury and rendering asunder of
the whole Church, and, as we have said, to
the contemning of all of you. For if one, as
he supposes, is universal bishop, it remains
that you are not bishops.

Furthermore, it has come to our knowledge
that your Fraternity has been convened to
Constantinople. And although our most pious
Emperor allows nothing unlawful to be done
there, yet, lest perverse men, taking occasion
of your assembly, should seek opportunity of
cajoling you in favouring this name of supersti-
tion, or should think of holding a synod about
some other matter, with the view of intro-
ducing it therein by cunning contrivances, —
though without the authority and consent of
the Apostolic See nothing that might be passed
would have any force, nevertheless, before
Almighty God I conjure and warn you, that
the assent of none of you be obtained by any
blandishments, any bribes, any threats what-
ever; but, having regard to the eternal judg-
ment, acquit ye yourselves salubriously and
unanimously in opposition to wrongful aims ;
and, supported by pastoral constancy and
apostolical authority, keep out the robber and
the wolf that would rush in, and give no way
to him that rages for the tearing of the Church


asunder ; nor allow, through any cajolery, a
synod to be held on this subject, which indeed
would not be a legitimate one, nor to be called
a synod. We also at the same time admonish
you, that if haply nothing should be done with
mention of this preposterous name, but a synod
be by any chance assembled on another matter,
ye be in all respects cautious, circumspect,
watchful, and careful, lest anything should
therein be decreed against anyplace or person
prejudicially, or unlawfully, or in opposition to
the canons. But, if any question arises to be
treated with advantage, let the question in
hand take such a form that it may not upset
any ancient ordinances. Wherefore we once
more admonish you before God and His Saints,
that you observe all these things with the
utmost attention, and with the entire bent of
your minds. For if any one, as we do not
believe will be the case, should disregard in
any part this present writing, let him know
that he is segregated from the peace of the
blessed Peter, the Prince of the Apostles.
Let, then, your Fraternity so act that when
the Shepherd of shepherds comes in judg-
ment, you may not be found guilty with
respect to the place of government which you
have received.

EPISTLE LXXVIIL
To EuLOGius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

I have received at the hands of the bearer
of these presents the letter of your most sweet
Holiness, speaking to me about your cause
being terminated speedily. But, as soon as
he had come, he learnt how the possession
which he sought from our Church was held,
and soon satisfied himself about it. The
business he had with others he settled with-
out contention.

But concerning the matter which ought by
all means to have been written about to me,
your Holiness has written nothing, considering
me also to be tardy therein. And indeed, for
fear of its breaking out into the scandal of
division, I have been unwilling to be the
author of such division. For I have chosen
that whatever may follow should ensue through
others. But in time to come, God granting it,
you will have proof that in a cause wherem I
desire to please God I am not afraid of men.
Concerning this I took care to write to you
before now, even when you went to Constanti-
nople.

As to the timber, I had prepared pieces of
a larger size, as your Blessedness had re-
quested in your letter ; but so small a ship has
been sent here that it could not carry them,


■J 2


20


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


unless they had been cut. But I was unwilling
to have them cut, and have reserved for your
judgment what should be done about them.
If you do not require them, we will adapt
them for other uses here. Moreover, I beg of
your Holiness to pray for me earnestly, since
I am incessantly pressed down by pains of
gout, and swords of barbarians, and distressing
cares. But, if you bestow on me the help of
your prayer, I believe that you will strongly
aid me against all adversities.

EPISTLE LXXIX.
To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna 3.

Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

What is to be done in the case of Maximus
you have learnt from the letters which we have
before sent to you. But, since we have ascer-
tained from the report of our Chartulary Cas-
torius, the bearer of these presents, what is the
wish, or rather the request, of your Fraternity
in this matter, therefore if the said Maximus,
in the presence of you and our aforesaid
Chartulary, shall purge himself on oath from
simoniacal heresy, and with respect to other
charges shall, before the body of Saint Apolli-
naris, as we have written, reply only, when
interrogated, that he is guiltless, we commit
his cause to the judgment of your Fraternity,
with regard to his having presumed to cele-
brate the solemnities of mass while excom-
municated, as to what penance such fault shall
be purged by. And so, whatever according to
God seems good to you, do you settle without
fear, and entertain no doubt with regard to us.
For whatsoever may be ordained by you con-
cerning this cause we both thankfully accept
and willingly allow. Yet we exhort you that
you should be careful, and so temper what you
provide for being done as both to deal kindly
with him, if so it shall seem fit, and by a
suitable arrangement to observe, as you ought,
the genius of ecclesiastical vigour. We have
instructed the above-named bearer, while pre-
sent with us, how he is to act with you ; and,
having learnt ail thoroughly from him, do you
so acquit yourselves in all respects that in
your anxious care we may feel that our pre-
sence has been with you.

EPISTLE LXXX.
To Castorius, Notary 4,

Gregory to Castorius, &c.

The more thou seest thyself to be trusted
by us, and charged with the conduct of cases
when need arises, the more oughtest thou to

3 See III. 47, note 2.

4 See below, Ep. LXXIX., and III. 47, note 2.


shew thyself energetic and solicitous. Accord-
ingly, if Maximus of Salona, having taken oath,
shall affirm that he is not guilty of simoniacal
heresy, and, as to other matters, when merely
questioned before the body of Saint Apol-
linaris, shall reply that he is innocent, and
shall have done penance, as we have directed,
for his disobedience, we desire that, to console
him, thy Experience should give him the letter
which we have written to him 5, wherein we
have signified that we have restored to him
both our favour and communion. For, as it
befits us to be severe to those who persist in
contumacy, so to those who are again humbled
and penitent we ought not to deny a place of
pardon.

Furthermore, as to our brother Sabinianus,
bishop of Jadera ^, and Honoratus 7^ arch-
deacon of Salona, or others who have had
recourse to the Apostolical See, Maximus must
be very earnestly dealt with, so that he may
receive them with becoming charity, and in no
way retain in his heart any grudge against
them, but live with them with pure goodwill
and sincere aifection,

EPISTLE LXXXL
To Maximus, Bishop of Salona ^

Gregory to Maximus, &c.

Although to what was faulty in thy ordin-
ation at the first thou hast added serious evil
through the fault of disobedience, yet we,
tempering with becoming moderation the au-
thority of the Apostohc See, have never been
incensed against thee to the extent that the
case demanded. But our displeasure which
thou hadst excited against thyself continued
the longer in that a sense of the responsibility
entrusted to us tormented us exceedingly, lest
we might seem to be passing over without
attention certain unlawful doings of thine
that we had heard of And, if thou con-
si derest well, thou wilt see that thou thyself,
by deferring to satisfy us, didst confirm these
reports, and thereby didst exasperate us the
more against thee. But now that, following
wholesome counsel, thou hast submitted thy-
self humbly to the yoke of obedience, and
that thy love, in doing penance 9, has purged
itself, as we directed, by fitting satisfaction,
understand thou that the favour of brotherly


5 See below, Ep. LXXXL

6 See VII. 15, VIII. lo.

7 See VI. 25, and note there.

8 See above, Ep. LXXX. and III. 47, note 2.

9 According to a narrative found in some few codices of the
Registrum Epistolarum, and printed in an appendix by the Bene-
dictine Editors, the penance done bj^ Maxinuis at Ravenna con-
sisted in his prostrating himself on the pavement of the city for
three hours and exclaiming, " Peccavi Deo, et beatissimo papae
Gregorio."


EPISTLE XCIII.


21


charity is restored to thee, and give thanks
that thou art received into our fellowship :
for, as it becomes us to be strict with those
who persevere in a fault, so does it to be kind
in pardoning those who return to a better
mind. Now, therefore, that thy Fraternity
knows that he has recovered the communion
of the Apostolic See, let him send some one
to us, according to custom, to receive and
convey to him the pallium. For, whilst we
do not suffer unlawful things to be perpe-
trated, we no less refuse not what is customary.
Further, though the discharge of the duties
of our position might have called upon us
to concede this, yet we are greatly constrained
thereto by the request of our most sweet and
excellent son, the lord Exarch Callinicus, that
we would treat thee with moderation. His
most dear wish we cannot resist, nor can we
cause him sorrow.

EPISTLE LXXXII.

To Anatolius, Constantinopolitan
Deacon ^.

Gregory to Anatolius, &c.

To good and devoted sons it is worth our
labour so to respond as to double, because we
are paying a debt, what it would befit us of
our own mere motion to bestow upon them.
Seeing, then, that the bearer of these presents,
our son the magnificent Marcellinus 2, has de-
meaned himself as he has in the cause of our
brother and fellow-bishop Maximus and in
that of the Istrians, and is anxious to employ
himself for the advantage of our Church,
therefore, that he may be able more and more
to shew his sincere affection not only in words
but also in deeds, we hereby exhort thy Love
to co-operate with him when he comes to the
royal city with entire zeal and earnestness,
and to be at pains so to assist him with all
the succour in thy power, that, su[)ported by
the aid of Almighty God and thine, he may
have the less difficulty to contend with there.
Thou wilt also study so to attend to him
as to one who is in very truth our own, and
so to bestow on him the efficiency of thy
charity, that he may both recognise a return
made to him for the past, and also be able
to entertain a great hope of retribution in the
future for his devotion which he promises
to exhibit in the service of the Church. But


* Gregory's apocrisiarius at Constantinople.

* Suf)posed to be identical with Marcellus, Proconsul of Dal-
matia, who, having originally and for some time afterwards sup-
ported Maximus as bishop of Salona against Gregory, had appa-
rently made overtures for reconciliation with the latter. See
IX. 5, and on the whole subject III. 47, note 2. He seems
to have now fully satisfied Gregory, whose laudation of him
in this letter is in marked contrast to the tone of IX. 5, addressed
to Marcellus himself previously.


inasmuch as, so far as we have learnt, the
most serene lord the Emperor had com-
manded our aforesaid magnificent son to
hasten to wait upon him immediately, it is
fitting for thee to seek an opportunity of
intimating that it was no faulty disobedience,
but the cause of our brother and fellow-bishop
Maximus, that has detained him : which cause,
though late, has nevertheless througli his ex-
ertions been brought to a conclusion. But
this we desire thy Love to attend to carefully ;
not to allow thyself to be mixed up in any
cause whatever where there is oppression of
the poor ; lest haply, under pressure to some
extent from persons in power, thou shouldest
be driven to do what could not be of advan-
tage to thy soul. Dealing, then, with all
matters in the fear of God, consider especially
the eternal reward.

EPLSTLE XCL

To FORTUNATUS, BlSHOP OF NeAPOLIS

{Naples).

Gregory to Fortunatus, &-c.

Inasmuch as the Father of God's servants
whom I had sent to the city of Naples has,
by the ordering of God as it hath pleased
Him, departed this life, it has seemed good
to me to send the bearer of these presents,
the monk Barbatianus, for the government of
the same monks. For the present we decide
that he shall be Prior, so that, if his life
should approve itself to thy Fraternity,
thou mayest after a little time ordain him
as their Father. For he has some good quali-
ties that commend him. But he has this
great fault, that he is exceedingly wise in his
own conceit. And it is evidently known how
many branches of sin may spring from this
root. Let thy Holiness, therefore, keep care-
ful watch over him; and if you shall find him
become wary in government and humble in
his own mind, then, with tiie permission of
God, advance him to the dii'nitv of Abbot.
But, if he makes little progress in humility,
defer his ordination, and report to me 3.

EPISTLE XCIII.

To GuLFARis, Magister Militum 4.

Gregory to Gulfaris, &c.

The bearers of these presents, who come


3 See X. 24.

4 As to Gregory's renewed efforts, now with better hope after
the accession of Callinicus as Exarch of Italj' to recover the
Istrian schismatics in the matter of "' the Three Chapters," see
above, IX. 9, 10. Gulfaris, addressed in this epistle, was in
military command in Istiia, and appears to have exerted himNelf
to further the aims of Gregory, who ever gladly availed himself
of the aid of* the secular arm. Other letters on the same subject
follow.


22


EPISTLES OF ST GREGORY THE GREAT.


to us from the Istrian parts, have reported
such good things of your Glory as to inflame
us ardently to return you thanks. For we
learn that, among the cares of the govern-
ment of those parts which has been committed
to you, you are especially anxious to win
souls, and that you so take pains to recall
the hearts of wanderers to the unity of the
Church that, as far as your desire goes, you
would have no one there separated from the
Apostolic Church; and that so great love of
Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, inflames
you that you long with all your heart to re-
store the sheepfold of him to whom the keys
were delivered by the Lord the Creator of all.
Have, glorious son, from such and so great
a work, a confident anticipation of divine
retribution, wherein not only our admonition
but also the words of the apostle confirm thee,
since he who shall have caused a sinner to
be converted from the error of his way shall
save his soul from death, and cover a multi-
tude of sins (James v.). For, however great
be temporal affluence, or at any rate pros-
perity, it has its end, — the limit of death. But
this pursuit of winning souls, which you have
taken up, retains the certainty of its hope
fixed ; to wit, the retribution of eternal life.
Wherefore, greeting you with fatherly affection,
we exhort your Glory that you the more earnestly
give effect to the zeal for the unity of our holy
faith which the Author of unity Plimself has
given you ; and that, recalling whomsoever
you can from the error of their schism into
the bosom of Mother Church, you cherish
them with continual admonition. And ac-
complish this also, — so to protect with the
succour of your defence those whom the Lord
through you may grant to be restored to His
fold that there may be no quarter to which
those who are still in error may be able to
resort for the accusation of such as return to
sound counsels. For, while you uphold the
cause of God on earth. He Himself will
prosperously direct your actions here with
the aid of His protection, and there will re-
main for you, in the eternal life which you
long for, retribution for your so great well-
doing.

EPISTLE XCIV.
To RoMANUs THE GuARDiAN {DefeJisorem).

Gregory to Romanus, &c.

The bearers of these presents, who came
hither from the parts of Istria to find their
bishop who is now living in the parts of Sicily,
have asked us to speed them in their way, and
we have arranged for their journey hence.
I>et, then, thy Experience receive them, and


arrange for their reaching their said bishop
as soon as possible ; lest, as they allege may
be the case, others of the schismatics in those
parts should be beforehand to persuade them.
For, so far as they indicate, the bishop him-
self has a desire to come to us in behalf of
the unity of the faith. Assistance therefore
should be given them, that, with the help of
the Lord, they may accomplish the good
things they desire. But let thy Experience,
in person if he is near at hand, or otherwise
by letter, exhort this same bishop to lose
no time in hastening, with the Lord's good
favour, to the threshold of the Apostles, being
assured that he will be received by us with
all affection. We also desire thee to pay him
the cost of his journey to enable him to come
to us. But, if he finds coming here burden-
some, and arranges to live in Sicily, and con-
sents, with his security given, to remain in the
unity of the Church among the perverters of
Scripture, this also do not thou delay to inform
us of, that we may arrange, with the help of
the Lord, how provision may be made for his
expenses there. But lend also thy concurrence
and succour for the bearers of these letters to
come to their said bishop, so that after leaving
us they may experience no' less attention.

EPISTLE XCVIIL
To Theodore, Curator s of Ravenna.

Gregory to Theodore, &c.

Although from the report of our responsalis
we have long heard many things of you to
rejoice our heart, yet now our son the abbot
Probus, who has returned to us, has reported
still further such things of the charity of your
Glory as it is becoming should be told of
a really good and most Christian son. And,
since he has told us of such kind feeling on
your part, and such earnestness in arranging
the peace as has not appeared even in our
own citizens who have previously been in your
parts, we beg the mercy of heavenly protection
to recompense you for this in body and in
soul both here and in the world to come,
seeing that you have not ceased to act ad-
vantageously for the weal of many.

We inform you therefore that Ariulf^ has
sworn to the observance of the peace, not as
his King swore 7, but under the condition that
no excess should in any way be committed
against himself, and that no one should march


5 *' Erat forte magistratus municipalis, qui annonae civitalis
curam geril." Note to Benedictine Edition.

6 The Loml)ard duke of Spoletum, who had besieged Rome,
A.D. 592, previously to the invasion of King Agilulph in person
Cf. II- 3) 29, 30, 46, and P^-olegoin., p. xix.

7 For notice of the peace conchided with the Lombard King
Agilulph, cf. IX. 4, 42, 43 ; and Prolegom., p. xx.


EPISTLE CVI.


23


against the army of Aroges^. This begin
altogether unfair and crafty, we take it as if
he had not sworn, — since to some extent he
will easily find for himself an occasion of
exceeding, and will deceive us the more if
we are not on our guard against him.

But Warnilfrid, according to whose advice
this same Ariulf acts in all respects, has
scorned to swear at all. And so it has come
to pass that from the peace which we. so much
desired, we in these parts can have hardly
any remedy, since we must still, and for the
future, be on our guard against the same
enemies that we have been on our guard
against so far.

Furthermore, be it known to your Glory
that the King's men who have been sent hither
press us to subscribe to the compact, But
remembering the insults which, to the injury
through us of the blessed Peter, Agilulph is
said to have addressed to the most illustrious
Basilius, though Agilulph himself has entirely
denied this, we have still thought it prudent
to abstain from subscription, lest we, who
are petitioners and mediators between him and
our m.ost excellent son the lord Exarch, should
find ourselves deceived in any respect, in case
•of anvthing being perchance secretly with
drawn {t'.e. from the compact)^ and he should
find an occasion of not assenting to our
petition. And so we beg, as we have re-
quested also of our aforesaid most excellent
son, that your Glory, with the charity whereby
you are united to us, would take measures
to the end that, before these men return from
Arogis, tlie king may send them, letters post-
haste, to be, however, handed on to us,
ordering them not to call on us to subscribe.
But, if it serves the purpose, we will cause
our glorious brother, or one of the bishops,
or at any rate an archdeacon, to subscribe.

With regard to Augustus we thank you,
and are giving attention to his settling his
cause with his adversary in accordance with
equity ; having been unwilling that the trouble
of putting in an appearance with you should
be imposed upon him, yet so as not to deny
justice to his adversary.

With regard to other matters since it has
not been so far in our power to thank you
adequately, we will for the future send to you
our responsalis^ through whom, by the mercy of
God, we may be the more bound together
in the charity wherein we are knit to each
other. Moreover, the sorrow of your Glory
affects us exceedingly ; but since a wise man
knows all that can be said in the way of


8 Arogis (or A^-igis) was the Lombard duke of Beneventum.
Cf. 11. 46.


comfort, we omit comforting you with words ;
but we attend you with our prayers, beseeching
Almighty God to guard the life and health
of yourself and all yours under the protection
of His loving-kindness, and to console your
heart while in a state of affliction,

EPISTLE CV.

To Serenus Bishop of Massilia,

{^Marseilles).

Gregory to Serenus, &c.

That we have been so long in sending a
letter to your Fraternity attribute not to slug-
gishness, but to press of business. W^e now
commend to you in all respects the bearer
of these presents, our most beloved son Cyri-
acus, the Father of our Monastery, that no delay
may detain him in the city of Massilia, but that
he may proceed under God's protection to
our brother and fellow-bishop Syagrius 9 with
the succour of your Holiness.

Furthermore we notify to you that it has
come to our ears that your Fraternity, seeing
certain adorers of images, broke and threw
down these same images in Churches. And
we commend you indeed for your zeal against
anything made with hands being an ol)ject
of adoration; but we signify to you that you
ought not to have broken these images. For
pictorial representation is made use of in
Churches for this reason ; that such as are
ignorant of letters may at least read by looking
at the walls what they cannot read in books.
Your Fraternity therefore should have both
preserved the images and prohibited the
people from adoration of them, to the end
that both those who are ignorant of letters
might have wherewith to gather a knowledge
of the history, and that the people might by
no means sin by adoration of a pictorial re-
presentation ^

EPISTLE CVL

To Syagrius, Aetherius, Virgilius, and
Desiderius, Bishops 2.

Gregory to Syagrius of Augustodunum
{Autufi)y Etherius of Lugdunum {Lyoiis)^
Virgilius of Aretale {Aries), and Desiderius
of Vienna ( Vien/ie), bishops of Gaul. A paribus.


9 It appears from Epistle CIX. below that Cyriacus was
being now sent to the bishop of Autvin with the special view
of getting a synod called l)y queen Briuiechild for restraining the
simony and other ecclesiastical irregularities which were pre-
valent in Gaid. Cf. also above, IX. ii, to Brunechild.

1 Cf. XI. 13.

2 This is a circular letter to the metropolitan bishops to
prepare tliem for the general synod which Gregory was anxious
should be held in Gaul for cliecking the simony, and other
abuses, continually referred to by him as prevalent there. Cf.
in this book, Epistles XL, CVll., CVIII., CIX., CX. On
a Paribus, see I. 25, note 8.


24


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


Our Head, which is Christ, has to this end
willed us to be His members, that through
the bond of charity and faith He might make
us one body in Himself. And to Him it
befits us so to adhere in heart, that, since
without Him we can be nothing, through Him
we may be able to be what we are called.
Let nothing divide us from the citadel of
our Head, lest, if we refuse to be His members,
we be left apart from Him, and wither like
branches cast off from the vine. Wherefore,
that we may be counted worthy to be the
dwelling-place of our Redeemer, let us abide
in His love with entire earnestness of mind.
For He Himself says. He that loi^eth me will
keep 7ny wo?'d, and my Father ivill love hifn,
and we will come unto him, and make ou?'
abode with him (Joh. xiv. 23). But, since
we cannot keep close to the author of all
good, unless we cut away from us covetous-
ness, which is the root of all evil, we therefore
by these present writings (which associate
us together mutually as in the alternate dis-
course of a wished for visitation) approach
your Fraternity in accordance with apostolic
institutes, that, leaning on the rules of the
Fathers and the Lord's commands, we may
banish from the temple of faith avarice, which
is the service of idols, so as to suffer nothing
hurtful, and nothing disor^lerly, to be in the
house of the Lord.

I apprize you to wit, that we have long
heard it currently reported how that in the
regions of Gaul sacred orders are conferred
through simoniacal heresy, x^nd we are af-
fected with sorrowful disgust, if money has
any place in ecclesiastical offices, and that
which is sacred is made secular. Whosoever,
then, sets himself to buy this thing by the
giving of a price, having regard not to the
office but to the title, covets not to be a priest,
but only to be called one. What forsooth ?
What comes of this but that there is no trial
of a man's conduct, no carefulness about his
moral character, no enquiry into his life, but
that he only is counted worthy who has the
means to give a price ? Hence it ensues, if
the matter be weighed in a true balance, that,
while one wickedly makes haste to snatch
a place of utility with a view to vain glory,
he is all the more unworthy from the verv
fact of his seeking dignity. Moreover, as one
who refuses when invited and flies when
sought should be brought up to the sacred
altar, so one that sues of his own accord and
jjushes himself forward importunately should
without doubt be repelled. For whoever
thus strives to climb to liigher places, what
does he but decrease in increasing, and in
rising outwardly sink low inwardly ? Where-


fore, dearest brethren, in ordaining priests
let sincerity prevail, let there be simple con-
sent without venality, let a pure election be
preferred, so that advancement to the highest
place of the priesthood may be believed to
be due, not to the suffrage of sellers, but
to the judgment of God. For that it is a
grievous crime to wish to procure or to sell
the gift of God for a price evangelical authority
is witness (Matth. xxi.).

For, when our Lord and Redeemer went
into the temple. He overthrew the seats of
them that sold doves. What else is it to sell
doves but to receive a price for the laying
on of hands, and to put to sale the Holy Spirit
whom Almighty God gives to men ? And that
the priesthood of such as do so falls before
the eyes of God is plainly signified by the
overthrowing of the, seats. And yet the per-
verseness of this iniquity still puts forth its
strength. For it drives those to sell whom
it deceives into buying. And, while attention
is not paid to what is enjoined by the divine
voice, Freely ye have received, freely give
(Matth. X. 8), it is brought to pass that it
increases, and becomes doubled in one and
the same contagion of sin, to wit of the buyer
and of the seller. And, it being well known
that this heresy crept into the Church with
a pestiferous root before all others, and was
condemned in its very origin by apostolic
detestation, why is it not guarded against ?
Why is it not considered that blessing is
turned into a curse to him who is promoted
to the end that he may become a heretic ?

For the most part, then, the adversary of
souls, when unable to insinuate into thein what
is wrong on the lace of it, endeavours to
supplant them by throwing over it as it were
a show of piety, and persuades them, perhaps,
that money ought to be received from those
who have it, so that there may be wherewith
to give to those who have it not, if only he
may even so infuse mortal poisons concealed
under the appearance of almsgiving. For
neither would the hunter deceive the wild
beast, nor the fowler the bird, nor the fisher-
man catch the fish, if the former were to
set their snares in open view, or if the latter
had not his hook hidden by the bait. By
all means, then, the cunning of the enemy
is to be feared and guarded against, lest those
whom he cannot subvert by open temi^tation
he should succeed in slaying more cruelly
by a hidden weapon. For indeed it is not
to be accounted almsgiving if that be dispensed
to the poor which is got by unlawful dealings,,
since he who vvidi this intention receives amiss
as though with the view of dispensing well
is the worse for it rather than the better^


EPISTLE CVI.


25


The alms that please the eyes of our Redeemer
are not those that are gathered together in
unlawful ways and from iniquity, but such
as are bestowed out of what has been granted
to us and well acquired. Hence this also
is certain, that, though monasteries or hospitals
or aught else be built with the money given
for sacred orders, it profits not for reward ;
since, when one that is perverse and a buyer
of dignity is transferred to a holy place, and
constitutes others after the likeness of himself
for a consideration given, he destroys more by
his evil administration than he who has re-
ceived money from him for ordination can
build up. That we should not, then, try to get
anything with sin under pretence of almsgiving
we are plainly warned by Holy Scripture, which
says, The sacrifices of the impious are abommable^
7vhich are offered of ivickedness (Pro v. xxi. 27).
For whatever in God's sacrifice is offered of
wickedness appeases not, but provokes, the
anger of Almighty God. Hence again it is
written, Honour the Lord from thy just labours
(Prov. lii. 9). Whoso, then, takes evilly that
he may, as he supposes, give well, it is evident
without doubt that he honours not the Lord.
Hence also it is said through Solomon, Whoso
offers a sacrifice of the substance of the poor
is as though he slew a son in his father s sight
(Ecclus. xxxiv. 24). Now let us consider how
great is a father's grief if his son be killed
in his sight ; and hence we easily understand
how much God is grieved when a sacrifice
is given Him out of pillage. Exceedingly to
be shunned then, most beloved brethren, is
the perpetration of the sins of simoniacal
heresy under pretence of almsgiving. For it
is one thing to do alms on account of sins,
but another to commit sins on account of
alms.

This also, which has reached our ears, we
include as worthy of no dissimilar detestation ;
that some persons, inflated with desire of
dignity, are tonsured on the death of bishops,
and from being laymen are suddenly made
priests, and shamelessly snatch at the leader-
ship of religious life, not having as yet even
learnt to be soldiers. What good do we sup-
pose these will do their subjects, who, before
touching the threshold of discipleship, fear not
to occupy the place of mastership ? In such
a case it is needful that, even though any one
were of unquestioned merit, he should be
exercised in ecclesiastical offices by passing
through distinct orders. He should see what
he is to imitate, he should be formed into the
shape he is to retain, so that afterwards he
may not err, when chosen for shewing the way
of life to the erring. He should, then, be
polished long by religious meditation, that he


may be well-pleasing, and so shine as a candle
placed on a candlestick that the adverse
force of winds driving against the kindled
flame of erudition may not extinguish it, but
increase it. For, since it is written. That o?ie
should first be proved, and so minister (i Tim.
iii. 10), much more ought he first to be proved
who is taken as an intercessor for the people,
lest bad priests should become the cause of
the people's ruin. There can therefore be no
excuse, no defence against this, since it is
clearly known to all how solicitous about
diligent attention to this matter is the holy
and excellent teacher, who forbids that a
novice should accede to sacred orders (i Tim.
iii.). But, as then one was called a novice
who had been newly planted in the conversa-
tion of the holy faith, so one is now to be held
to be a novice who, having been suddenly
planted in the habit of religion, creeps on to
canvass for sacred dignities. Orders, then,
should be risen to in an orderly way : for he
courts a fall who seeks to rise to the topmost
heights of a place by steep ascents, disregard-
ing the steps that lead to it. And, seeing that
the same apostle teaches his disciple, among
other directions with regard to sacred orders,
that hands are to be laid hastily on no man
(i Tim. v.), what can be more hasty or what
more headlong than to begin at the top, and
that a man should commence by being a bishop
before he has been a minister ? Whosoever,
then, desires to obtain priesthood, not for the
pomp of elation but for doing good, let him
first measure his own strength with the burden
he is to undergo, that, if unequal to it, he may
abstain, and also approach it with fear, even if
he thinks himself sufficient for it.

Further, it will not be beside the mark, if,
in addition to the argument from rational
beings we draw one from our use of irrational
things. For timber suitable for buildings is
cut from forests, and yet the weight of the
building is not imposed on them while they
are yet green, or till a delay of many days has
dried their greenness, and rendered them fit
for necessary use. And, if by any chance this
precaution is neglected, they are soon broken
by the mass imposed upon them, and the
material provided for support begets ruin.

For hence also medical men, whose care is
for the body, do not offer certain remedies to
him that needs them wiiile recently concocted,
but leave them to be macerated for some time.
For, should any one give them immaturely,
there is no doubt that the means of health
become a cause of danger. Let them learn,
therefore, let priests in their office learn, those
namely to whom the cure of souls is entrusted,
to observe what men of various arts under the


26


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


teaching of reason attend to, and restrain them-
selves from ambition, if not of fear, yet at any
rate of very shame.

But, lest perchance any one should still wish
to defend himself on the pretext of an evil
custom, let the discretion of your Fraternity
restrain them with the rein of reason, and not
allow them to lapse into unlawful doings, since
whatever is deserving of punishment ought not
to be adduced as an example for imitation,
but for correction.

Nor, further, can we suffer you to pass over
neglectfully this other matter, which alike re-
quires correction. For of what profit is it to
have guarded all besides if through one place
pernicious access be afforded to the enemy?
Therefore let women be prohibited from living
with those who are constituted in any sacred
order. With regard to them, lest the old enemy
of the human race should exult, it must be
laid down by the consent of all that they may
have no other women with them but those
whom the sacred canons include And, though
this interdiction is perhaps bitter for the time
to some, there is no doubt that it will after-
wards grow sweet from its very benefit to their
souls, if the enemy be overcome in that where-
by he might have overcome them.

In this part of our solicitude also we must
not leave unnoticed what has been ordained
by the provision of the Fathers, for the sake
of advantage, concerning the holding of coun-
cils throughout dioceses. Wherefore, lest there
should be any dissension among brethren, or
any fomentation of discord between superiors
and subordinates, it is necessary that priests
should assemble together, so that there may
be discussion about cases that arise, and
salutary conference about ecclesiastical ob-
servances ; to the end that, while things past
are corrected and things future regulated, the
Almighty Lord may be praised on all sides in
one accord by brethren. Know ye whose
presence will be with you, seeing that it is
written, Where tivo or three are gathered
together in My name, there am I in the midst
of them (Matth. xviii. 20). If, then, He will
vouchsafe to be present where there are two
or three, how much more will He not be want-
ing where many priests have come together?
And indeed it is not unknown what is ap-
pointed by the rules of the Fathers as to the
holding of a council twice in the year. But,
lest haply any necessity should not allow this
rule to be carried out, we decree that still one
shall meet, without any excuse allowed, once ;
so that nothing wrong, nothing unlawful, may
be ventured on while a council is being ex-
pected. For commonly, though not from love
of justice, yet from fear of enquiry, people


abstain from that which it is known may dis-
please the judgment of all. Let us, most
beloved brethren, keep this observance to be
left to our posterity ; and let us meditate on
all that is written in the sacred writings for
our instruction, and incite all we can to follow
it. For it is certain that, if with all our heart
we attend to these salutary precepts, we escape
all taint of vices, since, while we lean on these
whereby we are built up, we shut out, no
doubt, all place for deception.

Therefore for the purposes mentioned above,
we desire your Fraternity, God willing, to as-
semble a synod, and in it, through the media-
tion of our most reverend brother and fellow-
bishop Aregius 3, and our most beloved son
Cyriacus, let all things that are, as we have
before said, opposed to the sacred canons, be
strictly condemned under the ban of anathema ;
that is, that any one should presume to give
any consideration for acquiring ecclesiastical
orders, or receive any for conferring them ; or
that any one should all at once from a lay
condition dare to enter on a place of rule ; or
that any other women should live with priests
but such as are allowed, as aforesaid, by the
sacred canons. Concerning all these t'lings
let our most reverend brother the bishop
Syagrius, with the whole synod, when our
most beloved brother Cyriacus returns to us,
take care to send us word of what has been
done ; in order that, knowing accurately what
has been decreed, and with what safeguards
and in what manner, we may render thanks
without ceasing to Almighty God for your life
and manners.

EPISTLE CVIL
To Aregius, Bishop of Vapincum*.

Gregory to Aregius, Bishop in Gaul.

The afiliction of your Fraternity, which we
have learnt that you have had for the loss
of your people, has given us such cause of
grief that, since charity makes us two one,
we feel our heart to be especially in your
tribulations. But in the midst of this we
have been much consoled by your having
brought your mind to discern how it becomes


3 Perhaps an error for Syagrius, bishop of Augustodunum
{Aui7t7i), to whom the use of the pallium had been recently
conceded on certain conditions, and to whom the assembling
of the synod was committed, though he was not thus authorized
to take precedence of his metropolitan, the bishop of Lyons.
See Ep. CVIIl. and Ep. XI. note 2. Cyriacus, mentioned
below, had been sent specially from Rome to forward and
regulate the proceedings (see Ep. CIX., note 2), Aregius of
Vapincum being also directed to send Gregory a full report
of the proceedings (see Ep. CVIL). If the intended synod
was held at all, it appears to have failed to put a stop to the
abuses complained of. For a year or two later we find Gregory
still referring to them, and pressing for a synod to suppress
them. See XI. 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 63.

4 A see in Narbonensis Secunda under the Metropolis of
Arjiiae (Aix) ; the modern Gap


EPISTLE CVIII.


27


you to bear sorrow patiently, and, in the hope
of another hfe, not to have long continued
grief for death. Still, lest some tribulation
should still maintain itself in your soul, I ex-
hort you to rest from sorrow, to cease to be
sad. For it is unseemly to addict oneself
to wearisomeness of affliction for those of
whom it is to be believed that they have
attained to true life by dying. Those have
perhaps just excuse for long continued grief
who know not of another life, and have no
trust that there is a passing from this world
to a better. We, however, who know this,
who believe it and teach it, ought not to be
too much distressed for them that depart, lest
what in others has a show of affection, be to
us rather a matter of blame. For it is, as it
were, a kind of distrust to be tormented by
sadness in opposition to what , everyone
preaches, as the Apostle says, But we would
not have you to be ignorant, brethren^ concern-
ing them that are asleep, that ye sorrow not
even as others which have no hope (i Thess.
iv. 12).

Having, therefore, this reason before us,
dearest brother, we should try, as we have
said, not to afflict ourselves about the dead,
but bestow affection on the living, to whom
pity may be of advantage and love bear fruit.
Let us henceforth hasten, by reproving, ex-
horting, persuading, soothing, comforting, to
profit all we can. Let our tongue be an
encouragement to the good, a goad to the
bad ; let it beat down the puffed up, appease
the angry, stir up the slow, kindle the idle
by exhortation, persuade the shrinkers back,
soothe the rough, comfort the despairing ;
that, as we are called leaders, we may shew
the way of salvation to them that are advanc-
ing forward. Let us be vigilant in keeping
guard, let us defend all approaches against
the snares of the enemy. And, if ever error
should have drawn aside a sheep of the flocks
committed to us through devious ways, let
us strive with all our endeavours to recall it
to the Lord's sheepfolds, so that from the
name of shepherd which we bear we may reap
not punishment, but a reward. Seeing, then,
that in all this there is need of the help of
divine grace, let us implore the clemency of
Almighty God with continual prayers, to the
end that for doing these things He may give
us the will and grant us the power, and, with
the fruit of good work, direct us in that way
in which He has declared Himself to be the
Shepherd of shepherds; that so, through Him,
without whom we cannot rise to the doing
of anything, we may be able to accomplish all.

Furthermore, our common son, Peter the
deacon, has given us to understand that your


Fraternity at the time when you were here
requested that we would grant to yourself and
vour archdeacon license to use dalmatics 5.
But, because compelled by the sickness of
your people, you departed in such haste that
the very grief that weighed upon you did not
suffer you to press the matter any longer, as
was fit and as the nature of your request
required ; and because we had many engage-
ments, and consideration of ecclesiastical pro-
priety did not allow us to concede a new thing
inconsiderately and suddenly; for these reasons
the carrying into effect of the thing demanded
has been long postponed. Now, however, re-
calling to mind your Charity's good deservings,
by the tenor of this our authority we grant you
your request, and have granted to thee or to
thy archdeacon to be decorated by the use of
dalmatics ; and we have sent the same dal-
matics by the hands of our most beloved son,
the abbot Cyriacus.

Furthermore, at the synod which we have
decreed should be assembled through our
brother and fellow-bishop Syagrius against
simoniacal heresy, we desire thee to be
present; and we have ordered the pallium
which we have sent for our said brother to be
accordingly given him, on condition of his
promising to remove from holy Church,
by a definition of the synod, the unlawful
things which we have prohibited. Concern-
ing which synod we desire thy Fraternity
to report to us fully by letter all its proceed-
ings, that thou thyself, whose holiness we are
well acquainted with, mayest inform us about
everything.

EPISTLE CVIII.
To Syagrius, Bishop.

Gregory to Syagrius, Bishop of Augustodu'
num {AiUun).

Mistress of all good things is charity, which
savours of nothing extraneous, nothing rough,
nothing confused ; which so exercises and
strengthens hearts that nothing is heavy, no-
thing difficult, but all that is done becomes
sweet. Since, then, it is its peculiar quality'
to foster things that are concordant, to pre-
serve things that are united, to join together
things that are dissociated, to set right things
that are wrong, and to consolidate all other
virtues by the bulwark of its own perfection,
whosoever grafts himself into its roots neither
falls away from greenness, nor becomes empty
of fruits, because effective work loses not the
moisture of fecundity. And so I am much


5 For the use of Dalmatics, see Diet, of Christ. Ant. {Smith
and Cheetham, 1875), under Dalmatic.


28


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


delighted with thee, and rejoice with thee in
the Lord, most beloved brother, for that I find
thee, by the testimony of many, so endowed
with this same charity that thou both thyself
becomingly exhibitest what befits a priest, and
laudably shewest an example for imitation to
others.

Inasmuch, then, as in the work of preaching
(which after long thought I have taken care
to supply to the nation of the Angli through
Augustine, then provost {prcef)ositum) of my
monastery, and now our brother and fellow-
bishop), I have found thee to be, as was right,
so solicitous, devoted, and in all ways helpful,
as to lay me under a great debt to thee in this
matter, therefore moved by the consideration
of so great an obligation, I cannot bear to put
aside thy Fraternity's petition, lest I should ap-
pear towards thee unprofitable. Consequently,
according to the tenor of thy request, we have
provided under God for thy being dignified
by the use of the pallium ^, to be worn within
thy church, in the celebration of mass only.
Nevertheless we have decided that it should
be given thee only on condition of thy first
promising to amend by the definition of
a synod the things that we have ordered to be
corrected j for we certainly deem it fit that,
with the gravity of mind in which by the
mercy of God we have learnt that thou excel-
lest, a more distinguished adornment of out-
ward apparel should accrue to thee ; especially
as we think that thou hast asked for it, not
with a view to the pomp of needless elation,
but with regard to the character and dignity
of thy Church. And, lest in this vestment we
should seem to be bestowing as it were a bare
bounty, we have taken thought at the same
time for the granting of this also; — that, while
the Metropohtan has in all respects his place
and dignity preserved to him, the Church of
Augustodunum should be next after the Church
of Lugdunum {Lyons), and should claim to
itself this place and rank by the indulgence
of our authority. But as to the other bishops,
we decree that they shall take their places
according to the date of their ordination,
whether for sitting in council, or for subscrib-
ing, or in any other matter, and shall claim
to themselves the prerogative of their several
ranks : for it seems to us consonant to reason
that with the use of the pallium we should
together with it, as we have said, bestow some
privileges.

But, since with augmentation of dignity the
sense of responsibiHty ought also to increase,
that the adornments of action may agree with
the decoration of vestments, your Fraternity

6 Cf. IX. TI, 109.


should exercise yourself the more earnestly in
all your pursuits. Be vigilant with regard to
the doings of those who are under you; let
your example be their instruction, and your
life their teacher. By the exhortation of your
tongue let them learn what to fear, and be
taught what to love ; that, when thou givest
up the talents entrusted to thee with multi-
plied gain, in the day of retribution thou
mayest be counted worthy to hear. Well done,
good a?id faithful serva?it : enter thou into the
joy of thy lord (Matth. xxv. 23).

EPISTLE CIX.
To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.

Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

Now that vour Excellencv's royal solicitude
IS m all matters of government praiseworthy,
you ought, for the increase of your glory, to
shew yourself more watchful, and careful not
to allow those whom you rule with counsel
outwardly to perish inwardly among them-
selves. So may you, through the fruit of your
pious solicitude, after occupying this topmost
height of a temporal kingdom, attain under
God to kingdoms and joys that are eternal.
And this we trust you will be able after the
following manner to succeed in ; if, among
other good deeds, you pay attention to the
ordination of priests 7 ; whose office, as we have
learnt, has come in your parts to be such an
object of ambition that priests are ordained
all at once from being laymen. This is a very
serious matter. For what can they efi"ect,
what good can they do the people, who covet
being made bishops, not for doing good, but
for distinction? These, then, who have not
yet learnt what they have to teach — what do
they effect, but that the unlawful advancement
of a few becomes the ruin of many, and that
the observance of ecclesiastical government is
brought into confusion, seeing that no regular
order is observed ? For whoso comes to the
control thereof inconsiderately and hurriedly,
with what admonition can he edify those who
are put under him, his example having taught
them, not reason, but error? It is a shame
in truth, it is a shame, for one to command
others what he knows not how to observe
himself.

Nor do we pass over that other thing whicii
in like manner requires amendment, but detest
it as utterly execrable and a most serious
matter; that in your parts sacred orders are
conferred through simoniacal heresy, which
was the first to arise against the Church, and
was condemned with a rigorous malediction.

7 Sacerdotibus, in the usual sense of bishops.


lO^mj^


EPISTLE ex.


29


Hence, therefore, it is brought about that the
dignity of the priesthood comes into contempt,
and holy honour under condemnation. And
so reverence perishes, discipline is destroyed,
since he who ought to have corrected faults
committed them ; and by nefarious ambition
the honourable priesthood is brought under
censure and disparagement. For who will
any more venerate what is sold, or not think
worthless what is bought ? Hence I am greatly
distressed, and condole with that land ; since,
while they scorn to have as a divine gift, but
compass by bribes, the Holy Spirit which
Almighty God deigns to bestow on men through
the imposition of hands, I do not think that
the priesthood can long subsist there. For
where the gifts of heavenly grace are sold, the
life is not sought for God's service, but rather
money is venerated in opposition to God.
Seeing then that so great a wickedness is not
only a danger to them, but also in no small
degree injurious to your kingdom, greeting
your Excellency with fatherly affection we
beseech you to make God propitious to you
by the correction of this enormity. And, that
there may be henceforth no opportunity of
committing it, let a synod be held by your
order, at which, in the presence of our most
beloved son, the abbot Cyriacus ^, it shall be
interdicted strictly under pain of anathema
that any one should dare to pass suddenly
from a lay condition to the degree of the
Episcopate, or any one whatever dare to give
or receive anything for ecclesiastical orders ;
that so our Lord and Redeemer may so deal
with the things that are yours as He shall
see you to be solicitous with pious devotion
in the things that are His. But we have taken
special care to delegate the charge and manage-
ment of this synod, which we have decided
should be held, to our brother and fellow-
bishop Syagrius, whom we know to be pecu-
liarly your own ; and we beg you to deign
both to lend a willing ear to his supplication,
and to support him by your aid ; to the end
that what may redound to your reward, namely
a pious and God-pleasing ordination of priests,
the contagion of this evil being removed, may
take effect within all the limits of your juris-
diction.

To this our brother, in that he has shewn
himself exceedingly devoted with regard to
the mission which has been sent, under God,
to the nation of the Angli, we have sent a
pallium to be used in the solemnities of mass,
so that, having given aid in things spiritual,
he may find himself advanced by the favour

8 Cyriacus, abbot of St. Andrew's monastery at Rome, had
been sent, for the purpose indicated, to Syagrius, bishop of
Autun. Cf. IX, T05.


of the Prince of the apostles in the spiritual
order itself.

Furthermore, we have altogether wondered
why in your kingdom you allow Jews to
possess Christian slaves. For what are all
Christians but members of Christ? And we
all know that you sincerely honour the Head
of these members. But let your Excellency
consider how inconsistent it is to honour the
Head and to allow the members to be trampled
on by his enemies. And so we beg that your
Excellency's ordinance may remove the mis-
chief of this iniquity from your kingdom ; so
that you may prove yourself the more to be
a worthy worshipper of Almighty God, in that
you set his faithful ones free from His enemies.

EPISTLE ex.

To Theoderic and Theodebert, Kings
OF THE Franks?.

Gregory to Theoderic, &c.

Since the renown of your kingdom has been
resplendent of old among all others by the
grace of the Christian religion, great pains
should be taken that, wherein you stand out
more glorious than other nations, you should
therein please more perfectly the Almighty
Lord who gives health and wealth to kings,
and have the faith which you observe in all
ways helpful to you. We had wished indeed,
most excellent sons, to address to you a dis-
course of friendly greeting only, so as to shew
our fatherly affection in offices of charity.
But, seeing that an unlawful proceeding dis-
tresses us exceedingly, it befits us so to
exhibit one thing as by no means to pass over
in silence the other which needs amendment.
If you give diligent attention, you will find
that we speak entirely for the security of your
well-being.

Now it is said that simoniacal heresy (which
was the first to creep in by the devil's planting
against the Church of God, and was at its
very rise smitten and condemned by the weapon
of apostolical vengeance) prevails within the
limits of your kingdom, though faith together
with good life ought to be chosen in priests.

If good life is wanting, faith has no merit,
as the blessed James attests, who says,
jFai//i without works is dead (Jam. ii. 18).
But what can be the works of a priest who
is convicted of obtaining the dignity of so
great a sacrament by a bribe? Thus it is
brought about that even the very persons who
are desiring sacred orders take no pains to
amend their lives or order their conduct, but
busy themselves in amassing wealth wherewith


9 See VI. 58, note i.


30


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


to buy sacretl dignity. Hence also it comes
to pass that the innocent and poor recoil from
sacred orders, being debarred and looked
down upon. And while the innocence of the
poor man displeases, there is no doubt that
the bribe in the other case commends de-
linquencies; for, where gold pleases, so does
vice. Hence, therefore, not only is a deadly
wound inflicted on the souls of the ordainer
and of the ordained, but also the Kingdom
of your Excellence is weighed down by the
fault of your bishops, by whose intercessions
it ought rather to have been aided. For, if
he is thought worthy of the priesthood who
is supported, not by the merits of his doings,
but by the abundance of his bribes, it remains
that neither gravity nor industry can put in
any claim for ecclesiastical dignities, but that
the profane love of gold obtains all. And,
while vices are remunerated with dignity, he is
promoted to the place of the avenger who
perhaps ought to have vengeance executed
on himself; and hence priests are shewn not
to profit others, but rather themselves to
perish. For, when the shepherd is wounded,
who may apply medicine for healing the
sheep? Or how shall he protect the people
with the shield of prayer who exposes him-
self to be stricken by hostile darts? Or
what kind of fruit shall he produce out
of himself, whose root is infected by sore
disease ? Greater calamity, then, is to be ap-
prehended in those places where such inter-
cessors are promoted to places of rule, being
such as to provoke the more the anger of
God against themselves which they ought,
through themselves, to have appeased in be-
half of the people.

Moreover, we have heard that the farms
of the Churches do not pay tribute; and we
are consequently lost in great surprise, if
unlawful payments be sought from those to
whom even lawful ones are remitted \

Nor does our solicitude allow us to pass
over this evil also ; that some, lured by the
instigation of vain glory, snatch all at once,
from a lay condition of life, at the dignity of
priesthood, and (what it shames one to say,
though it is too serious a matter to pass over
in silence) those who require to be ruled
neither blush nor fear to appear as rulers,
and those that require to be taught as teachers.
Persons assume shamelessly the leadership of
souls to whom the whole way to be taken by the


I The majority of MSS. have here nunc prcebeant instead of
non tribuant : Vjut the reading adopted in the text has good
support, and seems to give the more intelligible meaning. I'he
drift seems to he, that, while it was the custom in Gaul to relieve
Church property even from tribute that might have been ex-
acted lawfully, it was monstrously inconsistent to burden it
unlawfully by the exaction of bribes for promotion.


leader is unknown, and who know not whither
even they themselves are walking. How bad
and how venturesome this is, is shewn even
by secular order and discipline. For, seeing
that a leader of an army is not chosen unless
he has been tried in labour and carefulness, let
those who desire with immature haste ta
mount to the height of episcopacy consider,
at any rate by the aid of this comparison,
of what sort leaders of souls should be; and
let them abstain from attempting suddenly
untried labours, lest a blind ambition for
dignity both be to their own penalty and also
sow seeds of pestiferous error to others, they
themselves not having learnt what they have
to teach. Accordingly, greeting you with
fatherly affection, we beg, most excellent sons,
that you would be at pains to banish this-
so detestable an evil from the limits of your
kingdom, and that no excuse, no suggestion
against your soul, find place with you ; since
he who neglects to amend what he is able
to correct, undoubtedly has the guilt of the
doer. Wherefore, that you may be able to
offer a great gift to Almighty God, order a
synod to be assembled, in which (as we have
enjoined our brethren and fellow-bishops), in
the presence of our most beloved son the
abbot Cyriacus, it may be ordained under the
obligation of anathema that no one may ever
give and no one ever receive anything for an
ecclesiastical order, nor any one of the laity
pass all at once to the priesthood ; that sO'
our Redeemer, whose priests you suffer not to
be ruined among themselves by the enemy,
may recompense you for this service both here
and in the life to come.

Furthermore, we are altogether astonished
that in yoiir kingdom you allow Jews to
possess Christian slaves. For what are all
Christians but members of Christ ? The Head
of these members we all know that you honour
faithfully : but let your Excellency consider
how inconsistent it is to honour the Head
and to allow His members to be trodden on
by His enemies. And so, we beg that an
ordinance of your Excellency may remove the
evil of this wrong-doing from your kingdom,
that you may thus shew yourselves the more
to be worthy worshippers of Almighty God,
in that you set free His faithful servants from
His enemies.

EPISTLE CXI.
To ViRGTLius, Bishop of Arelate (Arles\

Gregory to Virgilius, &c.

Inasmuch as the desire of a pious purpose
and the bent of a laudable devotion ought
always to be aided by the earnest endeavours


I


EPISTLE CXIV.


31


of priests, anxious care should be taken that
neither remissness, neglect nor presumption
disturb whatever has been ordained for the
quiet of monks and of religious conversation.
But, as it was right that what reason required
should be profitably prescribed, so what has
been prescribed ought not to be violated.
Now Childebert of glorious memory, King of
the Franks, inflamed by love of the Catholic
religion, in founding for his own reward
a monastery for men within the walls of the
city of Arelate, as we find set down in writing,
granted certain things there for the sustentation
of its inmates. And, lest his purpose should ever
be frustrated, and what had been arranged for
the quiet of the monks be disturbed, he prayed
in his letters that whatever rights he conceded
to the said monastery might be confirmed
by apostolical authority ; adding this also to
his petition, that certain privileges might at
the same time be accorded to the same mon-
astery, as well in the management of its affairs
as in the ordination of its abbot. This he did
as knowing such reverence to be paid by the
faithful to the Apostolic See that what had
been settled by its decree no molestation of
unlawful usurpation would thereafter shake.
Hence, since the royal purpose as well as the
thing desired, urgently demanded effect to be
given to it, letters were sent by our predecessor
Vigilius, bishop of the Roman See, to your pre-
decessor Aurelius, wherein all things that a desire
to embrace that purpose demanded were willing-
ly confirmed by the support of apostolical au-
thority, inasmuch as a thing of this kind, when
requested, could not be allowed to encounter
difficulty. But, that your Fraternity may know
what was decreed at that time, we have seen
to the written orders of our aforesaid prede-
cessor being added to this letter. These
having been perused, we exhort thee to keep
them all inviolate with priestly earnestness,
as becomes thee, and to allow nothing undue
or unlawful to be imposed on that mon-
astery, or the said orders to be infringed by
any usurpation. For, though what has once
been sanctioned by the authority of the Ap-
ostolic See has no lack of validity, yet we do,
over and above, once more corroborate by
our authority in all respects all things that
were ordained by our predecessor for quiet
in this matter. Let your Fraternity, then, so
acquit yourself in observing them as both to
shut out all occasion of disturbance, and also
to persuade others to carry these things out,
while you shew yourself careful and devoted,
as becomes you, in observing the most pious
will of the departed one.


EPISTLE CXIV.

To YlRGILIUS AND SyaGRIUS, BiSHOPS.

Gregory to Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate
{Aries), and Syagrius, Bishop of Augustodu-
num {An fun).

The nature of the office committed to me,
dearest brethren, drives me to break out into
a cry of grief, and to sharpen your love with
the anxiety of charity, for that it is said that
you in your parts have been too negligent and
remiss, where the rectitude of justice and zeal
for chastity ought to have inflamed your ear-
nestness. Now it has come to our ears that
a certain Syagria had entered on a religious
life, having even changed her dress, and was
afterwards united by force to a husband (a
thing iniquitous to be told), and that you have
been moved by no sorrow to interfere in her
defence.- If this is so, I groan for it the more
heavily for fear lest with the Almighty Lord
(which God forbid) you should have the office
of hirelings, and not the merit of shepherds,
as having left without a struggle a sheep in the
mouth of the wolf to be torn. For what will
ye say, or what account will ye give of your-
selves to the future judge ; you whom the
lewdness of ravishment has not moved, whom
regard to the religious habit has in no wise
excited to stand up in defence, whom priestly
consideration has not roused to protect the
purity of virgin modesty? Even now, then,
let your neglect return to your memory ; let
remembrance of this fault stir you, and con-
sideration of your office impel you to ex-
hortation of the aforesaid woman. And, lest
haply in course of time constramt should have
passed into willing consent, let your tongue
be her cure, and through your exhortations let
her give herself diligently to prayer ; let not
the lamentations of penitence depart from her
memory ; let her exhibit a penitent heart to
our Redeemer ; and let her make amends
with weeping for the loss of chastity, which
in her body it was not allowed her to preserve.

Wherefore, inasmuch as the aforesaid woman
desires, as it is said, even now to devote her
property to pious uses, we exhort you that
she experience the favour and enjoy the
support of your Fraternity in this thing, and
that it be lawful for her, a competent portion
being reserved for her children, to decide
as she will about her substance. For with-
out doubt you do good yourselves, if you
render aid to those who wish to do good.
Consider, therefore, most beloved brethren,
from how great love these things which we
speak proceed, and take them all in the same
spirit of charity that inspires them. For, we
being one body in Christ, I burn with you in


3^


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


ihis which I feel to he to your hurt. And
with wliat earnestness, and what affection
I send you this epistle, may the Author of
truth disclose to your hearts. And so let not
this brotherly admonition distress you, since
even a bitter cup is taken gladly, when offered
with a view to health. Plnally, dearest bethren,
let us with united prayers implore the mercy
of our God, that He would favourably order
our life in His fear, to the end that we may
both serve Him here as priests should do, and
be able to stand in His sight hereafter secure
and without fear.

EPISTLE CXV.

To Syagrius, Bishop of Augustodunum
{A J (tun),

Gregory to Syagrius, &c.

If in secular aft'airs every man snould have
his right and his proper rank preserved to
him, how much more in ecclesiastical arrange-
ments ought no confusion to be let in ; lest
discord should find place there, whence the
blessings of peace should proceed. And this
will in this way be secured, if nothing is
yielded to power, but all to equity.

Now it has been reported to us that our
most beloved brother Ursicinus, bishop of the
city of Taurini 2, after the captivity and plunder
which he endured, has suffered serious pre-
judice in his parishes 3, which are said to be
situated within the boundaries of the Franks,
even to the extent of another person being
constituted bishop there in contravention of
ecclesiastical ordinances, no crime of his
demanding it. And, lest this prejudicial pro-
ceeding should perchance seem to be a light
matter, there has been also some hardship
added in the taking from him of the property
of his Church which he might have held.
Now, if these things are really so, seeing that
it is a very cruel thing and opposed to the
sacred canons, that the ambition of any should
remove from his own altar an innocent priest
who does not deserve to be superseded on
account of crime, let all regard his cause as
their own, and strive against the imposition
on others of what they would be unwilling
to endure themselves. For if the entrance for
an evil thing is not closed before it has been
long open, it grows wider by use ; and what is
evidently forbidden by reason will be allowed
by custom. But, beyond all others, let the
solicitude of your Fraternity, in consideration


2 Aiigiista Tmirinarum, the modern Turin.

3 Itt parochiis suis. Though tiie term napoiKCa meant origi-
nally what we should now call a bishop's whole diocese, it came
after the third century to be applied to parishes within such
diocese. Hence here pa7ochiis in the plural. Cf. Bingham,
B>. IX., oh. ii., sect, i ; Ch. viii.. Sect. i.


of our commendation and your own sense of
what you owe to God, devote itself earnestly
to his defence, and not allow him to be any
longer removed against reason from his
parishes. But, as well in your own person
as by making supplication to the most excel-
lent kings 4j whom we believe to cause you no
sadness in any respect, do you bring it about
that this thing which has been done amiss may
be corrected, and that what has been taken
away by force may under the patronage of
truth be restored ; for, seeing that it is written,
A brother helping a brother shall be exalted
(Prov. xviii. 19), your Charity may know that
it will receive by so much the more from
Almighty God as His precepts shall have been
gladly and constantly executed in helping a
brother.

EPISTLE CXVI.

To Theoderic and Theodebert, Kings
OF THE Franks.

Gregory to Theoderic, &:c.

It is the chief good in kings to cultivate
justice, and to preserve to every man his rights,
and not to suffer subjects to have done to
them what there is power to do, but what is
equitable. Our trust that you both love and
altogether aim at this invites us to indicate to
your Excellency things that call for amend-
ment, that so we may be able by our letters
both to succour the oppressed and to acquire
reward for you.

Now they say that our brother and fellow-
bishop Ursicinus, bishop of the city of Taurini
{Turin), suffers very serious prejudice in his
parishes that are within the limits of your
kingdom, in such sort that, contrary to eccle-
siastical observance, contrary to priestly gravity,
and contrary to the definitions of the sacred
canons, no crime of his requiring it, another
has not feared to be ordained bishop there.
And, it being thought not enough unless un-
lawfulness were added to unlawfulness, even
the property of his church, as is said, has been
taken away. If the truth is so, it being exceed-
ingly intolerable that one should be oppressed
by force whom guilt has not harmed, we beg
of you, addressing you in the first place with a
greeting of paternal charity, that what out of
reverence for the Church and regard to equity
your Excellency might of your own accord
bestow, you would study to grant all the more
kindly on our intercession, and would cause
justice to be observed towards him in all


4 Viz- Theoderic and Theodebert (see VI. 58, note i), t(' whom
a letter on the same subject was sent at the same time, viz.
Ep. CXVI., which follows. The former would be in this year
(a.d. 598-9) about ten, and the latter about thirteen years of age.


EPISTLE CXX.


33


respects according to the trust we bave in the
goodness of your equity ; and that, having
ascertained the truth, you would order what
has been unlawfully done to be corrected, and
the property that has been wrongfully taken
from him to be equitably restored to him.
Nor should the fact of his church being de-
tained for the present by his enemies be at all
to his disadvantage : but this ought to move
more and more the disposition of your Chris-
tianity to succour him, that, being consoled
by the gifts of your bounty, he may not feel
the loss arising from the captivity which he
has endured. For the good, then, of your
soul let this our exhortation find place with
you, tliat to your own reward you may lift up
again his dejection with the outstretched hand
of justice, to the end that from your observance
of equity towards priests you may ever flourish
through their prayers before the eyes of God.


EPISTLE CXVII.

To Brunichild, Queen. of the Franks.

Gregory to Brunichild, &c.
Whereas for the government of a kingdom
valour stands in need of justice, and power of
equity, nor for this purpose can one suffice
without the other, with what great love your
care for these things is resplendent is shewn
plainly enough by the fact of your governing
crowds of nations so laudably. Who then,
considering this, can distrust the goodness of
your Excellency, or be doubtful of obtaining
his request, when he thinks it right to ask for
what he knows you would willingly bestow
upon your sul)jects ? The bearer, then, of
these presents, Hilarius 5, a servant of your
Excellency, supposing that our intervention
with your power will aid him, has requested
to be supported by letters of commendation
from us ; holding it as certain that he will
more abundantly obtain such favours as you
grant to others if our intercession should speak
for him. Accordingly, paying you our address
of greeting with the affection of paternal
charity, we beg that, as he states that he is
labouring under adversities from the iniquity
of certain persons, the protection of your
Excellence may defend him ; and, lest he
should possibly be oppressed against reason,
that by your command you would order him
to be kept safe ; that so, while no one's op-
position shall have place unjustly and of mere
will, both we may return thanks for having
obtained what rather for your own reward we
request, and that the blessed Peter, Prince of


the Apostles, whom you will venerate in us
with Christian devotion by granting what we
ask, may recompense your Excellency.


EPISTLE CXX.

To Claudius in Spain ^

Gregory to Claudius, &c.
The renown of good deeds being fragrant
after the manner of ointment, the odour of
your glory has extended from the ^Vestern
parts as far as here. Besprinkled by the
sweetness of which breath of air, I declare
that I greatly loved one whom I knew not,
and within the bosom of my heart seized thee
with the hand of love ; nor did I love without
already knowing him to be one whose good
qualities I had learnt. For of him who
is known to me by great intenseness of feel-
ing, but remains unknown by bodily vision,
I undoubtedly can say truly that I know his
person, though I know not his home. Now
herein is a great assertion of your good repute,
that your Glory is said to cleave sedulously to
the excellent king of the Goths ; since, while
good men always displease bad ones, it is
certain that you are good, who have pleased
one that is good. P'or this reason, addressing
you with the greeting that is due to you, I
hope that you are being exercised in these
things which you have begun, so tliat that
true sentence of Solomon may be fulfilled in
you — The path of the just is as a shining light,
and groweth unto the perfect day (Prov iv. i8).
For, now that the light of truth shines upon us,
and the sweetness of the heavenly kingdom dis-
closes itself to our minds, it is indeed already
day, but not yet perfect day. But it will then
be perfect day, when there shall be no longer
anything of the night of sin in our souls. But
do you grow unto the perfect day, tliat, until
such time as the heavenly country shall appear,
there may be spreading increase of good works
here ; to the end that in the retribution here-
after the fruit of reward may be by so much
the greater as earnestness in labour has been
increasing now. Wherefore we commend to
your Glory our most beloved son Cyriacus, the
Father of our monastery, that, after he has
accomplished what has been enjoined him,
there be no hindrance to delay his return.
May Almighty God guard you by the pro-
tection of His heavenly arm, and grant unto


5 Who this Hilarius was, and what were his grievances, does

not appear.

VOL. XIII. U


6 This Claudius appears to have been a person of influence
in the court of King Reccared, and no doubt a good Catiiolic,
of whose virtues Gregory may have lieard from his friend Leander
of Seville. The object of this very complimentary letter to him
was to commend to his favour the abbot Cyriacus, who, as appears
from preceding epistles, had been sent into Gaul to bring about
the assembling of a synod there, and who appears froni this
epistle to have been sent on into Spain, thou^lifor what par-
ticular purpose does not appear. Cf. Proleg., p. xi.


34


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


you to be glorious both now among men and
after long courses of years among the angels.

EPISTLE CXXI.
Td Leander, Bishop of Hispalis {Seville).

Gregory to Leander, Bishop of Spain.

I have the epistle of thy Holiness, written
with the pen of charity alone. For what the
tongue transferred to the paper had got its tinc-
ture from the heart. Good and wise men
were present when it was read, and at once
their bowels were stirred with emotion. Every-
one began to seize thee in his heart with the
hand of love, for that in that epistle the sweet-
ness of thy disposition was not to be heard,
but seen. All severally were inflamed, and
all admired, and the very fire of the hearers
shewed what had been the ardour of the
speaker. For, unless torches burn themselves,
they will not kindle others. We saw, then,
with how great charity thy mind was aflame,
seeing that it so kindled others also. Yoiir
life indeed, which I always remember with
great reverence, they did not know ; but the
loftiness of your heart was manifest to them
from the lowliness of your language. As to
my life, this your epistle speaks of it as worthy
of imitation by all : but may that which is not
as it is said to be become so because it is
said to be so, lest one should lie who is not
wont to he. In reply to this, however, I
speak shortly the words of a ceitain good
woman. Call me not JVoe/ni, that is, fair ; but
call 7ne Mara, for I am full of bitterness (Ruth
i. 20). For indeed, good man, I am not
to-day the man you knew. For I confess that
in advancing outwardly I have fallen much
inwardly, and I fear that I am of the number
of those of whom it is written, TJioit didst cast
them down while they were lifted up (Ps. Ixxii.
187). For he is cast down when he is lifted
up who advances in honours, and falls in
manners. For I, following the ways of my
Head, had determined to be the scorn of men
and the outcast of the people, and to run in
the lot of him of whom again it is said by the
Psalmist, The ascents in his heart he hath dis-
posed in the valley of tears {Vs. Ixxxiii. 7^);
that is, that I should ascend inwardly all the
more truly as I lay outwardly the more
humbly in the valley of tears. But now
burdensome honour much depresses me, in-
numerable cares din me, and, when my mind
collects itself for God, they cleave it with
their assaults as if with a kind of swords.
My heart has no rest. It lies prostrate in the


7 Ii English Bible, Ixxiii. i8.

8 I 1 Enji-lisk Bible, Ixxiv. 5, 6, different!}',


lowest place, depressed by the vv^eight of its
cogitation. Either very rarely or not at all does
the wing of contemplation raise it aloft. My
sluggish soul is torpid, and, with temporal
cares barking round it, already almost reduced
to stupor, is forced now to deal with earthly
things, and now even to dispense things that
are carnal ; nay sometimes, by force of disgust,
is compelled to dispose of some things with
accompanying guilt. Why should I say more ?
Overcome by its own weight, it sweats blood.
For, unless sin were reckoned under the name
of blood, the Psalmist would not say, Deliver
me from bloodguiltiness (Ps. 1. i6 9J. But,
when we add sin to sins, we fulfil this also
which is said by another prophet. Blood hath
touched blood (IIos. iv. 2.) For blood is said
to touch blood when sin is joined to sin, so
as to multiply the load of iniquity. But \\\
the midst of all this I implore thee by
Alin{'];l-ity God to hold me who am fallen into
the billows of perturbation with the hand of
thy prayer. For I sailed as it were with
a prosperous breeze when I led a tranquil life
in a monastery : but a storm, rising suddenly
with gusty surges, caught me in its commotion,
and I lost the prosperity of my voyage; for in
loss of rest I suffered shipwreck. Lo, now I
am tossed in the waves, and I seek for the
plank of thy intercession, that, not being
counted wortliy to reach port rich with my
ship entire, I may at least after losses be
brought to shore by the aid of a plank.

Your Holiness writes of beinfr afPiicted with
the pains of gout, by continual suffering from
which I too am grievously worn down. But
comfort will be readily at hand, if amid the
scourges under which we suffer we recall to
mind whatever faults we have committed ; and
then we shall see that they are not scourges,
but gifts, if by pain of the flesh we purge tlie
sins which we did for delight of the flesh.

Furthermore we have sent you, with the
blessing of the blessed Peter, Pi i nee of the
Apostles, a pallium, to be used only in cele-
bration of Mass. In sending it to you I ought
to admonish you much as to how you ought to
live : but I suppress speech, since in your
manner of life you anticipate my words. May
Almighty God keep you under His protection,
and bring you to the rewards of the heavenly
country with multiplied fruits of souls. As to
me, with what amount of business and with
what weakness I am weighed down this shor':
letter bears witness, in which I say little to
one whom I greatly love.


9 li. 14, in English Bible.


EPISTLE CXXII.


35


EPISTLE CXXII.

To Rechared, King of the Visigoths ^

Gregory to Rechared, &c.

I cannot express in words, most excellent
son, how much I am delighted with thy work
and thy life. For on hearing of the power of
a new miracle in our days, to wit that the
whole nation of the Goths has through thy
Excellency been brought over from the eiTor
of Arian heresy to the firmness of a right faith,
one is disposed to exclaim with the prophet^
This is the chajige ivroiight by the right hand of
the Most High {?s. Ixxvi. 11=^). For whose
breast, even though stony, would not, on
hearing of so great a work, soften in praises of
Almighty God and love of thy Excellency?
As for me, I declare that it delights me often
to tell these things that have been done
through you to my sons who resort to me,
and often together with them to admire.
These things also for the most part stir me
up against myself, in that I languish sluggish
and unprofitable in listless ease, while kings
are labouring in the gathering together of
souls for the gains of the heavenly country.
What then shall I say to the coming Judge in
that tremendous assize, if I shall then come
thither empty, where thy Excellency shall
bring after thee flocks of faithful ones, whom
thou hast now drawn to the grace of a true
faith by assiduous and continual preaching ?
But this, good man, by the gift of God, affords
me great comfort, that the holy work which I
have not in myself I love in thee. And, when
I rejoice with great exultation for thy doings,
the results of thy labour become mine through
charity. With regard, therefore, to the con-
version of the Goths, both for your work and
for our exultation, we may well exclaim with
the angels. Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace to 7nen of goodwill (Luk. ii. 14).
For we, as I think, owe the more thanks to
Almighty God for that, although we have done
nothing with you, we are nevertheless par-
takers in your work by rejoicing with you.


* Reccared, the Visigoth king of Spain, previously an Arian,
had declared himself a Catholic a.d. 587, and had formally
adopted Catholicism as the creed of the Spanish Church at the
council of Toledo, a.d. 589. See I. 43, note 9. This is the only
extant letter addressed to the king himself by Gregory, its date,
if rightly placed, being a.d. 598-9, and thus as much as ten
years alter the council of Toledo. Gregory had been long in-
formed of what had been done at Toledo, as appears in his
epistle to Leander (I. 43), written, if correctly placed, a.d, 590-1 ;
and it may appear strange that his letter to the king himself
had been so long delayed. He may have waited for a letter
to himself from Reccared; and, if Ep. LXI. in this book (see
note thereon) be genuine, it would be in reply to it that the letter
before us was written. But in Ep. LXI. only three years are
said to have elapsed since Reccared's conversion, and gifts spoken
of sent at that time to Rome are acknowledged in the Epistle
before us. Hence the dates assigned to the Epistles by the
Benedictine Editors are ooen to suspicion.

2 In English Bible, Ixxvii. 10, differently.


Further, how gladly the blessed Peter, Prince
of the Apostles, has accepted the gifts of your
Excellency your very I'fe witnesses evidently
to all. For it is written, The voivs of the
righteous are his delight (Pro v. xv. 8). For
indeed in the judgment of Almighty God it is
not what is given, but by whom it is given, that
is regarded.

For hence it is that it is written. The Lord had
respect nnto Abel a?td to his gifts, but unto Cain
and to his gifts he had not respect (Gen. iv. 4, 5).
To wit, being about to say that the Lord had
respect to the gifts, he was careful to premise
that He had respect unto Abel. Thus it is
plainly shewn that the offerer was not accept-
able by reason of the gifts, but the gifts were
so by reason of the offerer. You shew, there-
fore, how acceptable your offering is, seeing
that, being about to give gold, you have first
given gifts of souls by the conversion of the
nation subject to you.

With regard to your telling us that the
abbots who were sent to us to bring your
offering to the blessed Apostle Peter had been
wearied by the violence of the sea and re-
turned to Spain without accomplishing their
voyage 3, your gifts were not kept back, for
they reached us afterwards ; but the con-
stancy of those who had been sent has been
tried, as to whether they knew^ how with holy
desire to overcome dangers in their way, and,
though fatigued in body, by no means to be
wearied in mind. For adversity which comes
in the way of good purposes is a trial of virtue,
not a judgment of reprobation. For who can
be ignorant how prosperous an event it was
that the blessed Apostle Paul came to Italy to
preach, and yet in coming suffered shipwreck?
But the ship of the heart stood unharmed
among the billows of the sea.

Furthermore, I must tell you that I have
been led to praise God the more for your work
by what I have learnt from the report of my
most beloved son Probinus the presbyter ;
namely that, your Excellency having issued
a certain ordinance against the perfidy of the
Jews, those to whom it related attempted to
bend the rectitude of your mind by offering
a sum of money ; which your Excellency
scorned, and, seeking to satisfy the judgment
of Almighty God, preferred innocence to gold.
With regard to this what was done by King
David recurs to my mind, who, when the
longed for water from the cistern of Bethlehem,
which was wedged in by the enemy, had been
brought him by obedient soldiers, said, God
forbid that I should drink the blood of righteous
men (i Chron xi. 19). And, because he


3 See IX. 61.


U 2


36


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


poured it out and would not drink it, it is
written, He offered it a libation to the Lord.
If, then, water was scorned by the armed
king, and turned into a sacrifice to God, we
may estimate what manner of sacrifice to Al-
miglity God has been offered by the king who
for His love has scorned to receive, not water,
but gold. Wherefore, most excellent son, I
will confidently say that thou hast offered as
a libation to the Lord the gold which thou
wouldest not have in opposition to Him.
These are great things, and redound to the
praise of Almighty God.

But in the midst of all these things we
must guard with vigilant attention against the
snares of the ancient foe, who, the greater gifts
he sees among men, with the more subtle
snares seeks to take them away. For robbers
too do not look out for empty travellers to
seize them on their road, but such as carry
vessels of gold and silver. For indeed the
present life is a road. And every one must
needs be the more on his guard against am-
bushed spirits in proportion as the gifts are
greater which he carries. It is the duty, then,
of your Excellency, with regard to this so great
gift which you have received in the conversion
of the nation subject to you, to keep with all
your might, first humility of heart, and se-
condly cleanness of body. For where it is
written, Every Ofte that exalteth himself shall be
humbled^ and he that hinnbleth himselj shall be
exalted (Luke xiv. ii ; xviii. 14), it is assuredly
evident that he truly loves what is lofty who
does not cut off his soul from the root of
humility. For often the malignant spirit, in
order to destroy the good that previously he
had not power to oppose, comes into the mind
of the worker after accomplishment of his
work, and agitates it with silent thoughts of
self-praise, so that the deluded mind admires
itself for the great things that it has done.
And, being exalted in its own sight through
hidden tumour, it is deprived of the grace of
Him Who bestowed the gift. For hence it is
that it is said through the voice of the prophet
to the soul that waxes proud, Having trust in
thy beauty thou playedst the harlot because of
thy renown (Ezek. xvi. 15). For indeed a
soul's having trust in its beauty is its pre-
suming within itself on its righteous doings.
And it plays the harlot because of its renown,
when in what it has done aright it desires not
the praise of its Maker to bespread abroad, but
seeks the glory of its own reputation. Hence
again it is written through the prophet, In
that thou art 7nore beautiful^ go down (Ezek.
xxxii. 19). For the soul goes down because
of being more beautiful when, owing to the
comeliness of virtue whereby it ought to have


been exalted before God, it falls from His grace
through elation. What then is to be done in
this case but that, when the malignant spirit
employs the good things that we have done to
exalt the mind, we should ever recall to
memory our evil deeds, to the end that we
may acknowledge that what we have done sin-
fully is our own, but that it is of the gift of
Almighty God alone when we avoid sins.
Cleanness also of body is to be guarded in our
strivings after well-doing, since, according to
the voice of the apostolic preacher, 77ie temple
of God is holy, ivhich temple ye are (i Cor.
iii. 17). And again he says. For this is the
will of God, even your sandification (i Thess.
iv. 3). As to which sanctification, what he
means by it he shews by straightway adding,
That ye should abstain fro7n foi-nicaiion, that
every one of you should know how to possess his
vessel in sanctification and honour, not in the
lusts of concupisce?2ce.

The very government also of your kingdom
in relation to your subjects ought to be tem-
pered with moderation, lest power steal upon
your mind. For a kingdom is ruled well
when the glory of reigning does not dominate
the disposition. Care also is to be taken that
wrath creep not in, lest whatever is lawful to
be done be done too hastily. For wrath, even
when it prosecutes the faults of delinquents,
ought not to go before the mind as a mistress,
but attend as a handmaid behind the back of
reason, that it may come to tlie front when
bidden. For, if once it begins to have pos-
session of the mind, it accounts as just what it
does cruelly. For hence it is written. The
wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of
God (Jam. i. 20). Hence again it is said, Let
every inan be swift to hear^ but slow to speak,
and slow to wrath (lb. 19). However I doubt
not that under the guidance of God you ob-
serve all these things. Still, now that an op-
portunity of admonition has arisen, I join my-
self furtively to your good deeds, so that what
you do though not admonished you may not
do alone, having an admonisher to boot. Now
may Almighty God protect you in all your
doings by the stretching out of His heavenly
arm, and grant you prosperity in the present
life, and after a course of many years eternal
joys.

We have sent you a small key irom the
most sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter
to convey his blessing, containing iron from
his chains, that what had bound his neck for
martyrdom may loose yours from all sins. We
have given also to the bearer of these pre-
sents, to be oftered to you, a cross in which
there is some of the wood of the Lord's cross,
and hairs of the blessed John the Baptist, from


EPISTLE CXXV.


37


which you may ever have the succour of our
Saviour through the intercession of His fore-
runner.

Moreover we have sent to our most rev-
erend brother and fellow-bishop Leander a
pallium from the See of the blessed Apostle
Peter, which we owe both to ancient custom,
and to your character, and to his goodness and
gravity ^.


A long time ago, when a certain Neapolitan
youth came hither, your to me most sweet Excel-
lency had thought fit to charge me to write to the
most pious Emperor to the end that he might
search in the record office for the treaties that
had formerly been concluded with the prince
Justinian of pious memory as to the claims of
your kingdom, so as to gather from them what
he should observe with regard to you. But
there were two things seriously in the way of
my doing this. One was that the record-
office in the time of the aforesaid prince Jus-
tinian of pious memory had been so burnt by
a fire which had crept in suddenly that hardly
any paper of his times remained. The other
was that, as no one need be told, thou oughtest
to look in thy own archives for the documents
that are against thee, and produce these in-
stead of my doing so. Wherefore I exhort
your Excellency to arrange matters suitably to
your character, and carefully to carry out
whatever makes for peace, that the times of
your reign may be memorable with great
praise through many courses of years. Further-
more, we have sent you another key from the
most sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter,
which, being laid up with due honour, may
multiply with blessing whatever it may find you
enjoying.

EPISTLE CXXIIL

To Venantius and Italica 5.

Gregory to the lord Venantius, Patrician,
and Italica his wife.


4 What follows is preceded by " Item in anagnostico." (Tlie
word is thus explained in D' Amis' Lexicon Manuale ; " Gra;cis
id omne est quod legitur aut recitatur. Unde Gregorins Magnus
pro epistola aut quovis scripto vocem hanc usurpat.") The whole
is absent from many MSS., and in one of those preserved in
Bibliotheca Colbertina it is given, without the heading Item in
anognostico, as a separate epistle, entitled " Secunda ad Recha-
redum," and concludes thus: " Furthermore we have received
the gifts of your Excellency, which have been sent for the poor
ot the blessed apostle Peter, namely three hundred coculhc
{co7uls) ; and, as much as we can, we earnestly pray that you
may have as your protector in the tremendous day of judgment
Him whose poor you have protected by abundance of clothes.
Our not sending at once a man of ours to your Excellency
has been owing to the want of a ship : for none can be found
that can proceed from these parts to the shores of Spain," The
fact of a second key containing filings of St. Peter's chains being
referred to as sent to Reccared in this concluding portion of the
epistle confirms the prubability of its having been part of a sub-
sequent letter. For two such keys were not likely to be sent
at the same time.

5 See I. 34, note 8.


I have taken care, with due affection, to
enquire of certain persons who have come
from Sicily about your Excellency's health.
But they have given me a sad report of the
frequency of your ailments. Now, when I say
this, neither do I find anything to tell you
about myself, except that, for my sins, lo it is
now eleven months since it has been a very
rare case with me if I have been able now
and then to rise from my bed. For I am
afflicted by so great sufferings from gout, and
so great from troubles, that my life is to me
most grievous pain. For every day I faint
under my sufferings, and sigh in expectation
of the relief of death. Indeed among the
clergy and people of this city there has been
such an invasion of feverous sicknesses that
hardly any freeman, hardly any slave, remains
fit for any office or ministry. Moreover, from
the neighbouring cities we have news daily of
havocs and of mortality. Then, how Africa is
being wasted by mortality and sickness I
believe that you know more accurately than
we do, insomuch as you are nearer to it. But
of the East those who come from thence report
still more grievous desolations. In the midst
of all these things, therefore, since you perceive
that there is a general smiting as the end of
the world draws near, you ought not to be too
much afflicted for your own troubles. But, as
becomes wise nobles, bring ye back your whole
heart to the care of your souls, and fear the
strict judgment all the more as it is so much
nearer at hand. Devote yourselves to piety,
of which it is written that // hath promise of
the life that noiv is, and of that which is to come
(i I'im. iv. 8). But Almighty God is power-
ful both to preserve the life of your Excellency
for a long time here, and to bring you after
many courses of years to eternal joys. I beg
my most sweet daughters, the lady Barbara
and the lady Antonina, to be greeted in my
name ; whom I pray that heavenly grace may
protect, and grant them to be prospered in all
things.

EPISTLE CXXV.
To Maximus, Bishop of Salona^.

Gregory to Maximus, &c.

Having received the letters of our brother
and fellow-bishop Marinianus, and Casturius,
our chartiilariiis^h.^Vmg^.ho returned, we learn
that your Fraternity have made most full satis-
faction with regard to the matters about which
there had been uncertainty ; and we return
great thanks to Almighty God that from our
inmost heart all rancour of sinister suspicion

6 See III. 47, note 2, and IX. 81.


38


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


has been eradicated. On this account I have
been desirous of dismissing with the utmost
speed our common son, your deacon Stephen.
But the frequent pains of my sicknesses have
compelled me to retain him with me for a few
days. As soon, however, as I have begun to
be even slightly better, I have provided for
sending him forthwith back to you with joy.

Accordingly we send to you, according to
custom, the pallium for the sacred solemnities
of mass ; the meaning of which we desire you
in all respects to vindicate. For the dignity
of this vestment is humility and justice. Let,
then, your Fraternity make haste with all your
heart to shew yourself humble in prosperity,
and in adversity, if ever it should ensue ; up-
right in justice; friendly to the good, and
opposed to the froward ; never discount-
enancing any one who speaks for the truth ;
instant in works of mercy according to thy
means, and yet beyond thy means desiring to
be instant ; sympathizing with the weak ; re-
joicing with men of good will ; regarding the
woes of others as thine own ; exulting for the
joys of others as if for thine own ; in correct-
ing vices severe, in cherishing virtues, sooth-
ing the minds of hearers ; in anger, retaining
judgment without anger, but in calmness not
relinquishing the censorship of your severity.
This, dearest brother, is the meaning of the
pallium which you will receive, which if you
act up to, you will have inwardly what you are
seen to have received outwardly.

Furthermore I commend in all respects to
your Fraternity our brother and fellow- bishop
Sabinianus 7 j and if there be any matters of
dispute between you, let them meanwhile be
laid aside. Let charity remain fixed between
you, that so, in case of contention ever arising
about external things, they may be examined
without charity deserting the heart. We
commend also our common son Honoratus :
concerning whom if it is the case, as we have
learnt through Castorius our chartularius^ that
through him three previous archdeacons have
been compelled to observe the ecclesiastical
custom by retiring at the expiration of five
years, we desire indeed that he may experience
the charity of thy Holiness. For a judgment
ought not to be solicited in a case which he
himself has judged. If, however, it is not so,
then, all swelling of heart being repressed, and
all grudge set aside, he ought to be received,
and by no means removed from the place
which he now occupies. Messianus also, the
clei'ic who had taken refuge with us, we have
confidently committed to the cliarge of our
common son Stephen the deacon, being assured

7 See IX. 8o VI. 27, note 6 ; VII. 17, IX. 80.


that in the cose of one whom we ourselves
send to your Fraternity, you will not show any
grudge, but lend the countenance of your
authority. May Almighty God keep you in
His protection, and grant us so to act that
after the billows of this temporal state we
may be able to attain with joy to things
eternal.

EPISTLE CXXVII.

From S. Columbanus to Pope Gregory ^.
To the holy lord, and father in Christ, the


8 This epistle of the Irish saint Columbanus to Gregory was
added to the Registruin Epistolarum by the Kenedictine editors,
having been first published, with other writings of S. Columban,
by Patrick Fleming in Collecta^iea sacra; Lovan. a.d. 1667.
(See Galland. Bibliotheca veterujJi patrum. Scec. VI. circ. a.d.
589.) It is assigned by the Benedictines to A.D. 598-9, and
hence placed at the end of Book IX. of Gregory's Epistles.

At this time St. Columban was at the monastery founded by
him at Luxoviiim {L?ixiieil) among the Vosges mountains in
Burgundy, over which country Theoderic II. was now king.
He had already given offence in Gaul, not only by his protest
in life and teaching against prevalent laxity, but also by his
continuing to observe and uphold the custom of his own Celtic
Church with regard to the time for keeping Easter, which differed
from what had now been adopted by Rome and prevailed in the
West generally. The main purpose of this epistle is to plead
with pope Gregory for approval of the Celtic tradition. Sub-
sequently, a synod being held in Gaul for considering the ques-
tion, he addresr^ed the bishops tliere assembled in a letter which
is also extant, defending, as in this epistle, the Celtic usage.
and pleading for being allowed at any rate to follow it himself in
peace. (S. Cohimljani, Ep. II. z";/ CoUectaii, sacr.)

It may be observed in the epistle before us, as also in a
subsequent one to pope Boniface IV. with reference to the same
subject {S. Coljcmbani, Ep. V. ; Collectan. sac?-.), that, though
addressing the bishop of Rome in language of the utmost defer-
ence, and recognizing his high position, he shews no disposition
to submit to his authority ; telling him on the contrary that,
should he declare himself so as to contradict the supposed teach-
ing of St. Jerome, he would be rejected as heretical by all the
Celtic churches. And throughout the letter there runs a vein
of sarcasm. There is no extant reply from Gregory to the letter.
Probably none was sent. Possibly the letter never reached its
destination: for in the subsequent letter, above referred to, to
Boniface IV. Columban says, "Once and again Satan hindered
the bearers of our letters written formerly to pope Gregory of
good memory, which are subjoined below."

The point at issue, and Columban's argument, as it appears
in this letter, may be briefly stated thus. Apart from any differ-
ences in the cycles for calculating the true day of the Paschal
full moon in successive years, there was this difference between
the Celtic and Roman usages. While all agreed in keeping
Easter on a Simday, the Celtic use was to keep it on the day
of the Paschal full moon itself (i.e. the calculated 14th day
of the moon falling on, or next after, the Vernal Equinox),
in case of such day falling on a Sunday; whereas the Roman
was, in such a case, to defer their Easter celebration till the
following Sunday, so as to avoid coincidence with the actual day
of the Jewish Passover. Hence, in Bede's account of the con-
troversy on the subject between the British and Scottish (i.e.
Irish) Churches on the one hand and the Roman on the other,
he speaks of the former keeping their Easter between the 14th
and the 20th days of the moon inclusive, but the latter between
the 15th and the 21st (Bede, H.E. II. 2; III. 25). In Gaul,
however, as appears from the letter before us, it was the rule
to defer Easter for a week in case of the day of the Paschal full
moon (i.e. the 14th) falling on a Saturdaj^ so as to avoid coin-
cidence even with the t5th day of the moon. Hence, agreeing
with Bede as to the Celtic usage being to keep Easter between
the 14th and 20th days, he speaks not ot the 15th and 21st, but
of the i6th and the 22nd being the extreme limits according to
the Gallic usage. The reason of this uifference was. that it tiad
once been the Latin use, as against the Alexandrian, to keep
Easter from the 16th to tlie 22nd days, thus avoiding the 15th;
and this rule had l.>een retained in the cycle of V^ictorius (as
to whom see below, note 7), which was still receivetl in Gaul.

The arguments of St. Columban in defence of the Celtic usage
may be tints summarized, i. It had been sanctioned by Ana-
tolius (see below, note 5), whose view had been approved by
.St. Jerome. 2. To ilefer Easter to the 22nd, or even the 2tst
day was incongruous, seeing that the moon then entered her
last quarter, rising so late as to give darkness preponderance
over light; and the solemnity of light should not be celelirated


EPISTLE CXXVII.


39


Roman [fope], most fair ornament of the
Church, a certain most august flower, as it
were, of the whole of withering Europe, dis-
tinguislied speculator, as enjoying a divine
contemplation of purity (?) 9. I, Bargoma ^,
poor dove in Christ, send greeting.

Grace to thee and peace from God the
Father \^a/id] our [Z<?/v/] Jesus Christ. I am
pleased to think, O holy pope, that it will
seem to thee nothing extravagant to be inter-
rogated about Easter, according to that can-
ticle, A.s7c thy father^ and he ivill sheiv thee;
thi?ie elders and they will tell thee (Deut.
xxxii. 7). For, though on me, who am indeed
a trifler {inicrologo) may be branded that ex-
cellent expression of a certain wise man, who
is reported to have said, on seeing a certain
woman, contupictcun ^, / do 7iot admire the
art, but I admire the brow, in that I who am
vile write to thee that art illustrious ; yet,
relying on my confidence in thy evangelical
humility, I presume to write to thee, and im-
pose on thee the matter of my grief. For


under the domination of darlcness. "He quotes Anatoliiis as
having insisted on this principle, of which (we may here oljseive)
we find an intimation in Philowith re'^eience to the Jewish
Passover : — " That not only by day but also by night the world
may be full of all-beauteous light, inasmuch as sun and moon
on that day succeed each other with no interval of darkness
between." {De Sept. et Fcst. 1191.) 3. The alleged objection
to keeping Easte'- on the day of the Jewish Passover was un-
founded and futile. 4. The Mosaic Law enjoined seven days,
beginning with the 14th, as the duration of the Passover festival ;
and within the same limits should be kept the Easter festival.
[This argument, it may be observed, whatever its worth in other
respects, appears to be founded on an error. Yox the Passover,
having been killed before sunset on the 14th of Nisan, is believed
to have been eaten after sunset, i.e. after the 15th day, reckoned
from evening to evening, had begun ; and from the latter day
inclusive the seven days of unleavened bread were reckoned,
thus ending with the 21st, which was a special day of "holy
convocation." Cf. below, note 5.]

9 Thaoria iitpote diviiia castulitatis potito. The word cas-
tulitas may possibly have been in use among the Irish monks
as an endearing diminutive o{ castitas (i.e. chastity or purity),
regarded as the object of their affections in the contemplative
life. Their writers appear to have been given to the use of such
diminutives, not only of the names of people, but of other words
also. — "In the following pages (sc in Adamnan's Life of St.
Columba) the reader will observe the liberal employment of
diminutives, so characteristic of Iri.sh composition; and he will
find them, in many cases, used without any grammatical force,
and commutable, in the same chapters, with their primitives."
'(^Reeve's Adanifian. Appendix to Preface, Ed., 1857, p. Ixi.).

1 Perhaps an error for Barjona, meaning ' son of a dove,'
in allusion to his name, Columba, or Columbanus. He after-
wards calls himself " vilis columba." Cf. " Pauperculus prse-
potenti (mirum dictu ! nova res!) rara avis scribere audet Boni-
facio patri Palumbus : " " Sed talia suadenti, utpote torpenti
actu, ac dicenti potius quam facienti mihi, Jonas Hebraice, Peris-
terae Gra;ce, Columbae Latine, potius tantum \nl. tamen] vestrae
idiomate linguae nancto \_al. nuncupato], {S . Cohinihniii Ep. V.
ad BoH'/acium papain IV. CoUectan. sacr. Patr. Fleming.
Galland. scec. VI. c. A D. 598). Cf. " Vir erat vitas venerabilis
et beatae memoriae, monasterioruni pater et fundator, cum Joi a
propheta homonymum sortitus nomen ; nam licet diverso trium
diversarum sono liiiguarum, unam tamen eandemque rem sig-
nificat hoc quod Hebraice dicitur Jona, Graecitas vero IIEPli-
TEP.\ vo:itat, et Latina lingua Columba nuncupatur." {Adam-
7ians Life of S. Columba; Seciinda Prcpfatio.) Du Cangc
suggests a corruption of Barginna, said to be a low Latin word,
equivalent to peregrinus.

2 The meaning of this word is obscure. Patrick Fleming
(Collect. Sncr.) suggests an error for compte pictavi ; Du Cange
for comptam, or ac7e coniptatn, some artificial arrangement of the
hair being supposed to be referred to. The intended point of the
comparison seems to be, that Gregory will still be admirable,
though the writer may set him off nn>kilfully.


writing is not in vain, when necessity compels
one to write, though it be to one's betters.

What, then, dost thou say concerning l^^aster
on the 2ist or 22nd day of the moon, which
(with thy peace be it said) is proved by many
calculators not to be Easter, but in truth a
time of darkness ? For it is not unknown, as
I believe, to thy Itfticicncy, how Anatoliuss
(a man of wonderful learning, as says Saint
Hieronymus, extracts from whose writings
Eusebius, bishop of C?esarea, inserted in his
Ecclesiastical Histoiy, and Saint Hieronymus
praised this same work about Easter in his
.catalogue) disputes with strong disapprobation
about this age of the moon. For against the
Gallican Ritiiarii^, who erred, as he says,
about Easter, he introduced an awful sentence,
saying, Certainly^ if the rising of the vwoii be
delayed till the end of ttvo watches, tvhich in-
dicates'midnight, light does not oixrcome dark-
ness, but darkness light ; ivJiich thing is cer/ainly
not allowable in the Easter Festival. Jianiely, that
a?iy part of the darkness should dominate over
the light, since the solemnity of the Lord's Resur-
rectio7i is light, a?id there is no conimnnion of light
with darkness. And, if the moon has not shone
forth till the third watch, there is 710 doubt that
the 7110071 has rise7i on its 21st or 2 2 7id oay, in
which it is 7iot possible for a true Paschal ojfei--
ing to be fnade. For those who lay down
that it is possible for a true Easter to be
celebrated at this age of the moon, 710 1 only are
U7iable to affirm this by autho7'ity of divine
Scripture, but also i7icur the guilt of sacrilege
and co7ituniacy a7id peril of their souls, while
affirming that the true Light, which dominates
over all darkness, ca7i be offih'ed while there is
a7iy do77ii7iatio7i of dark7iess. Also in the book
of holy dogma we read, Easter, that is, the
sole7n7iity of the Lord's Resn7Tection, ca7mot be
celebrated before the beginvi7ig of the vernal
equi7iox is past, to wit, that it 7/iay 7iot come
before the ver7ial equinox 5 ; which rule assuredly


3 Anatolius, an Alexandrian by birth, and bishop of Laodicea,
A.D. 269, is referred to by Eusebius [H.E. VII. 32), as dis-
tinguished for learning, and the writer of a wcrk on the 1 aschal
quesiion, which he quotes. A " Canun Paschalis," purporting to
be this work, was published by Bucherius in a Latin version
{Doct. Temp. Antv. 1634) ; but its guiuiineness is doubted.
Anatolius was adduced by Colman at the synod of Whitby
(Bcde, HE. III. 25). as an authority for the 14th and 20th days
of the nioon being the limits for Easter. But Willi id replied
that Anatolius had been misunderstood ; for that, having in view
the Egyptian mode of reckoning days from sunset to sunset,
he had meant the day which began after simset on the 14th day,
i.e. reall>' the 15th. And so also with regard to the 20th day.
His language, as quoted by Eusebius, supports tliis e.vplanatic n
of his meaning : — " Given that the day of the I'assover is on the
fourteenth of the moon after evening (fxeO' ea-rrepai')." See
above, end of note i.

4 " p^orie sic dictos, quod obscura et difificilia rimarentur."
Benedictine edit. Aligne. — " Nostri rimenrs vocant poetastras,
sed an ea sit hie notio non definio." Du Cange.

5 The original here, being probaloly an incorrect citation, is
obscure. It is, *' Pascha, ed est solemnitas dominicae Resurrec-
tionis, ante transgressum vernalis atquinoctii 16 initiam non
potest celehrari, ut scilicet aequinoctium non antecedat."


40


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


Victorius ^ has gone beyond in his cycle, and
hereby has already introduced error into Gaul,
or to s])eak less boldly, has confirmed one of
old standing. For indeed how can either of
these things stand with reason ; either that the
Lord's Resurrection should be celebrated be-
fore His Passion (the thought of which is
absurd), or that the seven days sanctioned by
the Lord's command in the Law, during which
only it is enjoined that the Lord's Passover
could lawfully be eaten (which are to be
numbered from the 14th day of the moon
to the 20th), should against law and right be
exceeded? For a moon in its 21st or 22nd
day is out of the dominion of light, as having
risen at that time after midnight ; and, when
darkness overcomes light, it is said to be im-
pious to keep the solemnity of light. Why
then dost thou, who art so wise, the brilliant
lights indeed of whose sacred genius are dif-
fused, as in ancient times, through the world,
— why dost thou keep a dark Easter ? I won-
der, I confess, that this error of Gaul, ac si
Schy nteiieiun 7, has not long ago been swept
away by thee ; unless I should perchance sup-
pose, what I can hardly believe, that, as it is
evident that thou hast not corrected it, it has
thy approval

In another way, however, may thy Expert-
ness be more honourably excused, if, fearing
to subject thyself to the mark of Hermagoric^
novelty, thou art content with the authority of
thy predecessors, and especially of pope Leo.

Do not, I pray thee, in such a question trust
to humility only or to gravity, which are often
deceived. Better by far is a living dog in this
problem thaii a dead lion (Eccles. ix. 4). For
a living saint may correct what had not been
corrected by another who came before him.
For know thou that by our masters and the
Irish ancients, who were philosophers and
most wise computists in constructing calcula-
tions, Victorius was not received, but held


6 Pope Leo I. referred the question between the Roman and
Alexandrian Chiirclies as to the computation of Easter to his
archdeacon (afterwards pope) Hilarius for investigation ; and he
referred it to Victorius of Aquilaine, who consequently (a.u. 457)
drew up a cycle, which was accepted first in the Galilean
Churches {Concil. Aiael. IV., ^». 541), and continued to be
observed there after it had been superseded in Italy by that
of Dionysius Exiguus(A.D. 527). See above, note i.

7 " Sckyntciwion Graecam vocem o-xotvorei/jj? putat Editor,
id est, tanquam si rectum et legitimum e.sset." I)u Cange. This
interpretation appears probable from the fact that the Irish
writers of the period were given to air their Greek learning by
the use of such words. — " He (Adamnan) occasionally employs
Greek or Grafco-Latin words" i^Reeves's AdainnaJc. p. Ixi. See
also p. 158, note, for other evidence of this Irish tendency). The
meaning in the text would thus be, " I wonder that this error
should be tolerated by thee as though it were right and legiti-
mate."

8 HerinagoriccE novitatis ; the epithet being apparently
formed from the name of Herniagoras of Temnos, a distinguished
Greek rhetorician of the time of Pompey and Cicero. He de-
voted peculiar attention to what is called the invetition, Quin-
tilian re.ers to him and approves his system : Cicero {^De Invent,
i. 6) was opposed to it. The use of a word like this is again
characteristic of the Irish writers


rather worthy of ridicule or of excuse than as
carrying authority. Wherefore to me, as a
timid stranger rather than as a sciolist, afford
the support of thy judgment, and disdain not
to sencl us speedily the suffrage of thy Pla-
cability for assuaging this tempest which sur-
rounds us ; since, after so many authors whom
I have read, I am not satisfied with that one
sentence of those bishops who say only, We
ought not to keep the Passover with the Jeivs.
For this is what the bishop Victor formerly
said ; but none of the Easterns accepted his
figment 9. But this the benumbing {nwjtb ?)
backbone of Dagon ; this the dotage of error
drinks in ^°. Of what worth, I ask, is this
sentence, so frivolous and so rude, and resting,
as it does, on no testimonies of sacred Scrip-
ture ; We ought not to keep the Passover ivith
the Jeivs ? What has it to do with the ques-
tion ? Are the reprobate Jews to be supposed
to keep the Passover now, seeing that they are
without a temple, outside Jerusalem, and
Christ, who was formerly prefigured, having
been crucified by them ? Or, can it be rightly
supposed that the 14th day of the moon for
the Passover was ^of their own appointment,.
and is it not rather to be acknowledged to be
of God's, who alone knew clearly with what
mysterious meaning the 14th day of the moon
was chosen for the passage [out of Egypt\
Perhaps to wise men and the like of thee this
may be in some degree clearer than to others.
As to those who make this objection, although
without authority, let them upbraid God for
that He did not then beforehand guard against
the contumacy of the Jews by enjoining on
them in the Law nine days of unleavened
bread, if He would not have us keep the Pas-
sover with them, so that the beginning of our
solemnity should not exceed the end of theirs.
For, if Easter is to be celebrated on the 21st


9 i.e. pope Victor, in his opposition, towards the end of the
second century, to the Asiatic Quarto-decimans, who kept their
Pasch on the day of the Paschal full moon, whatever the day
of the week might be. Colman at the synod of Whitby had
alleged St. John, to whom the Asiatics had traced their tradition,
as an authority for the Scottish usage. But Wilfrid truly alleged
in reply that the question at issue between the Scots and Romans
at that time was a different one, since both parties agreed in
keeping Easter on a Sunday only. Still, Columban's argument
here is to the point as shewing that the Easterns had not objected
to keeping Easter on the actual day of the Jewish Passover.
It may be noted here how the authority of Victor, as well as
of other popes, is set at naught by S. Columbanus.

10 Sed hoc soporans sphia Dagonis, hoc imbibit bubum erroris.
On these obscure expressions it may be observed that spina
Dagonis evidently means what was left to the fish-god (paxt?
in LXX.), after his head and hands had been severed. Gregory,
in his comment on i Sam. v., interprets it as denoting heathenism
prostrate, and at length deprived of even the semblance of
rationality, in the presence of the Gospel, which was represented
by the ark. Columban may possibly have got the idea from
Gregory's own interpretation of the incident, and been pleased
to use it against him. Biibunt^ according to Du Cange, is a late
Latin word denoting senium, or languor, the novui biibuia also
being vised in the sense oi /abula. The idea seems to be that
pope Victor's view was a figment, worthy only to be received
(or, as we might now say, swallowed) by senseless heathenism
or wandering dotage.


EPISTLE CXXVII.


41


or 22nd day, from the 14th to the 22nd nine
days will be reckoned, that is, seven ordered
by God, and two added by men. But, if it is
allowed for men to add anything of their own
accord to divine decree, I ask whether this may
not seem opposed to that sentence of Deuter-
onomy, Lo (he saith), the word ivhich I give unio
thee, thou shalt 7iot add unto it ?ior take frovi
it (Deut. iv. 2).

But in writing all this more forwardly than
humbly, I know that I have involved myself in
an Euripus of presumption attended with great
difficulty, being perchance unskilled to steer
out of it. Nor does it befit our place or rank
that anything should be suggested in the way
of discussion to thy great authority, and that
my Western letters should ridiculously solicit
thee, who sittest legitimately on the seat of the
apostle and key-bearer Peter, on the subject
of Easter. But thou oughtest to consider not
so much worthless me in this matter as many
masters, both departed and now living, who
confirm what I have pointed out, and suppose
thyself to be holding a colloquy with them :
for know that I open my thick-lipped mouth
dutifully, though it may be incoherently and
extravagantly. It is for thee, therefore, either
to excuse or to condemn Victorius, knowing
that, if thou approvest him, it will be a ques-
tion of faith between thee and the aforesaid
Hieronymus, seeing that he approved Anato-
lius, who is opposed to Victorius ; so that
whoso follows the one cannot receive the other.
Let, then, thy Vigilance take thought that, in
approving the faith of one of the two authors
aforesaid who are mutually opposed to each
other, there be no dissonance, when thou pro-
nouncest thy opinion, between thee and Hiero-
nymus, lest w^e should be on all sides in a
strait, as to whether we should agree with thee
or with him. Spare the weak in this matter,
lest thou exhibit the scandal of diversity. For
I frankly acknowledge to thee that any one
who goes against the authority of Saint Hiero-
nymus will be one to be repudiated as a heretic
among the churches of the West : for they ac-
commodate their faith in all respects unhesi-
tatingly to him with regard to the Divine
Scriptures. But let this suffice with respect to
Easter.

^ But I ask what thy judgment is about those
bishops whom thou hast written of as simo-
niacal, and whom the writer Giltas ' calls pests.
Should communion be had with them? For
there are known to be many such in this pro-
vince, whereby the matter is made more serious.
Or as to others, who having been polluted in


* Meaning Gildas.«


their diaconate, are afterwards elected to the
rank of bishops? For there are some whom
we know to have conscientious scruples on
these grounds; and in conferring with our
littleness about them, they wished to know for
certain whether they may minister without
peril after such transgressions ; that is, either
after having bought their rank for money, or
after adultery in their diaconate. I mean,
however, concealed adultery with their de-
pendents % which with our teachers is ac-
counted as no less criminal

As to a third head of enquiry, say in reply,
I pray thee, if it is not trou1)]esome, what
should be done in the case of those monks
who for a closer sight of God, or inflamed by
a longing for a more perfect life, going against
their vows, leave the places of their first con
version, and, against the will of their abl)ots,
the fervour of monks compelling them, eitiier
go free or fly to deserts. The author Ven-
nianus enquired about these of Giltas, who
replied to him most elegantly: yet still to one
who is anxious to learn there is ever an in-
crease of greater fear. These things, and
much more which epistolary brevity does not
admit of, might well have been enquired about
more humbly and more clearly in a personal
interview, but that weakness of body and the
care of my fellow-pilgrims keeps me bound at
home, though desirous of going to thee, so as
to draw from that spiritual vein of a living well
and from the living water of knowledge flowing
from heaven and springing up unto eternal
life. And, if my body were to follow my
mind, Rome would once more be in danger
of being itself despised; seeing that — even as
we read in the narration of the learned Hiero-
nymus how certain persons once came to
Rome from the utmost boundaries of the
Heuline coast 3 ; and then (wonderful to be
told) sought something else outside of Rome —
so I too, saving reverence for the ashes of the
saints, should seek out longingly, not Rome,
but thee : for, though I confess myself not to
be wise, but athirst, I should do this same
thing if I had time and opportunity.

I have read thy book containing the Pas-
toral Rule, short in style, lengthy in teaching,
full of mysteries ; an(l acknowledge it to be
a work sv/eeter than honey to one that is in


^ Cum clientelis : meaning perhaps livinc: with females cf
their own households as concubines, in disiinciion from open
transgression. Tlie word can hardly denote, as suggested by tlie
Benedictine Editors, wives lawfully inairied before ordination.

3 Dc ulti7!iis Heiili)n litoris jlnibus. — "Loco Heuli7ii esse
legendum Hiialini. vel Huelini, constat ex conlexlu Hierony-
miano. Est vox Grseca, a rad. vaAo?, sive veAo?, vitrimi, crys-
tallns. Sic mare vocaiur {AfocnL iv.) Gdkaaaa va\ivr\. In
Hieronymo hie leginins ", De ultiinis H ispnnio' Gallinrnvtque
yinihis" {note in Benedictine Edition). See above, note 8, as
to the fondness of the old Irish writers for the use of Greek
words.


42


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


need. Wherefore bestow, I pray thee, on me
who am atliirst for what is thine, the works on
Ezekiel, which, as I have heard, thou hast
elaborated with wonderful genius. I have
read the six books of Hieronymus on that
prophet ; but he has not expounded the
middle part. But, if thou wilt do me the
favour, send for me to the city some of thy
remaining writings ; to wit, the concluding ex-
positions of one book, and (? namely) the Song
of Songs from that place where it is said,
/ 7inll go to the moimtain of myrrh ajid the hill
of fraiikincense^ to the end, treated with short
comments, either of others, or thine own : and
I beg that thou wouldest expound the whole
obscurity of Zachariah, and make manifest its
hidden meaning, that Western blindness may
give thee thanks for this. I make unreason-
able demands, and ask to have great things
told me : who can fail to see this ? But it is
true also that thou hast great things, and
knowest well that from a little less, and from
much more should be put out to use. Let
charity induce thee to write in reply ; let not


the roughness of my letter hinder thee from
expounding, seeing that it is my mode of ex-
pression that has been in fault, and I have it
in my heart to pay thee due honour. It was
for me to provoke, to interrogate, to request :
it is for thee not to refuse what thou hast
received freely, to put thy talent out to use,
to give to him that asks the bread of doctrine,
as Christ enjoins. Peace be to thee and thine ;
pardon my forwardness, blessed pope, in that
I have written so boldly ; and I pray thee in
thy holy prayers to our common Lord to pray
for me, a most vile sinner. I think it quite
superfluous to commend to thee my people,
whom the Saviour judges fit to be received, as
walking in His name ; and if, as I have heard
from thy holy Candidus*, thou shouldcst be
disposed to say in reply that things confirmed
by ancient usage cannot be changed, error is
manifestly ancient ; but truth which reproves
it is ever more ancient still.


4 Candidus had been sent by Gregory to Gaul as rector
patrimonii there. See previous Epistles.


BOOK X.


EPISTLE X.
To Rom ANUS, Guardian {Defensorem).

Gregory to Romanns, our guardian in Sicily.

It has been reported to us that our most
reverend brother the bishop Basihus is occu-
pied in legal suits as though he were one of
the last of the people, and unprofitably attends
the courts. Now, since this thing both ren-
ders the man himself vile and does away with
the reverence due to priests, let thy Experience,
immediately on receiving this order, so compel
him by strict execution of it to return to his
duty that, through thy insistency, a delay of
five days be not under any excuse allowed
him ; lest, if thou shouldest in any way permit
him to make such delay, thou with him
shouldest come to be gravely culpable before
us. Given in the month of December, Indic-
tion 3.

EPISTLE XV.
To Clementina, Patrician ^

Gregory to Clementina, &c.

It has reached us by the report of a certain
Abbot that your Glory has been told by certain
evil-speakers that we have a pique against you.
If this is so, whosoever have made up this
story have been double towards you under
a shew of sincerity, so as to shew themselves
off as faithful, and wickedly cause you to doubt
us. But I, glorious daughter, knowing thy
good qualities of old, and especially the chas-
tity which has been thy companion from youth,
have ever regarded thee with great respect and
affection. But, lest even now your Glory should
suspect that my heart is changed, I declare
that there is not in me a scruple of ill-feeling
or anger towards you ; but be assured that
I evince paternal affection for you. One
thmg, however, that has been told me I ought
not to pass over in silence, lest there should
begin to be a diminution of charity, if what
needs to be said for amendment were sup-
pressed.


^ Clementina was one of the ladies of rank whose acquaintance
Gregory had made at Constantinople, and with whom he con-
tinued to keep up affectionate father] j' intercourse. Cf. I. 11, and
the epistle which follows this.


For indeed it has been reported to me that,
when any one has offended you, you retain
soreness unremittingly. Now, if this is true,
since the more I love you the more grieved
I am, I beg that you would nobly rid yourself
of this fault, and not suffer the seed of the
enemy to grow to the detriment of your crop
of Avell-doing. Let the words of the Lord's
Prayer be brought back to your memory, and
let not blame prevail with you over pardon.
Let the goodness of your Glory get the better
of transgressions, and by salubriously pardon-
ing make the offender devoted to you more
than persistent asperity can make him unde-
voted. Let there be left to him what may
make him ashamed, and not kept up what
may grieve him. For usually discreet remis-
sion has more effect for correction than strict-
ness in executing vengeance ; so much so that
sometimes the one makes a man more faithful
and subdued, while the other makes him ob
stinate and spiteful. And indeed we do not
say this to you in order that you should abate
your zeal for righteousness, but lest you should
be in the least things such as you ought to be
in the greatest. For, if ever the quality of
a transgression requires severity, it should be
so dealt with that both vengeance may correct
the ftiult and grace not be denied afterwards to
those that have been corrected. Seeing, then,
that we warn you under the dictates of paternal
affection for your soul's good, receive our
words with the charity wherewith they are
spoken, and take them to yourself for the ad-
vantage of your Glory, so that your good quali-
ties may become clearer before men and very
pure before \hnighty God. But count on us,
dearest dau^llLer, confidently in all things, as
indeed you may ; and, since we always desire
to hear of your prosperity, refresh us often by
your letters.

EPISTLE XVIII.

To Clementina, Patrician*.

Gregory to Clementina, &c.

Know, glorious daughter, that the presbyter


2 It is a sign of Gregory's habitual courtesy to ladies of rank,
as well as of their influential position, that he is moved to send


44


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


Amandus has been elected to the episcopate
by the people of Surrentum. And, we having
written for him to be sent hither, you ought
not to be saddened for his absence, seeing
that one who is with you in heart should not
even be believed to be departing from you.
And, since he who once pleased you is accept-
able to those who want a bishop, bless Al-
mighty God for this, and with Christian devoiion
rejoice the more ; and gladly do your best to
further his coming to us for the advantage of
others speedily, since it is the part of sincere
charity to exult when one who is loved is called
that he may grow.

EPISTLE XIX.
To Anthemius, Subdeacon.

Gregory to Anthemius, Subdeacon of Cam-
pania.

After he who had been elected to the
episcopate of the city of Surrentum had
appeared to us to be unfit, they elected
Amandus, presbyter of the oratory of Saint
Severinus, which is in the Lucullan camp.
Wherefore we enjoin on thy Experience, lay-
ing aside excuses, to take care to send the
said presbyter to us with all speed, to the end
that, if there is nothing to hinder him from
coming, the desires of the petitioners may with
the help of Christ be fulfilled. As to his life
and deeds, seeing that they can be better
known where he has long lived, let it be thy
care, together with our brother and fellow-
bishop, Fortunatus 3, to make diligent enquiry.
And if there is nothing in the way of his pro-
motion to the sacred order, he should be sent
to us without any delay. But, lest our glorious
daughter Clementina should take this amiss,
let thy Experience go to her, and do this
thing with her consent. If, however, she should
be disposed to resist, let thy Experience still
send huTi hither without delay, since we ought
so to pacify the minds of our children as still
not to obstruct benefit to souls.

EPISTLE XXin.
To Adrian, Notary of Sicily 4.
Gregory to Adrian, &c.
A thing to us altogether detestable and


her a kind of apology for removing from Constantinople a priest
whom she valued, and who may have been her spiritual adviser.
See also the epistle which follows, in which the subdeacon in
charge of the proceedings is directed to resort to her in person to
solicit her consent. Amandus was after his death venerated
as a Saint at Surrentum. In the Church of SS. Felix and
Baculus there is this epitaph; — " Hie requiescit sacerdos Dei
Amandus episcopus sanctje ecclesiae Surrentinrc, qui sedit annos
xvii. dies xxi. Depositus est die 13, mense Aprilis, indict. 5,
imperante D.N. Heraclio R. Aug. anno 7. Orate pro me,
sancte Pater." {Migne, Patrilog., in loc.)

3 Bishop of Naples.

4 As to the employment of notaries, see Prolegomena, p. viii.


infamous has come to our ears, and we wonder
why, if it is true, thou hast not taken notice
of it. For Martianus, a monk of the monas-
tery of Saint Vitus, situate on Mount ^tna,
has come to us, and presented a petidon,
complaining among other things that the
monks of this monastery live so perversely and
wickedly as to dare to have women living with
them, which is a thing atrocious to be spoken
of. And, seeing that we have written on this
matter to our brother and fellow-bishop Leo s,
in order that, having enquired into the truth,
he may, if he should find it to be so, be at
pains to correct it with the strictest severity,
it is necessary for thy Experience also to shew
thyself in all respects solicitous for investiga-
tion of the truth, and punishment of so great
a wickedness ; so that nothing may be found
to be done remissly or negligently. Further^
for the interests in other respects of the same
monastery, lend thy assistance so far as equity
may require, to the end that if, as is said,
there has been any invasion of it, it may be
redressed according to justice, and tl^.at for the
future nothing prejudicial may in any way
arise there contrary to the fear of God and
the order of law.

EPISTLE XXIV.

To Fortunatus, Bishop of Neapolis

{NaJ)ks).

Gregory to Fortunatus, &c.

When your Fraternity pays too little atten-
tion to the monasteries that are under you,
you both lay yourself open to reproof, and
make us sorry for your laxity. Now it has
come to our ears that one Mauricius, who
lately became a monk in the monastery of
Barbacianus, has fled from the same monas-
tery, taking other monks with him. In this
case the hastiness of the aforesaid Barbacianus
inculpates him exceedingly in our sight, in that
he rashly tonsured a secular person without
even previous probation. Did we not write
to you that you should prove him first, and
then, if he were fit, should make him abbot ?
Even now, then, look well after him whom you
chose. For you are delinquent in his delin-
quency, if he has begun so to demean himself
as to shew himself unfit to have the govern-
ment of brethren.

Further, let your Fraternity more strictly
interdict all monasteries from venturing by
any means to tonsure those whom they may
have received for monastic profession before

5 Bishop of Catana in Sicily, to whom a previous epistle
(Ep. XXII.,not here translated)on thesame subject is addressed.
Several years previously he had been summoned to Rome to
answer to certain charges against him, but had been honourably
acquitted. Cf. I. 72 ; II. 33.


EPISTLE XXXV.


45


they have completed two years in monastic
life. But in this space of time let their life
and manners be carefully proved, lest any one
of them should either not be content with
what he had desired or not keep firm to what
he had chosen. For, it being a serious matter
that untried men should be associated under
obedience to any master, how much more
serious is it that any who have not been proved
should be attached to the service of God ?

Further, if a soldier should wish to become
a monk, let no one for any cause whatever
presume to receive him ^ without our con-
sent, or before it has been reported to us.
If this rule is not diligently observed, know
that all the guilt of those that are under thee
redounds on thyself, seeing that thou provest
thyself by the very facts of the case to be too
little anxious about them.

EPISTLE XXXL

To LiBERTINUS, EX-PR^TOR.

Gregory to Libertinus, &c.

What straits you are in with regard to the
things of this world is not unknown to us.
But, since to those who are placed in the
utmost tribulation the only comfort is the
mercy of the Creator, rest your hope on Him,
and turn to Him with your whole heart, Who
both justly allows whom He will to be afflicted
and will mercifully deliver one who trusts in
Him. To Him, then, give thanks, and pa-
tiently endure what has been brought upon
you. For it is the part of a right mind not
only to bless God in prosperity, but also
in adversities to join in praising Him. In
these things therefore that you are suifering
let no murmur against God creep into your
heart, since for what purpose our Creator thus
works is unknown. For perchance, magni-
ficent son, thou didst offend Him in some-
thing when in a state of prosperity, from which
He would purge thee by kindly bitterness.
And so neither let temporal affliction break
thee down nor losses of thy goods distract
thee, since if, returning thanks in adversity,
thou make God propitious to thee by thy
patience, both the things that were lost are
multiplied, and in addition to this, eternal
joys held out to thee. I beg thee, however,
not to take it amiss that we have written
through Romanus the guardian to order twenty
suits of clothing to be supplied from us to
your servants, seeing that things, however
small, which are offered from the goods of the
blessed Apostle Peter are always to be taken
for a great blessing, since he will have power


both to bestow on you greater things, and
to hold out to you eternal benefits with
Almighty God. The month of June, Indie-
tion 3.

EPISTLE XXXV.
To EuLOGius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

In the past year I received the letters of
your most sweet Holiness ; but on account
of the extreme severity of my sickness have
been unable to reply to them until now. For
lo, it is now almost full two years that I have
been confined to my bed, afflicted with such
pains of gout that I have hardly been able
to rise on feast-days for as much as
three hours space to solemnize mass. And
I am soon compelled by severe pain to lie
down, that I may be able to bear my torment
with intervening groans. This pain of mine
is sometimes moderate, and sometimes ex-
cessive : but neither so moderate as to depart,
nor so excessive as to kill me. Hence it
comes to pass that, being daily in death, I am
daily debarred from death. Nor it is surpris-
ing that, grievous sinner as I am, I am long
kept confined in the prison of such corruption.
Whence I am compelled to exclaim, Brino;
my soul out of prison^ that I may confess thy
name (Ps. cxli. 8). But, since I am not yet
worthy to obtain this by my prayers, I beg
that the prayer of your Holiness may aftbrd
me the aid of its intercession, and deliver me
from the weight of sin and corruption into that
liberty, which you know well, of the glory of
the children of God.

Your to me most sweet and ever to be
honoured Blessedness has informed me in
your letter that our common son Anatolius,
deacon of the city of Constantinople, had
written to you to say that certain monks from
the parts about Jerusalem had come to me
to make some enquiry concerning the error of
the Agnoitce 7, and you say that he begged
your Holiness to write to me to express your
opinion with respect to this enquiry. But
neither have monks come to me from the
parts about Jerusalem to make any enquiry,
nor do I think that the said our common son


* See III. 65, note i.


7 The Agnoetee or Themistiani arose in connexion with the
Monophysite controversy in the sixth century, being led by
Themistius, a deacon ol" Alexandria, who taught the limitation of
the human knowledge of Christ, referring especially to Mark xiii.
32, and John xi. 34. The majority of the Monopliysites rejected
his view, which was condemned also by the ortliodox. Eulogius
of Alexandria, to whom the letter before us is addressed, wrote
a treatise against the Agnoetse, from which extracts are given
by Photius. Sophronius, patriarch of Jerusalem, pronounced
the anathema against Tliemistius, On the same subject, of. Ep.
XXXIX. below. Gregory's arguments in Ep. XX XIX. against
the views of the Agnoetae are interesting to English readers at
the present day, when similar views have been lately put forward
and discussed.


46


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


can have told you in liis letters what was not
the case ; but I suspect that the interpreter
has mistaken the meaning of his letters. For
the same deacon, now more than two years
ago, wrote to me that monks had come from
the aforesaid parts to the city of Constanti-
nople making such enquiries, and he desired
to ask me what I thought. To him, long
before I received your letters, I made the
very same reply against that same heresy
as I found afterwards in the epistle of your
Holiness : and I returned great thanks to
Almighty God that concerning all questions
the Fathers of the Romans and of the Greeks,
whose followers we are, have spoken with one
spirit. For in many parts I found this your
epistle to be as though I had been reading
the writings of the Latin Fathers against the
aforesaid heresy. And consider how much
I must love and praise the excellence of my
most holy brother, in whose mouth I recog-
nised the venerable Fathers, whom I love
so much. Praise therefore be to Him, to
Him be glory in the highest, of whose gift the
voice of Mark still cries aloud in the See
of Peter ^; from .the effusion of whose spirit,
when the priest enters into the Holy of Holies
for searching into mysteries, spiritual bells
resound in holy Church, as in the tabernacle,
from the words of preaching. Right, then, and
highly to be praised is your preaching. But
we implore the Almighty Lord to keep you
long even in this life, that from the organ
of God, which you are, the voice of truth may
in this world sound more widely. And for
me, I pray you, intercede, that the way of
this pilgrimage, which has become too rough
for me may with speed be finished, to the
end that I, who cannot by my own merits,
may by yours be able to attain to the promises
of the eternal country, and to rejoice with the
citizens of heaven.

EPISTLE XXXVI.
To Maximus, Bishop of Salona9.

Gregory to Maximus, &c.

When our common son the presbyter Vete-
ranus came to the Roman city, he found me so
weak from the pains of gout as to be quite
unable to answer thy Fraternity's letters my-
self. And indeed with regard to the nation
of the Sclaves % from which you are in great
danger, I am exceedingly afflicted and dis-
turbed. I am afflicted as suffering already in

8 See Lib. VII. 40.

9 For a suminaiy of previous dealings with Maximus of Salona,
and his long defiance of the authority of Rome, see III. 47,
note 2. It appears from this epistle that all former insubor-
dination, which had called forth such fulminalions, was now
fully condoned.

J Cf. IX. 9.


your suffering : I am disturbed, because they
have already begun to enter Italy by way of
Istria. Furtlier, of Julian the scribo ^, what
shall I say, seeing that I see everywhere how
our sins find us out. so as to cause us to be
disturbed by the nations from without and by
judges from within ? But be not at all sad-
dened by such things, since those who shall
live after us will see worse times ; so much so,
tliat they will regard us as having had happy
days in comparison with their own. But, so
far as thy Fraternity has power, thou oughtest
to oppose thyself in behalf of the poor, in
behalf of the oppressed. And, ev-en if thou
shouldest be unable to do any good, the very
devotion of thy heart, which Almighty God
has given, is enough for Him. b^or it is
written. Rescue them that are drawn unto deaths
and forbear not to deliver them that are ready to
be slain (Prov. xxiv. 1 1). But if thou shouldest
say, My powers are insufficient, He who sees
into the heart understands. In all that thou
doest, then, desire to have Him Who sees into
the heart well-pleased with thee. But what-
ever there is whereby He may be pleased omit
not thou to do. For human terrors and favours
are like smoke, which is snatched by a light
breeze and vanishes away. Know this most
assuredly, that no one can please God and
bad men. Let, therefore, thy Fraternity esteem
thyself to have pleased Almighty God in such
degree as thou knowest thyself to have dis-
pleased froward men. Yet let thy defence of
the poor itself be moderate and grave, lest, if
anything be done too rigidly, men should
thiiik you actuated by the pride of youth.
But our defence of the poor must needs be
found of such sort that both the humble may
feel protection and oppressors may not easily
find what out of a malevolent disposition they
may blame. Attend, then, to what is said to
Ezekiel, Son oj man, unbelievers and destroyers
are with thee, and thou dost dwell among
scorpions (Ezek. ii. 6). And the blessed Job
says, / have been a brother of drago)is, and a
companio7i of owls (Job xxx. 29). And Paul
says to his disciples, Iji the midst of a crooked
ajid perverse ?iatio/i, among whom ye shine as
lights in the woiid (Philip, ii. 15). We ought,
then, to walk all the more cautiously as we
know that we are living among the enemies
of God. Further, with regard to the Pho-
tinianists, let thy Fraternity pay the utmost
attention ; and, as thou hast begun, study
how to recall them to the bosom of holy
Church. But, if any should wish to come to
me, and to receive an explanation, let them
first make oath that they will not permit their

2 As to the designation Scribo, see II. 32, note 7 ', V. 30^
note 8. As to this Julian, so described, cf. IX. 41.


EPISTLE XXXIX.


47


followers to persist in their error even after an
explanation has been received. And then let
thy Hohness promise them that they will suffer
no wrong from me, but that I will give them
an explanation. If they should acknowledge
the truth, let them accept it ; if they should
not acknowledge it, I will dismiss them un-
harmed. But, if any of them should wish to
come to us against you, let thy Fraternity by
no means detain them ; for, when they come,
they shall either accept an explanation, or
assuredly they will not see that land any more.

EPISTLE XXXVII.
To Innocent, Pr/Kfect of Africa.

Gregory to Innocent, &c.

The lucid eloquence of your Eminence,
seasoned with the honey of the heart, has so
infused its savour into our inmost soul, and
ravished us with love of it, that both what you
write sounds sw^eet, and what you do has a
pleasant savour ; nor this without good cause,
since one who is accomplished in good studies
is great in the eye of judgment, and not of
partiality. Further, as we understand that
you have taken upon you the belts 3 of the pre-
fecture, sadness is mingled with our joy. For
on the one hand we are rejoiced for the pro-
motion of our most sweet son, but are sad-
dened- on the other, because we feel in fact
from our own sorrow how heavy a burden it is
in times of confusion to be advanced to high
positions. Wherefore all pains ought to be
taken that troublesome circumstances may
become an occasion of reward. For, as you
know, corn springs from land that is full of
thistles, and the rose is produced from thorns.
While, then, you have a time given you meet
for sowing, delay not to sow the seed of good
works, that in the day of harvest you may
carry home the greater armfuls of joy, and
from good service in a transitory dignity may
come to eternal glory. Knowing, then, of the
pains you have taken in the preparation of
swift-sailing vessels 4, we relieve your anxiety
by wished for news, informing you that, by the
mercy of God, we have come to terms about
peace with the king of the Lombards until the
month of March in the coming fourth Indiction.
Whether it will hold or not we know not, since
the said king is reported to have died since,
though the fact so far is held to be uncertain 5.


2 Cingula. "Speciatim cingnliim adhibetur in re militari.
Est enim militiae insigne ; et metonymice pro ipsa militia poni-
tur." (Facciolati.)

4 Dromo7iibns. " Est etiam hoc nomine genus navis longze,
transvectioiiibus aptse, a celeritate dictaj (6p6/ixos), a I'j'igantitte,
cutter, yacht, carvel : cujus mentio fit in Cod. lib. i, tit. 27, leg. 2,
et apud Cassiod. 1. 5, Ep. XVII." (Facciolati.)

5 It was not the fact. The Lombard King Agilulph lived till
A.D. 616.


We have done what you wrote to ask us to
do about Anamundarus, and would that the
result might answer to our wish ; for, as far as
we are concerned, we do not deny the succour
of our intercession to the afflicted.

As to your wishing the book on the exposi-
tion of holy Job to be sent to you, we alto-
gether rejoice at your earnest desire ; since w^e
see that your Eminence earnestly desires what
may both prevent you from going entirely out-
side yourself, and bring your heart back to
itself after being distracted by secular cares.
But, if you desire to be satiated with delicious
food, read the works of the blessed Augustine,
your countryman, and seek not our chaff in
comparison with his fine wheat.

Furthermore, we have learnt from the testi-
mony of Hilarius our Chartularius what
patronage and what kindness your Glory has
bestowed in the interests of the poor of the
blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, who loves
you. On this account, returning you abun-
dant thanks, we implore the mercy of Almighty
God, that He would defend you wdth the pro-
tection of His grace, and permit neither bad
men to prevail against you without, nor
malignant spirits within ; but that He would
of His mercy so order your doings in His fear
that, as He has made you glorious among
men, He may also make you so after the
course of a long life in the number of His
saints.


EPISTLE XXXIX.

To EuLOGius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

As cold water to a thu'sty soul, so is good
news from a far country {Vxoy, xxv. 25). But
what can be good news to me, so far as con-
cerns the behoof of holy Church, but to hear
of the health and safety of your to me most
sweet Holiness, who, from your perception
of the light of truth, both illuminate the same
Church with the word of preaching, and mould
it to a better way by the example of your
manners ? As often, too, as I recall in my
heart your oneness of mind with me, and feel
that I remain fixed in your heart, I give
thanks to Almighty God that charity cannot
be divided by distance of place. For, though
in body we are far disjoined, yet in soul we
are indivisible.

Our common son Anatolius the deacon ^
has notified to me in his letters that in the
royal city nothing ecclesiastical has at any
time been disturbed from earthly causes. But
I believe that he had before announced to me


6 At this time Gregory's apocrisiarius at Constantinople.


48


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


how your Blessedness had spoken in the cause
of the Church. And I rejoice to think that,
where you chanced to be present, I do not
consider that there was any want of me. For
I know that you, as a minister of the truth,
a follower of Peter, and a preacher of Holy
Church, would speak what ought to have been
heard through the mouth of a teacher from the
Apostle Peter's See 7.

Moreover, before these days, when Abramius
of Alexandria came to me, I had written in reply
to your Holiness both what I thought of your
writings which you issued against the Agnoite
heretics^, and why I had been so late in replying.
But the said Abramius, compelled by difficul-
ties of navigation, is reported to have delayed
long in the city of Naples ; and so I write
again in the same sense in which I had for-
merly written, since in your teaching against
the heretics that are called Agnoitae there was
much for us to admire ; but to displease us
there was nothing. And in the same sense I
had already written at length to our son Anato-
lius the deacon. Moreover, your doctrine so
agreed in all respects with the Latin Fathers
that I find, not to my surprise, that in diverse
languages the Spirit has not been diverse.

For, as to what you have said about the
fig-tree, Augustine speaks aptly in the same
sense ; for, when the evangelist subjoined.
For the time of figs was not yet (Mark xi. 13),
it is plainly sbjwn that the figs which the Lord
had sought were fruit in the synagogue, which
had the leaves of the Law, but not the fruit
of works. For the Creator of all things could
not be ignorant that the fig-tree had no fruit ;
which was a thing that all might know, since it
was not the time of figs. But concerning
what is written, That the day and hour neither
the Son nor the angels know (Mark xiii. 32),
your Hohness has quite rightly perceived that
this is most certainly to be referred, not to the
said Son with rtspect to His being the Head,
but with respect to His body, which we are.
With regard to which matter, the same blessed
Augustine in many places adopts this sense
{Qii(Bst. lib. Ixxxiii. q. 60; lib, 1 de Trinit.,
c. 12 ; in psalm vi., i7zit. ; inps. xxxiv. sej'm. 2).
He mentions also another thing that may be
understood of the same Son, namely that
Almighty God sometimes speaks in a human
manner, even as He says to Abraham, Now
I k?iow that thou fearest God (Genes, xxii. 12).
It was not that God then came to know that
He was feared, but that He then made Abra-
ham know that he feared God. For, as we
speak of a glad day, not meaning that the day
itself is glad, but that it makes us glad, so


7 Cf. VII. 40.


8 See X. 35, note 7.


also the Almighty Son says that He does
not know the day which He causes not to
be known; not that He Himself does not
know it, but that He does not allow it to be
known. Whence also the Father alone is said
to know it, because the Son Who is consub-
stantial with Him has His knowledge of what
the angels are ignorant of from His divine
nature, whereby He is above the angels.
Whence also it may be more nicely under-
stood thus ; that the Only-begotten, being
incarnate and made for us a perfect man,
knew indeed in the nature of His humanity
the day and hour of the judgment, but still
it was not from the nature of His humanity
that He knew it. What then He knew in it
He knew not from it, because God, made
man, knew the day and hour of the judgment
through the power of His Deity : as also at
the marriage, when the Virgin Mother said
that wine was wanting. He replied, Woman,
what have I to do with thee ? Mine hour is not
yet come (Joh. ii. 4). For it was not that the
Lord of the angels was subject to the hour,
having, among all things which He had created,
made hours and times ; but, because the
Virgin Mother, when wine was wanting, wished
a miracle to be done by Him, it was at once
answered her. Woman, zvhat have I to do with
thee? As if to say plainly. That I can do a
miracle comes to me of my Father, not of my
Mother. For He who of the nature of His
Father did miracles had it of His mother that
He could die. Whence also, wiMtn He was
on the cross, in dying He acknowledged His
mother, whom He commended to the disciple,
saying. Behold thy mother (Joh.. xix. 27). He
says, then. Woman, what have I to do with
thee? Mine hour is not yet come. — That is,
" In the miracle, which I have not of thy
nature, I do not acknowlege thee. When
the hour of death shall come, I shall acknow-
ledge thee as my mother, since I have it of
thee that I can die." And thus the know-
ledge, which He had not of the nature of
humanity whereby He was with the angels
a creature, this He denied that He had with
the angels, who are creatures. The day, then,
and the hour of the judgment He knows as
God and man, but for this reason, that God
is man. It is moreover a thing quite mani-
fest, that whoso is not: a Nestorian cannot
in any wise be an Agnoite. ~TLor with what
meaning can one that confesses that the very
Wisdom of God was incarnate say that there
is anything that the Wisdom of God is ig-
norant of? It is written, In the beginning was
the Word^ and the Word zvas with God, and
the Word was God. All things were made by
him (Joh. i. i). If all things, then without


EPISTLE XLII.


49


doubt the day and hour of the judgment.
Who then can be so senseless as to presume
to say that the Word of the Fatlier made what
He is ignorant of? It is written also, Jesus
knowing that the Father had given all things
into his hands (Job xxii. 3). If all things,
certainly both the day and the hour of the
judgment. Who, then, is so foolish as to say
that the Son received into His hands what He
knows not?

But, with respect to the passage in which
He says to the women about Lazuras, JVhere
have ye laid him (Joh. xi. 34), I felt exactly as
you felt, that, if they say that the Lord did
not know where Lazarus had been buried, and
for that reason enquired, they will undoubt-
edly be compelled to acknowledge that the
Lord did not know in what places Adam and
Eve had hidden themselves after their sin,
when He said in Paradise, Adam^ where art
thoic (Gen. iii. 9) ? or when He chides Cain,
saying, Where is Abel thy brother (Gen. iv. 9) ?
But, if He did not know, why did He forthwith
add. Thy b rather'' s blood crieth imto me from the
ground 1 However, on this passage Severianus
Gabalensis speaks differently, saying that the
Lord spoke thus to the women as it were in
the way of rebuke, in that He enquired where
they had laid the dead Lazarus ; as if with
plain reference to the sin of Eve He had said,
I placed the man in Paradise, whom you have
placed in the sepulchre.

But. to these things our said common son
Anatolius the deacon has replied by putting
another question : — What if it should be ob-
jected to me that, even as He who is immortal
vouchsafed to die that He might deliver us from
death, and He who is eternal before all time
willed to become subject to time, so the
Wisdom of (jod vouchsafed to take upon
Himself our ignorance that He miglit deliver
us from ignorance ? But 1 have not yet given
him any reply to this, having been confined
until now by grievous sickness. Now, how-
ever, through your prayers I have already
begun to recover; and, if I should so recover
as to be able to dictate, with the help of the
Lord I will reply to him. To you it is not for
me to say anything on this subject, lest I
should seem to teach you what you know,
seeing that even me^iii ines lose their power
of healing, if applied to sound and strong
members.

Furthermore, we apprize you that in this
place we suffer from serious difficulty for want
of good interpreters. For there are none who
can express the sense, A\hile all ever try to
translate the words exactly : and so they con-
fuse the whole sense of what has been said.
Whence it comes to pass that we are by no

VOL. XIll. , X


means able without severe labour to under-
stand what has been translated.

I have received the blessing of Saint Mark
the Evangelist and of your Blessedness. And
I have been desirous of sending you some
timi)er ; but the ship which came was too
small to carry it. And yet even that which
the Alexandrians saw when they came is of
small size. For I had prepared some that is
much larger for you, which has not yet been
conveyed to the Roman city : for I waited
for it to be conveyed when the Alexandrian
ship should arrive ; and it has remained in
the place where it was felled.

May Almighty God long guard your life
for the edification of Holy Church, and in-
spire you to pray earnestly for me ; that, being
pressed down by my own sins, I may be lifted
up before Almighty God by your prayers.


EPISTLE XLII.
To EusEBius, Archbishop of Thessa-

LONICA.

Gregory to Eusebius, &c.

If, most dear brother, we consider atten-
tively how great is the excellence of peace,
we shall recognize with what earnestness it
should be cultivated by us. For indeed our
Lord and Redeemer vouchsafed to leave and
give it as a great boon to His disciples, that
He might thereby make those who were united
to Him in firmness of faith His associates in
loving participation with Himself. For it is
written. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they
shall be called the children of 6^^^(Matth. v. 9).
Whosoever, then, desires to be the father's
heir, let him, by keeping peace, not refuse
to be his child. For he who gives place to
discord surely makes himself to be without
lot in so great a gift. Seeing then that by
the mercy of God the purity of thy faith has
been declared to us, as was meet, with catholic
rectitude, we are taken up with great surprise
that thou shouldest suffer those wdiom thou
knowest to beiieve well and to think aright
to be needlessly scandalised by the fault of
certain persons, so that the reputation of thy
Fraternity is clouded by the guilt of others.
For how can one avoid suspicion of error who
extends sufferance to them that are in error?
Or what estimate of himself can he expect,
if he provides not for purging by open satis-
faction what fervour of foith requires to be
purged ?

For indeed it is said that Luke thy i)res-
byter and Peter refuse to receive the Chal-
cedonian synod, and that on this account the
hearts of thy orthodox children are perturbed


50


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


with no slight offence 9. And, since their zeal
is not only to be praised but also to be
altogether cherished, we exhort that the care
of thy Fraternity hesitate not to investigate
the matter with all activity and solicitude.
And, if those persons should be found innocent
of that pravity, remove offence from the minds
of thy children by giving them satisfaction,
and among all heresies anathematise especially
Severus and Nestorius, so that purification
may engender charity among those with whom
a sinister suspicion concerning those heretics
has, out of love of the faith, produced dissen-
sion ; and that one feeling of concord may
salubriously knit together those whom a pure
and single confession of catholic truth unites.
Nor let the doubters be thought unworthy
of satisfaction, since we are instructed by the
Divine voice, Despise not one of these who are
the least (Matth. xxviii. i8). Whoso, then, de-
sires not that he who instructs us should be
despised, let him not reject the words of the
instructor ; since he also of whom our Re-
deemer testified that he was a vessel of
election unto Himself admonishes us to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace
(Ephes. iv.). Hence whosoever refuses not to
be held by this bond of salvation, let him
study the things that make for peace, and
afford no place for the foe ; so that, having
been enabled to advance by the fierce dis-
sension of bretliren, he may be more stoutly
trampled on, when unity is established.

If however, as we do not expect, they
should be found to be wounded by the dart
of this error, the cure of ecclesiastical exhor-
tation must be applied to them, so that they
may either remam among the Lord's sheep
if healed, or be cut off from the unity of the
ecclesiastical body ; to the end that from
a slight loss there may be a great gain, and
that the removal of a part may make the
whole body free. For it is the care also of
a provident shepherd not to delay casting out
from consort with his sound sheep a sickly
one that admits not of cure, lest it should
contaminate others with the taint of its sick-
ness, knowing that he cannot preserve the
soundness of the rest but by the ejeciion of
this one. Accordingly 1 once more warn you
in brotherly charity to investigate this matter
with the utmost vigilance, and to observe
what we have written with the utmost care,
lest by consort with others you should make
the right faith which you hold doubtful. For

9 Those who refused to accept the condemnation of "The
Three Chapters " by the fifth council alleged that it contravened
the Council of Chalcedon, It may be that the persons referred to
here, in their defence of what had been decreed in the fifth
council, had seemed to admit that it did contravene the fourth,
which they consequently were supposed to reject.


he who does not correct things that should be
cut off commits them. Wherefore you must
take thought with great solicitude and with
great provision in all ways, that the persons
of those men be not an offence to others, or
common opinion injurious to you ; that so
a shepherd's gains may accrue to your Fra-
ternity from the sheep committed to you all
the more as both sincere love and approved
care shall have made you solicitous for their
custody.

EPISTLE LXII.
To THE Neapolitans.

Gregory to the clergy and noble citizens of
Naples.

it is not a new thing, nor is it reprehensible,
that in the election of a bishop the votes of
the people should be divided between two
parties : but it is a serious matter when in
cases of this kind the election goes not by
judgment, but by favour only. For before
your letter reached us we had learnt from the
report of certain persons that the deacon
John, who has been elected by the other
party, has a little daughter. Hence, if they had
had a mind to attend to reason, neither would
others have elected him nor would he have
consented. For what presumption must his
be who dares to approach the episcopate while
convicted by the evidence of the little girl, of
not having had long control over his own body !
Moreover, Peter the deacon, who you say has
been elected by you, is, according to what is
said, quite without astuteness. And you know
that at the present time the person to be
constituted in the highest place of government,
should be one who knows how to be careful, not
only for the salvation of souls, but also with re-
gard to the external advantage and safeguard
of his subjects. But know ye turther that it has
come to our ears concerning him, that he has
given money on usury; which thing you ought
to enquire into thoroughly, and, if it is so,
elect another, and without delay hold your-
selves aloof from a person of tiiis kind. For
we will on no account lay hands on lovers oi
usury. If, however, after accurate enquiry
made, this should prove to be false (since his
person is unknown to us, and we know not
whether what has been reported to us of his
simplicity be true), he must needs come to us
with your decree in his favour, that, having
made careful enquiry into his life and manners,
we may at the same time become acquainted
with his intelligence ; and thus, in case of his
satisfying this enquiry, we may in him, with
the Lord's lielj), fulfil your ciesires. Further,
let it be your care to looi<. out also lor anothe:


EPISTLE LXIIl.


51


person who may be suitable, so tliat, if this one
should by any chance appear unfit for appoint-
ment to this order, there may be some one
else to whom you may transfer your choice.
For it will be a serious disgrace to your clergy,
in case of this man by any chance not being
approved, if they should say that they have
no one else fit to be elected.

EPISTLE LXIIL
To DoMiNicus, Bishop of Carthage.

Gregory to Dominicus, &c.

We have already learnt what great pestilence
has invaded the African parts ; and, inasmuch
as neither is Italy free from such affliction,
doubled are the groans of our sorrows. But
amid these evils and other innumerable calam-
ities our heart, dearest brother, would fail from
desperate distress, had not the Lord's voice
fortified our weakness beforehand. For long
ago to the faithful the trumpet of the Gospel
lesson sounded, warning them that at the ap-
proach of the end of the world wars and many
other things, which, as you know, are now
feared, would come to pass (Matth. xxiv. ;
Luke xxi.). We ought not, then, to be too
much afflicted in suffering things that we
knew of beforehand, as though they had been
unknown. Frequently also, in our considera-
tion of another's death, the kind of death may
be an alleviation. For what manglings, what
cruelties have we seen, where death was the
only remedy, and life was a torment ! Did not
David, when a choice of deaths was offered
him, refuse famine or the sword, and choose
that his people should fall under the hand of
God? Gather ye from this how great favour is
granted to such as perish under Divine smiting,
since they die by the call that was offered to
the holy prophet for a boon. Wherefore let us
return thanks to our Creator in all adversities,
and, trusting in His mercy, bear all things
patiently, since we sufter much less than we
deserve. Since, however, we are so scourged
temporally that we may not be left without
the consolation of life eternal, it is needful


(since we are not ignorant, through the an-
nouncements of these signs, that the Judge
Who is to come is at hand) that we should so
much the more, by zeal for good works and the
wailing of penitence, make secure our accounts
which we shall have to submit to His scrutiny ;
so that such great smitings may be to us,
by the favour of His grace, not the begin-
ning of damnation, but a purgation for our
good.

Since, however, the nature of our infirmity
is such that we cannot but grieve for tliose
who pass away, let the teaching of your
Fraternity be a consolation to tlie afflicted.
Instil into them that the good things which
are promised will remain with them ; so that,
strengthened by a most sure hope, they may
learn not to grieve for the loss of temporal
things in comparison with the gift to come.
Let your tongue, as indeed we believe it does,
restrain them more and more from the per-
petration of evil deeds; let it announce the
rewards of the good, the punishments of the
bad, so that those who have little love for
good things may at least be greatly afraid
of bad things, and keep themselves from the
things which must be punished. For to com-
mit things worthy of scourges when placed in
the midst of scourges is to be peculiarly proud
against the smiter, and provokes the incensed
one to fiercer anger. And it is a prime kind
of madness for any one to be unwilling .to
desist justly from his own evil, and to wish
God to cease unjustly from His vengeance.
But, since in all this tliere is need of Divine
help, let us, beloved brother, with united
prayers implore the clemency of Almighty
God, that He would both grant unto us thus
to acquit ourselves worthily, and mercifully
stir the hearts of the people to perform such
things ; to the end that, while we order our
actions wholesomely in His fear, we may be
counted worthy both to be delivered from
impending evils, and, by the leading of His
grace, without which we can do nothing, to
come to supernal joys.

The month of August, Indiction 3.


X 2


BOOK XL


EPISTLE I.

To John, Abbot.

Gregory to John, Abbot of Mount Sina ^
The Epistle of thy Humility testifies to the
holiness of thy life; whence we give great
thanks to Almiglity God, for that we know
that there are still some to pray for our sins.
For we, under the colour of ecclesiastical
government, are tossed in the billows of this
world, which frequently overwhelm us. But
by the protecting hand of heavenly grace we
are raised up again from the deep. Do you,
then, who lead a tranquil life in the so great
serenity of your rest, and stand as it were safe
on the shore, extend the hand of your prayer
to us who are on our voyage, or rather who
are suffering shipwreck, and with all the sup-
plications in your power help us as we strive
to reach the land of the living, so that not
only for your own life, but also for our rescue,
you may have reward for ever. May the Holy
Trinity protect thy Love with the right hand
of Its protection, and grant unto thee in Its
sight, by praying, by admonishing, by shewing
example of good work, to feed the flock com-
mitted to thee, that so thou mayest be able to
reach the pastures of eternal life with the
flock itself which thou feedest. For it is
written, My sheep shall cofne and shall find
pashires (John x. 27). And these pastures in
truth we find, when, freed from the winter of
this life, we are satisfied with the greenness of
eternal life, as of a new Spring.

We have learnt from the report of our son
Simplicius that there is a want of beds and
bedding in the Gerontocoiniiim 2, which has been
constructed by one Isaurus there. Wherefore
we have sent 15 cloaks, 30 racha?ice'^, and


1 No doubt the John called Cliiriacns, Schoiasiicits, and
Shiaita, commemorated as a saint on 30 March. Having entered
the monastery of Mount Sinai at the age of 16, he is said to have
retired thence to live the life of an anclioret, to have been elected
abbot at the age of 75, to have again after a time retired into
.solitude, and to have died early in the 7th century. While abbot,
he wrote a work called Scala (KAt/xaj) Paradisi, whence his
nc.me of Climactis. The monastery on Mount Sinai was a place
to which pilgrimages were made. Cf. IV. 46.

2 Properly a hospital for aged persons.

3 The meaning of the word rai Iinna, racana, or rachina, is
uncertain. It occius again in XI. 78, where Barbara and Anto-
nina, two young ladies at Constantiiioijle, are thanked tor a pre-
sent of two racnncp, u hich they had alleged to be of their own


15 beds. We have also given money for the
purchase of mattresses and for their transport,
which we beg thy Love not to disdain, but to
supply them to the place for which they have
been sent. Given on the day of the Kalends
of September, Indiction 4.

EPISTLE XIL
To Conon, Abbot of Lirinus {Lerins).

Gregory to Conon, Abbot of the Monastery
of Lirinus 4.

The carefulness of persons in authority is
the safeguard of subjects, since one who
watches over what is entrusted to him avoids
the snares of the enemy. But how skilful thou
art in ruling the brethren, and how earnestly
watchful in keeping guard over them, we have
learnt from the report of our most reverend
brother and fellow-bishop Mennas s. And as
our hearing of the unwary remissness of thy
predecessor often saddened us, so the careful-
ness of thy foresight gladdens us, since there
is no doubt that the safeguard of thy earnest-
ness is of profit for reward to thee, and for
example to do good to others.

But, since the more our adversary knows
himself to be guarded against on all sides, the
more he seeks to break in by hidden ways,
and strives with cunning art to overthrow his
opponent, let the watchfulness of thy Love
ever kindle itself to more ardent care ; and so,
with God's help, fortify all beforehand, that
the ravening wolf, running about hither and
thither, may have no place for entering among
the Lord's sheep. Be it then thine earnest
endeavour, the grace of our Redeemer aiding
thee, to prohibit and in all ways guard those
who are committed to thee from gluttony,
from pride, from avarice, from idle speaking,
and from all uncleanness ; that by so much
the greater reward may accrue to thee from
the government committed to thee as thy sub-
jects, through thy vigilance, shall be con-
querors against the iniquities of the adversary.


workmanship. It is usually supposed to mean some wooller
article of dress, worn by monks. Others understand blankets.

4 See VI. 56, note 7. The abbot Stephen, addressed in that
letter, was probably the predecessor ot Conon.

5 He was bishop of Telona {Toulon). See XI. 58.


EPISTLE XIII.


53


Wherefore let the good feel thee sweet,
the bad a corrector. And even in correc-
tion know thou that this order should be ob-
served, that thou should est love persons and
visit faults ; lest, if thou shouldest perchance
be disposed to act otherwise, correction should
pass into cruelty, and thou shouldest destroy
those whom thou desirest to amend. For thou
oughtest so to cut away a sore as not to run
the risk of ulcerating what is sound ; lest, if
thou press in the steel more than the case
requires, thou injure him whom thou art in
haste to benefit. For let thy very sweetness
be wary, not remiss ; and let thy correction be
loving, not severe. But let the one be so sea-
soned by the other that both the good may
have, in loving, something to beware of, and
the bad, in fearing, something to love.

Attend carefully to these things, most be-
loved son ; earnestly observe them ; that, when
through such management thou shalt have
oiven back safe to God those whom thou hast
received from Him, thou mayest be -counted
worthy in the day of eternal retribution to hear
Him say, Well done, thou good afid faithful ser-
vant : because thou hast been faithful iji a few
things, I will set thee over numy things : enter
into the joy of thy Lord (Luke xix. 17). Fur-
ther, we desire that our son Columbus the
presbyter, who is commended to thy Charity
by his own merits, may advance in thy love
from our commendation also.

EPISTLE XIII.

To Serenus, Bishop of Massilia
{Marseilles) ^.

Gregory to Serenus, &c.

The beginning of thy letter so shewed thee
to have in thee the gK)od will that befits a
priest as to cause us increased joy in thy
Fraternity. But its conclusion was so at
variance with its commencement that such
an epistle might be attributed, not to one,
but to different, minds. Nay, from thy very
doubts about the epistle which we sent to thee
it appears how inconsiderate thou art. For,
hadst thou paid diHgent attention to the ad-
monition which in brotherly love we gave thee,
not only wouldest thou not have doubted, but
have perceived what in priestly seriousness it
was thy duty to do. For Cyriacus 7, formerly


6 Other epistles to Serenus of Marseilles are VI. 52, IX. 105,
XI. 58. In IX. 105 he had already been reproved for his in-
considerate zeal in breaking pictures of saints, which is the main
sabject of the present letter. His reply to the former letter,
ot which he had affected to suspect the genuineness, seems to
have called forth this longer and severer admonition.

7 Cyriacus, once abbot of Gregory's own monastery of St.
Andrew on the Coelian at Rome, is named in the former epistle
to Serenus (IX. 105) as its bearer. As to the cause of his being
sent at that time into Gaul, see notes to IX. 105, and IX. 109.


abbot, who was the bearer of our letter, was
not a man of such training and erudition as to
dare, as thou supposest, to make up another,
nor for thee to entertain this suspicion of false-
ness against his character. But, while putting
aside consideration of our wholesome admoni-
tions, thou hast come to be culpable, not only
in thy deeds, but in thy questionings also.
For indeed it had been reported to us that,
inflamed with inconsiderate zeal, thou hadst
broken images of saints, as though under the
plea that they ought not to be adored^.
iVnd indeed in that thou forbadest them to be
adored, we altogether praise thee ; but we
blame thee for having broken them. Say,
brother, what priest has ever been heard of as
doing what thou hast done ? If nothing else,
should not even this thought have restrained
thee, so as not to despise other brethren, sup-
posing thyself only to be holy and wise ? For
to adore a picture is one thing, but to learn
through the story of a picture what is to be
adored is another. For what writing presents
to readers, this a picture presents to the un-
learned who behold, since in it even the
ignorant see what they ought to follow ; in it
the illiterate read. Hence, and chiefly to the
nations 9, a picture is instead of reading. And
this ought to have been attended to especially
by thee who livest among the nations, lest,
while inflamed inconsiderately by a right zeal,
thou shouldest breed offence to savage minds.
And, seeing that antiquity has not without
reason admitted the histories of saints to be
painted in venerable places, if thou hadst
seasoned zeal with discretion, thou mightest
undoubtedly have obtained what thou wert
aiming at, and not scattered the collected
flock, but rather gathered together a scattered
one ; that so the deserved renown of a shep-
herd might have distinguished thee, instead
of the blame of being a scatterer lying upon
thee. But from having acted inconsiderately
on the impulse of thy feelings thou art said to
have so otfended thy children that the greatest
part of them have suspended themselves from
thy communion. When, then, wilt thou bring
wandering sheep to the Lord's fold, not being
able to retain those thou hast? Henceforth
we exhort thee that thou study even now to
be careful, and restrain thyself from this pre-
sumption, and make haste, with fatherly sweet-
ness, with all endeavour, with all earnestness,
to recall to thyself the minds of those whom
thou findest to be disjoined from thee.

For the dispersed children of the Church


8 See IX. 105.

9 Gentibus. The term i;enies was used not only to denote
Gentiles as usually understood, and pagan races as distinct frura
Christians, but also nations outside the Roman republic.


54


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


must be called together, and it must be shewn
then by testimonies of sacred Scripture that it
is uot lawful for anythin<j; made with hands to
be adored, since it is written, Thou shalt adore
the Lord thy God, and him only shalt serve
(Luke iv. 8). And then, with regard to the
pictorial representations whicli had been made
for the edification of an unlearned people in
order that, though ignorant of letters, they
might by turning their eyes to the story itself
learn what had been done, it must be added
that, because thou hadst seen these come to be
adored, thou hadst been so moved as to order
them to be broken. And it must be said to
them. If for this instruction for which images
were anciently made you wish to have them
in the church, I permit them by all means
both to be made and to be had. And explain |
to them that it was not the sight itself of the
story which the picture was hanging to attest
that displeased thee, but the adoration which
had been improperly paid to the pictures.
And with such words appease thou their
minds ; recall them to agreement with thee
And if any one should wash to make images,
by no means prohibit him, but by all means
forbid the adoration of images. But let thy
Fraternity carefully admonish them that from
the sight of the event portrayed they should
catch the ardour of compunction, and bow^
themselves down in adoration of the One Al-
mighty Holy Trinity.

Now we say all this in our love of Holy
Church, and of thy Fraternity. Be not then
shaken, in consequence of my rebuke, in the
zeal of uprightness, but rather be helped in
the earnestness of thy pious administration.

Furtherir.ore, it has come to our ears that
thy Love gladly receives bad men into its
society ; so much so as to have as a familiar
friend a certain presbyter who, after having
fallen, is said to live still in the pollution of
his iniquity ^ This indeed we do not entirely
believe, since he that receives such a one does
not correct wickedness, but rather appears to
give licence to otliers to perpetrate the like
things. But, lest haply by any subornation or
dissimulation he should prevail on thee to re-
ceive him and keep him still in favour, it
becomes thee not only to drive him further
from thee, but also in all ways to cut away his
excesses with priestly zeal. But as to others
who are reported to be bad, study to restrain
them from their badness by fatherly exhorta-
tion, and to recall them to the way of rectitude.
But, if (which God forbid) you seem not to


I Cf. Ep. LV, in this book to Virgilius of Aries, the metro-
politan of Serenus, in wiiich this laxity on the part of the latter is
alluded to.


profit them at all by -salutary admonition, these
also thou wilt take care to cast off far from
thee, lest, from their being received, their evil
doings should seem not at all to displease thee,
and lest not only they themselves should re-
main unamended, but others also should be
corrupted in consequence of thy reception of
them. And consider how execrable it is be-
fore men, and how perilous before the eyes
of God, if vices should seem to be nurtured
through him whose duty it is to punish crimes.
Attend therefore to these things diligently,
most beloved brother ; and study so to act as
both wholesomely to correct the bad and to
avoid breeding offence in the minds of thy
children by associating with evil men.

EPISTLE XXV.

To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
{Cagliari'^),

Gregory to Januarius, &c.

Know" ye that your Fraternity's solicitude
has pleased us, in that you have evinced, as
was riglit, pastoral vigilance for the guardian-
ship of souls. For indeed it has been reported
to us that you have forbidden a monastery to
be founded in the house of the late Epiphanius,
a reader of your Church, in accordance with
his will, for this reason ; lest, seeing that this
house was adjacent to a monastery of hand-
maidens of God 3, deception of souls should
thence ensue. And we praised you greatly
for guarding, as became you, by suitable fore-
sight against the snares of the ancient foe.
But, since we have been informed that the
religious lady Pompeiana is desirous of taking
away the handmaidens of God from this same
monastery, and restoring them to their own
monasteries whence they had been taken, and
establishing there a congregation of monks, it
is necessary that if this be accomplished, the
disposition of the deceased should in all re-
spects be adhered to. But, if this should not
be done, that the will of the testator may not
seem to be entirely frustrated, we will that —
inasmuch as the monastery of the late abbot
Urban, situated outside the city of Caralis, is
said to be left so destitute that not even one
monk remains there — we will, I say, that John,
whom the said Epiphanius appointed to be
abbot in the monastery which, as has been
said, he had determined should be founded in
his house, be ordained abbot {i.e. of the late
Urbaii^s monastery), provided only that there
be no impediment against him.

And let the relics which were to have been
deposited in the house of the aforesaid Epi-


2 See I. 62, and rt-jff .


See I. 48.


EPISTLE XXVIll.


5


phanins be deposited there, and let whatever
the same Epiphanius had contributed for the
intended monastery in his own house be in all
ways applied to the other ; that so, even though
for safeguard, as above wiitten, his will is not
carried out with regard to the place, the benefit
intended may nevertheless be preserved in-
violate. And indeed let your Fraternity, to-
gether with the guardian {defaisore) Vitalis,
arrange all this, and endeavour to order it so
advantageously that you may have your reward,
as for your praiseworthy prohibition, so also
for your good settlement of the case. Lastly,
though it may be superfluous to commend this
monastery to your Fraternity, yet we abund-
antly exhort you that, as becomes you, with
due regard to justice, you hold it as com-
mended to you 4.

EPISTLE XXVIII.
To Augustine, Bishop of the Angli s.

Gregory to Augustine, &c.

Glory to God in the highest^ and on earth
peace to men of good ^uill (ImI^q ii. 14) ; because
a grain of wheat, falling into the earth, has
died, that it might not reign in heaven alone ;
even Pie by whose death we live, by whose
weakness we are made strong, by whose suffer-
ing we are rescued from suffering, through
whose love we seek in Britain for brethren
whom we knew not, by whose gift we find
those whom without knowing them we sought.
But who can describe what great joy sprung
up here in the hearts of all the faithful, for
that the nation of the Angli through the oper-
ation of the grace of Almighty God and the
labour of thy Fraternity has cast away the
darkness of error, and been suffused with the
light of holy faith ; that with most sound
mind it now tramples on the idols which it
formerly crouched before in insane fear ; that
it falls down with pure heart before Almighty
God ; that it is restrained by the rules of holy
preaching from the lapses of wrong doing ;
that it bows down in heart to divine precepts,
that in understanding it may be exalted ; that
it humbles itself even to the earth in prayer,
lest in mind and soul it should lie upon the
earth. Whose is this work but His who says,
My Father worketh hitherto, and I work


4 For further reference to the subject of tliis letter, see XIV. 2.
It appears tliere tliat Epiplianius, mentioned in this letter, had
been a son-in-law of Pumpeiana. It appears further that this
lady afterwards accused both the bishop Januarius and the
defensor Vitalis of having unjustly vvitiiheld her son-in-law's
pious bequest, notwithstanding the admonition contained in this
letter.

5 For reasons for supposing this letter to Augustine to have
been written earlier than the 4th Indiction (a.d. 600-1), to which
it is assigned by tlie Benedictine Editors, and for a summaiy of
the whole series of letters relating to the English mission, see
Pz-olegojit., p. XXV.


(John V. 17)? who, to shew that He converts
the world, not by men's wisdom, but by His
own power, chose unlettered men as His
preachers whom He sent into the world ? And
He does the same even now, having deigned
to work mighty works in the nation of tlie
Angli through weak men. But in this hea-
venly gift, dearest brother, there is ground,
along with great joy, for most serious fear.
For I know that Almighty God has displayed
great miracles through thy Love in the nation
which He has willed to be chosen. Wherefore
thou must needs rejoice with fear for this same
heavenly gift, and tremble in rejoicing: —
rejoice, that is, because the souls of the Angli
are drawn by outward miracles to inward
grace ; but tremble, lest among the signs that
are done the infirm mind lift itself up to
presumption about itself, and from being
exalted' in honour outwardly, fall inwardly
through vain glory. For we ought to remem-
ber how, when the disciples returned with joy
from preaching, and said to their heavenly
Master, Loid, in thy name even the devils are
subject unto us (Luke x. 17), they straightway
heard, In this rejoice ?tot ; but rather rejoice
because your names are written in heaven
(lb. V. 20). For they had set their minds
on private and temporal gladness, when they
rejoiced in the miracles. But they are re-
called from private to common, from temporal
to eternal gladness, when it is said to them.
In this rejoice ye, because your names are written
in heaven. For not all the elect work
miracles ; and yet the names of all of them
are kept enrolled in heaven. For to the
disciples of the Truth there should not be joy,
save for that good which they have in common
with all, and in which they have no end to
their gladness.

It remains, therefore, dearest brother, that
in the midst of the things which through the
operation of God thou doest outwardly, thou
shouldest ever nicely judge thyself within,
and nicely understand both what thou art
thyself and how great is the grace in the
midst of that same nation for the conveision
of which thou hast received e\en the gift ot


doing signs. And if at any time thou snould-
est remember having oftended against our
Creator, whether in tongue or in deed, ever
recall these things to thy memory, that memory
of guilt may keep down the rising glory ot the
heart. And whatsoever thou ma} est receive,
or hast received, in the way of doing signs,
regard these powers as not granted to thyselt,
but to those for whose salvation they have
been conferred upon thee.

Further, there occurs to my mind, while
I think on these things, what took i)lace with


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


one servant of God, even one eminently
chosen. Certainly Moses, when he led God's
people out of Egy])t, as thy Fraternity knows,
wrought wonderful miracles. Fasting forty
days and nights in Mount Sina, he received
the tables of the Law ; among lightnings and
thunders, while all the people trembled, he
was attached to the service of Almighty God,
being alone with Him even in familiar col-
loquy (Exod. XXX., xxxi.) ; he opened a way
through the Red Sea ; he had a pillar of
a cloud to lead him on his journey ; to the
people when an hungered he gave manna from
heaven ; flesh to those who longed for it
he supplied in the wiklerness by a miracle,
even unto overmuch satiety (Exod. xiii., xiv.,
xvi.). But, when in a time of drought they
had come to the rock, he was distrustful, and
doubted being able to draw water from the
same, which still at the Lord's command
he opened without fail in copious streams.
But how many and great miracles after these
he did during eight and thirty years in the
desert who can count or search out (Exod.
xvii. ; Num. xx.)? As often as a doubtful
matter had troubled his mind, he resorted
to the tabernacle, and enquired of the Lord
in secret, and was forthwith taught concern-
ing it, God speaking to him (Fxod. xxxiii.
seq.). When the Lord was wrath with the
people, he appeased Him by the intervention
of his prayer ; those who rose in pride and
dissented in discord he engulphed in the jaws
of the gaping earth; he bore down his enemies
with victories, and shewed signs to his own
people. But, when the land of promise had
at length been reached, he was called into the
mountain, and heard of the fault which he
had committed eight and thirty years before,
as I have said, in that he had doubted about
drawing water from the rock. And for this
reason he was told that he might not enter
the land of promise (Num. xxvii.), Herein
it is for us to consider how formidable is the
judgment of Almighty God, who did so many
signs through that servant of His whose fault
He still bare in remembrance for so long
a time.

Wherefore, dearest brother, if we find that
even he whom we know to have been es-
pecially chosen by Almighty God died for
a fault after so many signs, with what fear
ought we to tremble, who do not yet know
whetlier we are chosen ?

But what should I say of the miracles of the
reprobate, when thy Fraternity well knows
what the Truth says in the Gospel; Mcviy
shall come iii that day saying to me, Lord iti
thy name ive have prophesied^ and in thy name
have cast out devils, aiid in thy name have done


many ivonderful 7iwrks. But I will say unto
them, I k?imv not ivho ye are: depart from me
all ye workers of iuiquiiy (Matth. vii. 22 ; Luke
xiii. 27)? Tlie mind, then, should be much
kept down in the midst of signs and miracles,
lest haply one seek therein one's own glory,
and exult in private joy for one's own exal-
tation. For through signs gains of souls should
be sought, and Flis glory by whose power
these very signs are done. But there is one
sign that the Lord has given us for which we
may exceedingly rejoice, and acknowledge the
glory of eleccion in ourselves, seeing that He
says. In this shall it be known that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another (John
xiii. 35). Which sign the prophet demanded,
when he said. Make ivith me. Lord, a sign for
good, that they "which hate fne may see it, and be
co?foundcd {Vs. Ixxxv. 17).

These things I sa)^, because I desire to abase
the mind of my hearer in humility. But let
thy very humility have its confidence. For
I, a sinner, maintain a most certain hope that
through the grace of our Almighty Creator
and Redeemer, our God and Lord Jesus
Christ, thy sins are already remitted, and thou
art chosen for this purpose, that those of
others may be remitted through thee. Nor
will you have sorrow for any guilt in the
future, while you strive to cause joy in heaven
for the conversion of many, 'truly the same
our Maker and Redeemer, speaking of the
repentance of men, says. Verily I say unio
you there will be joy in heaven over one sinner
that 7'epenteth, more than over niiieiy and ?iine
Just persons, ivhich 7ieed no repeniance (Luke
XV. 7). And if for one i:)enitent there is great
joy in heaven, of what kind may we believe
the joy to be for so large a people, converted
from its error, which, coming to faith, has
condemned by penitence the evil things it
did. \\\ this joy, then, of heaven and the
angels let us repeat the very words of the


anuels with which we


began


let us say there-


fore, let us all say, Glory to God in the highesty
and on earth peace to men of good zvill.

EPISTLE XXIX.
To Bertha, Queen of the Angli^.

Gregory to Bertha, &c.

They who desire, after earthly dominion, to
obtain the glory of a heavenly kingtiom ought
to labour earnestly to bring in gain to their
Creator, that they may be able to rise by the
steps of their operation to the things they long


6 As to the apparent inference from this letter that King
Ethelbeit of Kent had not been converted when it was wiitten,
and as to when it may have been sent to queen Beitha, see
Prolegotn., p. xxvi., note 2.


EPISTLE XXX.


57


for; as we are glad to know you do. For
indeed our most beloved son Laurentius the
presbyler, and Peter the monk, have brought
us word on their return to us how your
Glory has exhibited itself towards our most
reverend brother and fellow-bishop Augustine,
and how great succour and what charity you
have bestowed upon him. And we bless
Almighty God, who has been mercifully
pleased to reserve the conversion of the
nation of the Angli for your reward. For,
as through Helena of illustrious memory, the
mother of the most pious Emperor Constan
tine, He kindled the hearts of the Romans
into Christian faith, so we trust that He works
in the nation of the Angli through the zeal of
your Glory. And indeed you ought before
now, as being truly a Christian, to have in-
clined the heart of our glorious son, your hus-
band, by the good influence of your prudence,
to follow, for the weal of his kingdom and of his
own soul, the faith which you profess, to the
end that for him, and for the conversion of
the whole nation throush him, fit retribution
might accrue to you in the joys of heaven.
For seeing, as we have said, that your Glory
is both fortified by a right faith and instructed
in letters, this should have been to you neither
slow of accomplishment nor difficult. And
since, by the will of God, now is a suital)le
time, so proceed, with the co-operation of
divine grace, as to be able to make repara-
tion with increase for what has been neglected.
Wherefore strengthen by continual hortation
the mind of your glorious husband in love of
the Christian faith ; let your solicitude infuse
into him increase of love for God, and so
kindle his heart even for the fullest con-
version of the nation subject to him that
both he may offer, out of the zeal of your
devotion, a great sacrifice to the Almighty
Lord, and that the things related of you may
both grow and be in all ways proved to be
true : for your good deeds are known not only
among the Romans, who have prayed earnestly
for your life, but also through divers places,
and have come even to the ears of the most
serene prince at Con.-tantincp'e. Hence, as
great joy has been caused us by the consola-
tions of your Christianity, so also may there
be joy in heaven for your perfected work. So
acquit yourselves devotedly and with all your
might in aid of our above-named most reverend
brother and fellow-bishop, and of the servants
of God whom we have sent to 3 ou, in the con-
version of your nation that you may both reign
happily here with our glorious son your hus-
band, and after long courses of years may also
attain the joys of the future life, which know
no end. Now we pray Almighty God that He


would both kindle the heart of your Glory with
the fire of His grace to perform what we have
spoken of, and grant you the fruit of an
eternal reward for work well-pleasing to Hirn.

EPISTLE XXX.

To Venantius, Ex-Monk, Patrician of

Syracuse 7.

Gregory to Venantius, &c.

In addressing to you the greeting which is
due I was intending to speak of what I sufier.
But I think I need not relate to you what you
know. For I am tormented by })ains of gout,
which, afflicting not dissimilarly both me and
you, while they increase u])on us exceedingly,
have caused our life to decrease. In the midst
of them what else should we do but recall our
faults to mind, and give thanks to Almighty
God ? For we who have sinned in many
things from the pampering of the flesh are
purged by the affliction of the flesh. We are
to know also that present pain, if it converts
the mind of the afflicted one, is the end of
preceding guilt ; but, if it does not convert
to the fear of the Lord, is the beginning of
pain to follow. We must therefore take care,
and in entire conversion of heart watch to the
utmost of our power with tears, lest we pass
from torment to torments. We are also to
consider by how great a dispensation of loving-
kindness our Maker deals with us, in that He
continually smites us, who are worthy of death,
and still slays us not. For He threatens what
He will do, and yet does it not, that pains sent
in advance may alarm us, and, when we are
converted to the fear of the strict Judge, may
shield us from His animadversion when life is
over. For who may tell, who may count, how
many, sunk in their lechery, running headlong
also in blasphemies and pride, cominuing in
robberies and iniquities even to the (iay of
their deatii, have so lived in this world as
never to suffer even a headache, but by a
sudden stroke have been delivered to the fires
of hell ? W>, then, have a token that we
are not forsaken, in that we are continually
scourged, according to the testimony ot Scrip-
ture, which says, IV/wm the Lord loveih He
chasteneth^ a7id scoiirgeih evei-y son whom He
7-eceiveth (Heb. xii. 6). Wherefore under the
very stripes of God let us recall to mind both
His gifts and the losses of our guilt. Let us
consider what good things He has showered
upon our ill-doing, and what ill things we have


7 See I. 34, note 8. It is significant of Gregory's delicate tact,
that he does not in this letter, when his friend was siiflTering,
allude to his past renunciation of monastic life as among tliesins
to be repented of, or urge him to return to it, tliough that the
subject was still on his mind appears from his letter about the
same time to the Bishop of Syracuse (XI. 36).


58


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


committed under His goodness. Let us fulfil
what the Lord says through the prophet, Put
me 171 1-enienibi'ance^ that zve may plead together
(Isai. xliii. 26). Let us plead now in our
thought with God, that we be not hereafter
strictly judged by God. For what says Paul ?
If we would judge ourselves^ we should not be
judged of the Lord (i Cor. xi. -Tyi^. Whoso-
ever, then, would make haste to escape the
strictness of the sentence of the judgment to
come, let him, through the bitterness of peni-
tence, cut oif for himself all the sweetness of
the present life. Moreover, whatever gifts of
this kind there are, whose gifts are they but
our Maker's? But that should not be ac-
counted a gift of God fully to us which
separates us through delight in itself from
the love of God ; lest we should prefer the
things given to the Giver, and while receiving
good things, though ourselves evil, we should
be disjoined from His fear by that whereby we
ought to have grown in His fear. Now may
the Creator of all things, that is Almighty God,
pour into your heart by the inspiration of His
Spirit what we speak to you of by letter, and
cleanse you from all defilements of sin, and
grant you the joy of His comfort here, and
hereafter eternal rewards with Himself. I
beg that my most sweet daughters, the lady
Barbara and the lady Antonina, be greeted in
my name.

EPISTLE XXXII.

To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

When the bearer of these presents, Candidus
the abbot, came hither to ask for relics (which
have also been granted), as much as I rejoiced
in thy Fraternity's nursing aid, thy Fraternity's
care tor me being therein apparent, so much
was I distressed that I could not enjoy his
presence as I wished to do, seeing that he
found me sick, and, when he departed, left me
still in a state of weakness. For it is now a
long time since I have been able to rise from
bed. For at one time the pain of gout tor-
ments me, at anotlier a fire, I know not of
what kind, spreads itself with pain through my
whole body \ and it is generally the case that
at one and the same time burning pain racks
me, and body and mind fail me. Further,
what other great distresses of sickness beside
what I have mentioned I am affected by, I ani
unable to recount. This however I may briefly
say, that the infection of a noxious humour so
drinks me up that it is pain to me to live, and
I anxiously look for death, which alone I can
hope for to relieve my groans. Accordingly,
most holy brother, implore for me the com-


passion of divine loving-kindness, that it would
mercifully mitigate towards me the scourges
of its smiting, and grant me patience to endure,
lest (which God forbid) my heart break out into
impatience from excessive weariness, and the
guilt which might have been well cured through
stripes be increased by murmuring. Given in
the month of February, Indiction 4.

EPISTLE XXXIII.

To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

On the arrival here of a certain man of
Ravenna, I was smitten by most grievous
sorrow for that he told me of thy Fraternity
being sick from vomiting of blood. On this
account we have caused enquiry to be made
carefully and severally of those here whom we
know to be well-read physicians, and have
sent in writing to your Holiness their several
opinions and prescriptions. All, however, pre-
scribe before all else quiet and silence, which
I greatly doubt whether thy Fraternity can
have in thine own Church. And accordingly
it seems good to me that, when the Church
there has been provided for — whether with
such as may accomplish the solemnities of
mass, or with such as may take charge of the
episcopate, and maybe able to shew hospitality
and hold receptions, or such as may superin-
tend the guardianship of monasteries— thy
Fraternity should come to me before the
summer season, that I may, as far as I can,
take special charge of thy sickness, and keep
thee from being disturbed, since the physicians
say that the summer season is exceedingly
dangerous for this kind of sickness. And I
greatly fear lest, if thou shouldest have any
cares together with the unfavourableness of
the season, there might be further risk to thee
from this disorder. I too myself am very
weak, and it is in all respects advantageous
that thou shouldest, with the favour of God,
return to thy Church in health ; or certainly,
if thou art to be called, that thou shouldest be
called in the hands of thy friends ; and that
I, who see myself to be very near death, if
Almighty God should be pleased to call me be-
fore thee, should pass away in thy hands. But
if the circumstances of the present time stand
in the way of thy coming. Ago ^ may be treated
with, some small present being given him, that
he may himself send one of his people with
thee as far as Rome. If, then, thou feelest
thyself held heavily by this sickness, and


8 i.e, Agilulph, the Lombard king, referred to as Ago also
in IV. II. It was the Lombard occupation of a great part of
Italy at tl at time that was appreiiended as kely to impede
a journey from Ravenna to Rome.


EPISTLE XXXVI.


59


arrangest to come, thou must come witli few
attendants, since, while thou stayest witli me
in the episcopal residence (ediscopium), thou
wilt have daily attendance from this Church.

Furthermore, I neither exhort nor admonish
thee, but straitly charge thee, that thou by no
means presume to fast, since the physicians
say that the practice is very prejudicial to this
disorder ; except that, if by chance a great
solemnity demands it, I concede it five times
in the year. Thou must also refrain from
vigils ; and let the prayers which in the city of
Ravenna are wont to be said over tlie wax taper,
and the expositions of the Gospel which are
given by priests about the time of the Paschal
solemnity, be delivered by another. And by
no means impose on thyself, beloved, any
labour beyond thy powers. I have said this,
that, if thou shouldest feel thyself better, and
shouldest put off thy coming, thou mayest
know what to observe by my command.

EPISTLE XXXV.
To Barbara and Antonina^.

Gregory to Barbara, &c.

Having received your Glory's letters, which
spoke with tears for words, we, most beloved
daughters, are affected by no less sorrow than
yourselves for your father's sickness. For we
cannot account that sadness as extraneous
which is made our own by the law of charity.
But, since in no state of despair ought there
to be distrust in the mercy of our Redeemer,
raise your spirits for the comforting of your
father, place your hope in the hand of
Almighty God, and by His protection we trust
that He will guard you from all adversity, and
cheer your tribulation, and grant you to be
favourably disposed of according to your
father's desires. But should He pay the debt
of our human lot, even then let not any
despair crush you, nor the words of any
persons cause you alarm. For after (xod, Who
is the governor and protector of orphans, we
will be so solicitous in behalf of your most
sweet Glory, and will so make haste, with the
Lord's help, to provide as we can for your
advantage, that no rough handling of unjust
men may perturb you % and that we may repay
in all ways the debt we have contracted from
the goodness of your parents. And so may
heavenly grace nurture you with its favour
and defend you by its protection from all
evils, that your safety may become our joy.


9 Cf. I, 34, note 8.

^ The reason why trouble to the orphans of Venantius was
apprelien led appears further in the letter that follows to the
bishop of Syracuse.


EPISTLE XXXVL

To John, Bishop of Syracuse*.

Gregory to John, &c.

I have received your Fraternity's letters
telling me of the sickness of my most sweet
son the lord Venantius, and relating how all
things are going on about him. But when
I heard at one and the same time that he was
desperately and grievously sick, and that un-
fair men were laying claim to the property of
the orphans, the sorrow in my heart could
scarce contain itself. But in this there was
comfort, in that tears relieved my groans.
Your Holiness therefore ought not to neglect,
what should be your first care, to take thought
for his soul, by exhorting him, beseeching him,
putting before him God's terrible judgment,
and promising His ineffable mercy, so as to
induce him to return even at his last moments
to his former state of life 3, lest the guilt of so
great a fault should stand against him in the
eternal judgment. And then it is your duty
to take thought how his daughters, the ladies
Barbara and Antonina, may be disposed of,
so that no opportunity be aftbrded to bad men.
For after he had conjured me to take anxious
care for them, adding that I should see to
the disposal of them, he went on in his letter
to mention a thing which, when I consider
the matter, I have no doubt might stand in
the way. For he says that I should repeatedly
petition the most pious lord Emperor, that
he should himself cause provision to be made
for the disposal of them. You observe how
different this is from his former wish. And
1 fear lest an apt opportunity might hence be
given to men m Sicily who are seeking an
opportunity for interfermg in his affairs. For,
wnen this is known, what will those men do
who have already, as report goes, been at-
tempting to put a seal on his efiects + ? Would
not reason seem to be on their side, and to
afford them as it were a just ground for this
proceeding? If they should say, the girls have
been commended to the lord Emperor; we
cannot neglect the matter; it is at our peril
if we do ; we make the property safe till such
time as the lord Emperor may order them
to be taken to Constantinople ; — tell me,
I pray thee, what I could do in such a case,
wherein the father's commendation seems to


2 Cf. I. 34, note 8.

3 Viz. Monasticism, which Venantius had renounced in spite
of the earnest remonstrance of Gregory ten years previously.

4 It may have been that Venantius had filled some public
office, in connexion with which it was alleged that his estate
was liable to seizure by the government officials. Gregory evi-
dently believes that there is no such liabilicy ; but, in view of the
attempt to as>ert it, he is anxious that no pretext should be
afforded to the authorities lor taking charge of the projjerty of
the deceased, such as they might have had if the orphans had
been made wards of the Emperor.


6o


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


support a man that has authority. For he con
jures nie to see to their being so disposed of
that they may either be in the Roman city or
not be taken away from Sicily ; and he so acts
as to leave no way of either bringing them
hither or retaining them there. But, do you,
as far as you can, oppose these bad men.
Defend their substance for the sake of
Ahiiighty God as if it were your own : and,
if it is still possible, see to all opportunity
for wrong being removed with regard to the
will of the aforesaid lord Venantius. But,
if it is thought fit that they should be com-
mended to the palace, he ought not to impose
such a burden on me as to wish to charge
my soul with the care of the disposal of them ;
as to which be it enough that God Almighty
knows how I am taking thought. Hence
I have taken care to write at once to my
most beloved son the deacon Anatolius,
bidding him endeavour to speak with the
glorious patrician lady Rusticiana 5, and telling
him in what manner he should enquire and
inform me about the persons whose names
have been transmitted to me ; that so he may
inform us of all things speedily, and what is to
be done, may under the ordering of God be
arranged.

Furthermore, in the letters that have been
sent to us we find that your Fraternity has
been grieved at our not having wished you
to come hither, as though it had been on
account of some displeasure; whereas we
acted with a sole view to utility, knowing
that on account of persons in your locality
your presence there was exceedingly necessary.
But, lest you should hence suppose that we
have any feeHng or displeasure towards you
(which God forbid), if you have the will to
come to us, present yourself at a suitable time
at the threshold of the apostles. For, so far
as we are concerned, we so love your Charity
that we desire to see you often.

EPISTLE XXXVn.
To RoMANUS, Guardian {Defensorem),

Gregory to Romanus, Guardian of Sicily ^.

It has come to our knowledge that, if any
one has a suit against any clerics, thou causest
these clerics to be brought before thee for
judgment, setting at nought their bishops.
If this be so, seeing that it is evidently very
unsuitable, we order thee by this our authority
that thou presume not to do it any more.
But, if any one should have a suit against any
cleric, let him go to his bishop, tliat either


5 See II. 27, note 2.

6 For the appointment of Romanus, cf. IX. 18.


he may take cognizance himself, or at any
rate that judges may be deputed by him ; or,
if it should be a case for arbitration, let the
executive authority deputed by him compel
the parties to choose a judge. But, if any
cleric or lay person should have a suit against
a bishop, then thou oughtest to interpose,
so that either thou thyself mayest take cog-
nizance of the matter between them or that
on thy admonition they may choose for them-
selves judges. For, if each single bishop has
not his own jurisdiction reserved to him, what
else is done but that ecclesiastical order is
confounded through us by whom it ought to
be guarded ?

Further, it has been reported to us that,
certain clerics having been sent into penance
for fault requiring it by our most reverend
brother bishop John, thou hast on thy own
authority, without his knovvledge removed them
from it. Now, if this is true, know that thou
hast done a thing altogether unseemly, and
calling for no light reproof. Wherefore restore
these clerics wxtaouc delay to their bishop.
And beware of committing this fault in future :
for, shouldest thou be inattentive, know that
thou wilt incur our anger in no slight degree.

EPISTLE XXXVIIL
To Vitus, Guardian {Defensorem 7).

Gregory to Vitus, &c.

If thou art held bound by no condition or
liability to bodily service, and hast not been
a cleric of any other city, and if there is no
canonical objection to thee, it is our will and
pleasure, with a view to the advantage of the
Church, that thou receive the office of
Guardian of the Church, in order that thou
mayest execute incorruptly and diligently
whatever may be enjoined thee by us lor the
benefit of the poor ; using this privilege which
after deliberation we have conferred on thee,
so as to do thy diligence faithfully in accom-
plishing all that may be enjoined thee by us,
as having to render an account of thy doings
before the judgment of our God. This epistle
we have dictated for writing to Paterius,
secundicerio notario of our Church ^, and have
subscribed it

EPISTLE XL.

To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

Great infirmity constrains us, dearest broiher.


7 Cf. v. 29.

8 Priviiceritcs notariariim occ. III. 22. " Primiccrius^
Primus cujusqiie ordinis. — Secundicerius, Qui post primicerium
est in schola qualibet." D' Ay-nis Lexicon.


EPISTLE XLIV.


6i


irom which if we were free, we should seem
justly blamable. But since, while we are in
this ^fragile body, we cannot subsist but by
subservience to its weaknesses, we ought not
to blush for what necessity imposes on us.
And so, since physicians all say that to those
who suffer from eruption of blood fasts are
injurious, we exhort thy Fraternity by this
present address that, recalling to mind what
thou hast been accustomed to endure from
sickness, thou by no means impose on thyself
the labour of fasting 9. If, however, by the
mercy of God, thou knowest thyself to be so
far improved in health as to have sufficient
strength, we permit thee to fast once or twice
in the week. But of this it befits thee before
all things to take care, that thou in no wise
subject diy self to any feeling of irritation, lest
the sickness, which is believed to be now
lighter and as it were suspended, should be
experienced afterwards more heavily through
exasperation.

EPISTLE XLIV.
To RusTiciANA, Patrician »*>.

Gregory to Rusticiana, &c.

I have received the letters of your Excel-
lency, which altogether relieved me, while
. I was in a state of most grievous sickness, with
regard to your health, your devotion, and your
sweetness. One thing however I took amiss,
namely that in the same epistles to me what
might have been said once was said repeatedly ;
*'Your handmaiden," and "your handmaiden."
For, I having been made the servant of all
through the burdens of episcopacy, with what
reason does she call herself my handmaid
whose own I was before I undertook the epis-
copate? And so I beseech you by Almighty
God, that I may never find this word in what
you write to me. Further, the gifts which out
of a most pure and sincere heart you sent to
the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, have
been received and hung up there ^ in the pre-
sence of all the clergy. But my son, the mag-
nificent lord Symmachus, finding me ill from
pains of gout and almost despaired of, deferred
giving me your letters, and gave them long
after the veils had been received : and I found
afterwards in your Excellence's letters that they
were to have been borne to the Church of the
blessed Peter with a litany. And so this was
not done, because, as I have already said, we
received the veils before the letters. Never-
theless the aforesaid Symmachus did with your

9 Cf. Ep. XXXI 1 1., supra.
^0 See II. 27, note 2.

* The gifts that had been sent were, as appears below, veils or
Tiang'ng:s(j'?/rt) for the shrine of St. Peter in the Vatican basilica.


whole household what you wished us to do
with the clergy. But, even if the voices of
men were wanting, your offering itself has its
own voice before Almighty God. In His lov-
ing-kindness I trust that the intercession of
him whose body you have covered on earth
may protect you in heaven from all sins, and
in his provision rule your house, and in his
watchfulness guard it.

With regard to the affliction of gout which
you signify to us has come upon you, I am
both distressed and rejoiced exceedingly : re-
joiced, because the noxious humour, attacking
the lower parts of your body, has entirely left
the higher ones ; but distressed, because I fear
you suffer excessive pain in so very slender
a body. For where there is a denciency of
flesh, what strength can there be to resist
pain ? For as to myself, you know what I
used to be : but now bitterness of soul and
continual exasperation, and besides this the
affliction of gout so affects me that my body
is dried up even as if in burial. Hence it
comes to pass that I can rarely now rise from
bed. If, then, the pain of gout has reduced
the mass of my body to such dryness, what
must I think of your body, which was too dry
before the pains came on ?

As to the alms which you have bestowed on
the monastery of the blessed Apostle Andrew,
there is no need for me to say anydiing, since
it is written, Hide thine alms in the bosom of
a poor man^ and it shall pi-ay foi' thee (Ecclus.
xxix. 15). If then the good deed itself has its
voice in the secret ears of God, whether we
cry aloud or keep silence, this very thing which
you have well done cries aloud. Moreover
I declare that there are so great miracles, there
is so great care and custody of the monks in
this same monastery of the said apostle that it
is as if he himself were specially the abbot
of the monastery. For, to speak of a few
things out of many which I have learnt from
the narration of the abbot and the prior of
the monastery, two brethren were one day sent
out thence to buy something for the use of the
moriastery, one a junior who seemed to be
distinguished for prudence, the other a senior,
sent to be the guardian of the junior. Both
went forth, and from the money they received
as the price of what they were to purchase, he
who had been sent as the guardian of the
junior purloined something without the know-
ledge of the other. Having both of them
presently returned to the monastery, and
come to the threshold of the oratory, he who
had committed the theft fell down seized by
a demon, and began to be vexed. And, when
the demon had let him go, he was asked by
the monks who came round him whether per-


62


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


cliance he had purloined anything from what
he had received : he denied, and was a second
time vexed. Eiglit times he denied, and eight
times was vexed. But after his eighth denial
he confessed how much money he had pur-
loined. And repenting he acknowledged, pros-
trate on the earth, that he had sinned, and,
when he had undergone penance, the demon
came to him no more.

At another time also, on the anniversary of
the same apostle, while the brethren were rest-
ing during the mid-day hours, suddenly a cer-
tain brother, having iDecome blind with his
eyes open, began to tremble, to utter loud
cries, testifying by these cries that he could
not bear what he was suffering. The brethren
ran together to him, saw him blind with his
eyes open, trembling, and crying out, abstracted
from the scene around him, and having no
sense of anything that could be done exter-
nally. They lifted him in their hands, and
cast him before the altar of Saint Andrew the
Apostle, prostrating themselves also in prayer
for him. And he at once, coming to himself
again, declared what he had suffered ; namely
that a certain old man appeared to him, and
set a black dog at him to tear him, saying,
Why wouldest thou flee from this monastery?
And, when I could by no means have escaped
(said he) from the bites of the dog, certain
monks came, and besought that old man for
me, who straightway bade the dog depart, and
then I came to myself. And he. often after-
wards confessed, saying. On the day on which
I suffered these things I had had a design of
flying from this same monastery.

Another monk also secretly desired to de-
part from the same monastery. And, having
considered the matter in his mind, he would
have entered the oratory; but he was imme-
diately delivered to a demon and most sorely
vexed. But he used to be left by the demon,
and if he remained outside the oratory, he
would suffer no liarm ; but, if he attempted to
enter it, he was at once delivered to the evil
spirit and vexed. And, when this took place
frequently, he confessed his fault, namely that
he was thinking of going away from the monas-
tery. Then the brethren, assembled in his
behalf, bound themselves to continue in prayer
for him for three days, and he was so cured
that the evil spirit never came to him after-
wards. He used to say also that he had seen
the same blessed apostle while he was being
vexed, and had been reproached by him for
wishing to depart from the monastery.

Two other brethren also fled from the same
monastery, and gave some intimations pre-
viously to the bretTiren in conversation that
they were going down by the Appian way, to


make for Jerusalem ; but, when tliey had gone
out, they turned aside from the road. And,
that there might be no possibility of theii
being found by any that might follow them,
finding some retired crypts near the Flaminian
gate, they hid themselves therein. But when
they had been looked for in the evening, and
not found in the monastery, certain brethren
followed them on horseback, going out by the
gate of Metronus, to follow them along the
Latin or Appian way. But suddenly they
conceived the design of looking further for them
on the Salarian way : and so, in proceeding out-
side the city, they turned their course into the
Salarian way. But, failing to fmd them, tliey
decided to return throuoh the P'laminian oate.
And, as they were returning, presently when
their horses came in front of the crypts in
which the men were hidden, they stood still,
and, though beaten and urged, refused to
move. The monks considered that such a
thing could not be without some mystery.
They observed the crypts, and saw the en-
trance to them to be blocked by a piled heap
of stones, but, as their horses would not go in
any direction, they dismounted. They dis-
placed the stones which were placed at the
mouth of the crypts, entered, and found the
men in a state of consternation within these
dark subterranean hiding-places. 'Ihey were
taken back to the monastery, and were so
improved by this miracle that it was of great
advantage to them to have fled for a short time
from the monastery.

1 have told you these things that it may be
known to your Excellency whose oratory it is.
on which you have bestowed your alms. Now
may Almighty God keep you under His
heavenly protection both in soul and in body
and all your house, and grant you to live long
for our consolation. I beg that my most be-
loved son the Lord Strategius^ with his glorious
parents your children may be greeted in my
name.

EPISTLE XLV.
To Theoctista, Patricians.

Gregory to Theoctista, &c.
We ought to give great thanks to Almighty,
God, that our most pious and most benignant

2 Stiategius (as appears from other letters) was the^ young
grandson of Rusticiana, being the child of Appio and Eusebia.
See II. 27, note 2.

3 Sister of tlie emperor Mauricins, and governess of the impe-
rial children. See also I. 5, VII. 26. This long letter to her was
called forth by her having complained to Gregory of erroneous
views in matters o. religion being imputed to her at Constan-
tinople, for which slie seems to have been maligned in certain
quarters. In his reply, with his habitual courte>y, he takes for
granted that such imputations were unfounded, though the pains
he takes to combat tlie errors with which she was cnaraed may
perhaps suggest the idea of his not being in his heart quite
assured of her soundness. Tlie whole leLter, both for its tune
and for its style of argumentation, is very ciiaracteristic ot the
write)-.


EPISTLE XLV


6


Emperors have near them kinsfolk of their
race, whose hfe and conversation is such as
to give us all great joy. Hence too we should
continually pray for these our lords, that their
life, with that of all who belong to them, may
by the protection of heavenly grace be pre-
served through long and tranquil times.

I have to inform you, however, that I have
learnt from the report of certain persons how
that, owing to the levity of the people, a tumult
of detraction has arisen against you. And
I hear that your Excellency has consequently
been distressed with no slight vexation. If
this is so, I wonder much why the words of
men on earth should agitate you, who have
fixed your heart on heaven. For the blessed
Job, when his friends who had come to console
him had broken out into rebuke, said, For
behold my witness is in heaven^ and he that
knows me is on high (Job xvi. 20). For one
who has the witness of his life in heaven ought
not to be afraid of the judgments of men on
earth. Paul also, a leader of good men, says.
Our glory is this^ the testimony of onr conscience
(2 Cor. i. 12). And he says again. Let every
man prove his owji work, and so shall he have
glory in himself and not in another (Gal. vi. 4).
For, if we are rejoiced by praises and broken
down by detractions, we have set our glory
not in ourselves, but in the mouth of others.
And indeed the foolish virgins took no oil in
their vessels, but the wise ones took oil in
their vessels with their lamps (Matth. xxv.).
Now our lamps are good works ; of which it
is written. Let your light shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify you?-
Father which is in heaven (Matth. v. 16). And
we then take oil in our vessels with our lamps,
when we seek not the splendour of glory for
our good deeds from the adulation of our
neighbours, but preserve it in the testimony
of our conscience. And in regard to all that
is said of us outwardly we ought to recur to
the secrets of our soul. Although all should
revile us, yet he is free whom conscience ac-
cuses notj while, even though all should praise,
one cannot be free, if conscience accuses him.
Whence the Truth says concerning John,
What ivent ye out into the wilderness to see )
A reed shaken with the windl (Matth. xi. 7).
And this in truth is said in the way of nega-
tion, not of assertion, since it is added, Bict
what went ye out for to see 1 A man clothed
in soft raiment ? Behold, they that wear soft
clothing are in kings' houses (Ibid. 8). For
although, according to the truth of the Gospel,
John was clothed in rough raiment, yet the
signification is that they wear sott clothing
who are delighted by adulations and praiscb
And it is denied that John was a reed shaken


with the wind, inasmuch as no breath from
any human mouth bent the fortitude of his
mind. For we, if we are lifted up by praises,
or cast down by revilings, are a reed shaken
with the wind. But far be this, far be it from
the heart of your Excellency. I know that you
read studiously the teacher of the Gentiles,
who says, /, if T yet pleased men, should not be
the servant of Christ (Gal. i. 10).

If, however, any even slight sadness has
arisen in your mind from this cause, I believe
that Almighty God has kindly allowed this to
be the case. For not even to His elect in this
life has He promised the joys of delight, but
the bitternesses of tribulation ; so that, after
the manner of medicine, they may be restored
through a bitter cup to the sweetness of eternal
salvation. For what says He ? The world shall
rejoice, and ye shall lament {]oh.. x\i. 20). AVith
what hope ? With what promise ? A little
afterwards it is added, / 2vill see you again,
and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no
man shall take fiom you (Ibid. 22). Hence
again He says to His disci})les, Ln your pa-
tience shall ye poseess your souls (Luke xxi. 19).

Consider, I pray you, where patience would
be, if there were nothing to be endured. I
suspect that there is no Abel without having
a Cain for his brother. For if the good were
without the bad, they could not be perfectly
good, since they would not be purged : and
the very society of the bad is the purgation
of the good. There were three sons of Noe
in the ark, one of whom was a dericler of his
father, who, though in himself he was blessed,
still received a sentence of condemnation ni
his son. Abraham had two sons before he
took Cethura to wife ; and yet his carnal son
persecuted the son of promise (Genes, ix.).
Ihis the great teacher expounds, saying. As
he zvho is after the flesli persecuted him that is
after the Spirit, even so it is now (Gal. iv. 29).
Isaac had two sons ; but one, who was spiri-
tual, fled before the threats of his carnal
brother. Jacob had twelve sons, but one, who
hved uprightly, was sold by ten into Egypt.
In the case of the prophet David, because
there was in him what should have been
purged, it was brought to pass that he suf-
fered under a son's persecution. The blessed
Job says of the socie.y of the reprobate, L have
been a brother to dragons, and a companion to
owls (Job XXX. 29). To Ezekiel the Lord
says, Son of man, unbelievers and destroyers are
with thee, and thou dost dwelt among scorpions
(Ezek. ii. 6). Among the twelve apostles
there was one reprobate, that there might be
one by whcjse persecution the eleven might
be tried. The I'nnce 01 the aposlles speaks
thus to his disciples. Lie delivered just Lot,


64


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


oppressed by the injury and conversation of the
7vicked. For in seeing; and hearing he was jnst,
divelling amojig those who from day to day
vexed the soiU of the just one with their un-
righteous deeds (2 Pet. ii. 7, 8). Paul also the
apostle writes to his disciples, saying, In the
midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among
ivhom ye shine as liDninaries in the wo7'ld, hold-
ing fast the ivord of life (Philip, ii. 15)-

Seeing then that we know from the witness
of Scripture that in this life the good cannot
be without the bad, your Excellency ought by
no means to be disturbed by the voices of
fools, especially as there is then sure con-
fidence in Almighty God, when for well-doing
any adversity is given us in this world in order
that a full reward may be reserved for us in
the eternal retribution. Whence also in the
holy Gospel the Truth says, Blessed shall ye be
when men shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely for my name's sake (Matth. v. 11).
And for our consolation He deigned to adduce
as an example His own reproaches, saying,
If they have called the master of the house Beel-
zebub^ how much more them of his household
(Ibid. X. 25).

But there are many who perhaps praise the
life of the good more than they ought ; and,
lest any elation should creep in from praise.
Almighty God allows bad men to break out
into slander and objurgation, in order that,
if any sin springs up in the heart from the
mouth of them that praise, it may be choked
by the mouth of them that revile. Hence it is,
then, that the teacher of the Gentiles testifies
that he continues in his preaching through
evil report and good rep07't (2 Cor. vi. 8) ; say-
ing also. As deceivers and yet true. If then
there were such as laid an evil report on Paul,
and called him a deceiver, what Christian
now should account it a hard thing in behalf
of Christ to hear injurious words? Moreover
we know of how great virtue was the pre-
cursor of our Redeemer, who in Holy Writ
is called not only more than a prophet, but
even an angel : and yet, as the history of his
death testifies, after his death his body was
burnt by his persecutors 4. But why say we
these things of holy men? Let us speak of the
Holy of holies Himself, that is of God Who
was made man for us, Who before His death
heard the injuiious charge that He had a
devil, and after His death was called a de-
ceiver by His persecutors, when one said, We
know that that deceiver said, After three days I
will rise again (Matth. xxvii. 63). How much,
then, must we sinners needs bear from the

4 Cf. Theodoret, Eccles. Hist, lib, ii. c. 6, where this is told :
"asserueriint arcam Joannis Baptistae, et ossibns combustis dissi-
parunt cinerem."


tongues and hands of wicked men, we who
are to be judged at the coming of the eternal
Judge, if He Who will even come as Judge en-
dured so much both before and after His death ?

These things, most sweet and excellent
daughter, I have briefly said, lest, as often as
thou hearest of foolish men speaking in dero-
gation of thee, thou shouldest be touched by
even the least sadness of heart. But, seeing that
this very murmuring of foolish men cannot be
allayed by quiet reason, I hold it to be sin
if the doing of what can be done is neglected.
For, when we appease insane minds, and
bring them back to a healthy state, we ought
by no means to cause them offence. For
there are some offences that are to be alto-
gether despised ; but there are some which,
when they can be avoided without guilt, are
not to be despised, lest there be guilt in keep-
ing them alive. We learn this from the
preaching of the sacred Gospel ; since, when
the Trutii said, Not that ivhich godh into the
mouth defileth a man ; but that which cometh
out of the mouth, this defileth a maji (Matth.
XV. ii), and the disciples replied saying,
Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended
after they heard this saying 1 (Ibid. 12),
straightway He replied, Every plant ivhich my
Jieavenly Father hath not planted shall be
rooted up. let them alone ; they be blind, and
leaders of the blind (Ibid. 13). And yet, when
tribute was demanded. He first gave a reason
why tribute should not be paid, and forthwith
subjoined, Notwithstanding, lest we should
offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook,
and take up the fish that first cometh up ; and
tvhen thou hast opened his mouth, thou shall
find a stater. That take, and give unto them
for me and for thee (Matth. xVii. 26). Why is
it that of some who were offended it is said,
let the?n aio?ie ; they are blind, and leaders op
the blifid ; and that to others, lest they should
be offended, tribute is paid by the Lord, even
though not due ? Why is it that He allowed
one offence to remain, but forbade another to
be caused to others ? Why, but that He might
teach us on the one hand to despise offences
which nnplicate us in sin, but on the other to
mitigate in all ways those which we can ap-
pease without sin ?

Wherefore your Excellency, God protecting
you, may, with great quietness, turn aside the
offences of bad men. For the chief of them
you should of your own accord call to you
privately and give them reasons^ and anathe-
matize certain wrong points which they sup-
pose to be held by you. And if too, as it
is said may be the case, they su^^pect such
anathema to be insincere, you should confirm
it even by an oath, averring that you do not


EPISTLE XLV.


6s


hold, and never have held, those points.
Nor let it seem beneath you to satisfy them
in such a way ; nor let there be in your mind
any feeling of disdain against them on account
of your imperial race. For we are all brethren,
created by the power of one Emperor, and
redeemed by His blood. And so we ought
not in anything to despise our brethren, how-
ever poor and abject.

For certainly Peter had received power in
the heavenly kingdom, so that whatever he
should bind or loose on earth should be bound
or loosed in heaven ; he walked on the sea,
he healed the sick with his shadow, he slew
sinners with his word, he raised the dead by
his prayer. And because by the admonition
of the Spirit he had gone in to Gornelius the
Gentile, a question was raised against him by
the believers as to why he had gone in among
Gentiles and eaten with them, and why he had
received them in baptism. And yet this first
of the apostles, filled with such gifts of grace,
supported by such power of miracles, replied
to the complaint of the believers, not by power
but by reason, and explained the case to them
in order ; how he saw a certain vessel, as it
had been a sheet, in which were four-footed
beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and
creeping things, and fowls of the air, let down
from heaven, and heard a voice saying. Arise,
Pitej; kill and eat (Acts xi. 5 seq.) ; how three
men came to him calling him to Cornelius; how
the Holy Spirit bade him go with them ; how
the same Holy Spirit who had been wont to
come on those baptized in Judea after baptism,
came on the Gentiles before baptism. For if,
when he was blamed by the believers, he had
paid regard to the authority which he had re-
ceived in Holy Church, he might have replied
that the sheep should not dare to find fault
with the shepherd to whom they had been
committed. But, had he said anything of his
own power in answer to the complaint of the
believers, he would not have been truly a
teacher of gentleness. He pacified them,
therefore, by giving a reason humbly, and
-even produced witnesses to defend him from
blame, saying, JSIoreover these six brethren
accompanied 7ne (Acts xi. 12). If, then, the
pastor of the Church, the Prince of the
Apostles, who singularly did signs and mira-
cles, disdained not, in defending himself from
blame, humbly to give a reason, how much
more ought we sinners, when we are blamed
for anyihing, to pacify those who blame us
by giving a reason humbly !

For to me, as you know, when I was resi-
dent at the footsteps of my lords in the royal
city, many used to come of those who were
accused with respect to the aforesaid points.

VOL. XIII. 1


But I declare, my conscience bearing me
witness, that I never found in them any error,
any pravity, or anything of what was said
against them. Whence also I took care, de-
spising report, to receive them familiarly, and
rather to defend them from their accusers
For it used to be said against them that under
pretext of religion they dissolved marriages ;
and that they said that baptism did not entirely
take away sins ; and that, if any one did pe-
nance for three years for his iniquities, he
might afterwards live perversely ; and that,
if they said under compulsion that they an-
athematized anything for which they were
blamed, they were by no means hoiden by the
bond of anathema. Now if there are any who
undoubtedly hold and maintain such views,
there is no doubt that they are not Christians.
And such both I, and all catholic bishops, and
the universal Church, anathematize, because
they think what is contrary to the truth, and
speak what is contrary. For, if they say that
marria'j:es should be dissolved for the


sake


religion 5j be it known that,


of

human
divine law has
in person says,


though


law has conceded this, yet
forbidden it. For the Truth
What God hath joined together let not man put
asunder (Matth. xix. 6). He says also, // is
not lawful for a man to put away his wife
saving for the cause of fornication (Ibid. 9).
Who then may contradict this heavenly legis-
lator? We know how it is written. Two shall
be one flesh (Matth. xix. 5; i Cor. vi. 16;
Gen. ii. 24). If, then, a man and wife are
one flesh, and a man puts away his wife for
the sake of religion, or a woman her husband
while he remains in this world, even though
perchance he turns aside to unlawful deeds,
what is this conversion 6, in which one and
the same flesh on the one part passes to
continence and on the other part remains
in pollution ? If, however, it should suit both
to lead a continent life, who may dare to
accuse them, since it is certain that Almighty
God, who has granted what is less, has not
forbidden what is greater ? And indeed we
know of many holy persons who have both pre-
viously led continent lives with their consorts,
and have afterwards passed over to the rules
of holy Church. For in two ways holy men
are accustomed to abstain even from lawful
things. Sometimes that they may increase
their merits before Almighty God ; but some-
times that they may wipe away the sins of
their former life. For when the three children
who were brought under obedience to the
Babylonian [ving, asked for pulse for food,


being


unwillinsj to make use of the


king's


5 Keligionis, in the sense of monastic life.

6 Conversio, in the usual sense of embracing monastic life.


66


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


meat, it was not because it would have been
sin in them to eat what God had created.
They were unwilhng, then, to take what it was
lawful for them to take, that their virtue might
increase through continence. But David, who
had taken to himself another man's wife, and
had been sorely scourged for his fault, desired
long afterwards to drink water from the cistern
of Bethlehem ; which when his bravest soldiers
had brought to him, he refused to drink it,
and poured it out as a libation to the Lord.
For it was lawful for him to drink it, had he
been so minded ; but, because he remem-
bered having done what was unlawful, he
laudably abstained even from what was lawful.
And he, who to his guilt previously feared
not that the blood of dying soldiers should
be shed, afterwards considered that, were he
to drink the water, he would have shed the
blood of living soldiers, saying, S/ia// I drink
the blood of these men who have put their lives
in jeopardy (i Chron. xi. 19)? Accordingly,
when good husbands and wives desire either
to increase merit or to do away with the faults
of previous life, it is lawful for them to bind
themselves to continence and to aspire to a
better life. But, if the wife does not follow
after the continence which the husband aspires
to, or the husband refuses that which the wife
aspires to, it is not lawful for wedlock to be
cut asunder, seeing that it is written. The ivife
hath 7iot power of her oivn body, but the
husband ; and the husband hath not power of
his ow?i body, but the zuife (i Cor. vii. 4).

But, if there are any who say that sins are
only superficially put away in baptism, what
can be more against the faith than such
preaching, whereby they would fain undo
the very sacrament of faith, wherein prin-
cipally the soul is bound to the mystery of
heavenly cleanness^ that, being completely
absolved from all sins, it may cleave to Him
alone of Whom the Prophet says. But it is
good for vie to cleave to God (Ps. Ixxii. 287)?
For certainly the passage of the Red Sea was
a figure of holy baptism, in which the enemies
behind died, but others were found in front
in the wilderness. And so to all who are
bathed in holy baptism all their past sins are
remitted, since their sins die behind them
even as did the Egyptian enemies. But in
the wilderness we find other enemies, since,
while we live in this life, before reaching the
country of promise, many temptations harass
us, and hasten to bar our way as we are wend-
ing to the land of the living. Whosoever says,
then, that sins are not entirely put away in
baptism, let him say that the Egyptians did

7 In English Bible, Ixxiii. 28.


not really die in the Red Sea. But, if he
acknowledges that the Egyptians really died,
he must needs acknowledge that sins die
entirely in baptism, since surely the truth
avails more in our absolution than the shadow
of the truth. In the Gospel the Lord says.
He that is washed Jiecdeth not to zvash, but is
clean every whit (Joh. xiii. lo). If, therefore,
sins are not entirely put away in baptism, how
is he that is washed clean every whit? For
he cannot be said to be clean every whit, if
he has any sin remaining. But no one can
resist the voice of the Truth, He that is zvashed
is clean every whit. Nothing, then, of the
contagion of sin remains to him whom He
Himself who redeemed him declares to be
clean every whit.

But, if there are any who say that penance
is to be done for sin during any three years,
and that after the three years one may live
in pleasures, these know neither the preaching
of the true faith nor the precepts of sacred
Scripture. Against these the excellent preacher
says, He that sowetli in his flesh shall of the
flesh also reap corruption ( Galat. vi. 8). Against
these he says again, They that are in the flesh
cannot please God (Rom. viii. 8); where he
subjoins to his disciples, But ye are not in the
flesh, but in the Spirit.

Now they are in the flesh who live in carnal
pleasures. Against them it is said. Neither
shall corruption possess incorrupfion (i Cor. xv,
50). But, if they say that a short season of
penitence may suffice against sin, so that one
may be allowed to return again to sin, rightly
does the sentence of the first pastor hit them,
when he says, // is happened unto them accord-
ing to the true proverb ; The dog is tur7ud
to his own vomit again, and the sow that was
washed to her walloiuing in the mire (2 Pet. ii.
22). For great is the efficacy of penitence
against sin ; but only if one persevere in this
penitence. For it is written. He that shall
persevere unto the end, the same shall be saved
(Matth. X. 22 : xxiv. 13). Hence again it is
written. He that is baptized from a dead body,
and toiuheth it again, what availeth his wosh-
ing? (Ecclus. xxxiv. 30 ^). Now a dead body
is every perverse work, which draws a man to
death, because he lives not in the life of right-
eousness. He, then, is baptized from a dead
body, and again touches it, who deplores the
bad works which he remembers having done,
but after his tears entansdes himself in the same
again. Washing, therefore, from such dead
body avails not any soul that does again what
it has bemoaned, and rises not through the
lamentations of penitence to the rectitude of

8 In E?i^lish Bible, x.\xiv. 25.


EPISTLE XLVI.


67


righteousness. For to do penance truly is not
only to bemoan what has been committed, but
also to decline from what has been bemoaned.

But, if there are any who say that, if any one
shall have anathematised anything under com-
pulsion of necessity, he is not held by the
bond of the anathema, these are themselves
witnesses that they are no Christians. For
they think by vain attempts to loose the
binding of holy Church, and hereby neither do
they account as real the absolution of holy
Church which she offers to the faithful, if
they think that her binding is of no avail.
Against such as these dispute should be no
longer held, since they ought to be altogether
scorned and anathematised; and whence they
think to elude the truth, thence let them in
reality be bound in their sins.

If, then, there are any who under the
Christian name dare either to preach, or to
hold silently in their own minds, the points
of error wliich we have spoken of above, these
undoubtedly we both have anathematised and
do anathematise. Yet, as I have said before,
in those who used to come to me in the royal
city I observed no error at all as to any one
of the aforesaid points, nor do I think there
was any. For, if there had been, I should
have observed it. However, since there are
many of the faitliful who are inflamed with
unwise zeal, and often, while they attack
certain persons as though they were heretics,
themselves make heresies, consideration should
be had for their infirmity, and, as I have said
before, they should be appeased with reason
and gentleness. For indeed they are like unto
those of whom it is written, I bear them record,
that they have a zeal of God^ but not according
to knowledge (Rom. x. 2). Wherefore your
Excellency, who live incessantly in reading,
in tears, and in alms, should, as I have re-
quested, appease their unwisdom by gentle
exhortations and replies, that not only in your-
self, but also in them, you may find the glory
of eternal retribution. All this my exceeding
love has induced me to say to you, since
I think that your joy is my gain, and your
sadness my loss. May Almighty God guard
you with heavenly grace, and, keeping safe
the Piety of our lord and the Tranquillity of
our most pious lady, prolong your life for the
education of the little lords.

EPISTLE XLVI.
To ISACius, Bishop of Jerusalem 9.

Gregory to Isacius, &c.

In keeping with the truth of history, what


9 Written in reply to a letter received from the new patriarch


means the fact that at the time of the flood the
human race outside the ark dies, but within
the ark is preserved unto life, but what we
see plainly now, namely that all the unfaithful
perish under the wave of their sin, while the
unity of holy Church, like the compactness
of the ark, keeps her faithful ones in faith and
in charity? And this ark in truth is compacted
of incorruptible timber, since it is built of
strong souls, and such as persevere in good.
And, when any single person is converted from
a secular life, timber is, as it were, still cut
down from the mountains. But when, ac-
cording to the order of holy Church, one is
assigned to have custody of others, it is as
though tlie ark were built of timber sawn and
put together for preserving the life of men.
And in truth that ark, when the flood was
over, rested on a mountain, because when the
corruption of this life is over, when the billows
of evil works have passed away, holy Church
will rest in the heavenly country, as on a high
mountain. To the building, therefore, of this
ark we rejoice to find, after reading your
Fraternity's epistle, that in the compactness of
a right faith }'ou lend your aid ; and we render
great thanks to Almighty God, who, though
the pastors of His flock are changed, keeps the
faith which He once delivered to the holy
Fathers, even after them unchangeable. Now
the excellent preacher says, Other foundation
can no man lay than that is laid, ivhich is
Christ Jesus (i Cor. iii. 11). Whosoever, then,
with love of God and his neighbour, holds
firmly the faith which is in Christ, he has laid
the same Jesus Christ, Son of God and man,
as a foundation for himself from the Father.
It is to be hoped, then, that, where Christ
is the foundation, the building also of good
works may follow. The Truth itself also in
person says, He that entereth ?iol by the door
into the sheep/old, but climbeth up some other
way, the same is a thief and a robber. But
he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd
of the sheep (Joh. x. i). And a little after-
wards He adds, / am the door. He, then,
enters into the sheepfold by the door who
enters by Christ. And he enters by Christ
who thinks and preaches what is true con-
cerning the same Creator and Redeemer of
the human race, keeps what he preaches, and
undertakes the topmost place of government
with a view to a burdensome office, not in
desire of the glory of transitory dignity. He
watches also wisely over the charge of the
sheepfold which he has taken in hand, lest
either perverse men speaking frowardly tear


of Jerusalem, announcing, as was usual, his election, and con*
tainino; his confession of taith.


Y 2


68


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


the sheep of God, or mahgnant spirits waste
them by persuading them to vicious deh'ghts.

But in all these things may He instruct
us Who for our sake was made man. May
He Who vouchsafed to become what He made
Himself infuse the spirit of His love both into
my iniirmity and thy charity, and open the
eye of our heart in all carefulness and watchful
circumspection.

But that men of a right faith are advanced
to sacred orders, thanks should be given
without cease to the same Almighty God, and
prayer should ever be made for the life
of our most pious and Christian lord the
Emperor, and for his most tranquil spouse,
and his most gentle offspring, in whose times
the mouths of heretics are silent, since, though
their hearts seethe in the madness of perverse
opinion, yet in the time of the orthodox
Emperor they presume not to speak out the
wrong opinions which they hold ; so that we
plainly see fulfilled what is written. Gathering
the waters of the sea together as in a bottle
(Ps. xxxii. 7) \ For the water of the sea is
gathered together as in a bottle, because what-
ever wrong opinions the bitter science of
heretics entertains at the present day it keeps
within the breast, and presumes not to express
them openly. But thy Fraternity, spiritually
taught, has set forth in all respects the right
laith, and has thoroughly declared the things
that should be sought after. Your faith, there-
fore, is ours. We hold what you say, and
say what you hold.

But, inasmuch as it has come to our ears
that in the Churches of the East no one
attains to sacred orders but by giving of bribes,
if your Fraternity finds that this is the case,
you should offer as your first oblation to
Almighty God the restraining of the error
of simoniacal heresy in the Churches subject
to you. For, not to speak of other things,
what sort of men can they be when in sacred
orders who are advanced to them not by
merit but by bribes ? Now we know with what
animadversion the Prince of the apostles at-
tacked this heresy, having pronounced the
first sentence of condemnation against Simon,
when he said, Thy vioney be ivith thee unto
perditiofi, because thou hast thought that the
gift of God nuiy be purchased ivith money
(Acts viii. 20). Our Lord God Himself also,
tlie Creator and Redeemer of the human race,
having made a scourge of small cords, over-
threw and cast out of the temple the seats
of them that sold doves (Matth. xxi.). For
to sell doves in the temple, what else is it but
to give for a price in holy Church that im-

I In A.V. xxxiii. 7.


position of hands whereby the Holy Spirit is
given ? But the seats of them that sold doves
were overthrown, because the priesthood of
such is not accounted as priesthood.

Moreover, I have been informed that in the
Church which is called Neas, strifes often arise
with your Church in the city of Jerusalem.
Wherefore your Holiness ought carefully to
consider all things, and to correct some things
gently, but bear others that cannot be corrected
with equanimity. For we see plainly what is
said by holy Church through the voice of the
Psalmist, Sinners have built upon my back
(Ps. cxxviii. 3) 2. For on the back burdens
are borne. Sinners, then, build upon our back,
when we bear with sufferance those whom
we cannot correct. For the steersman of a
ship, when he considers that the wind is against
him, surmounts some billows by steering right
over them, but some which he foresees cannot
be surmounted he prudently avoids by turning
his course aside. So, therefore, let your
Holiness mitigate some evils by repressing
them, and others by bearing them, so as in
all respects to conserve the peace of them that
dwell together in the holy Church of Jeru-
salem. For it is written, Fo II oiu peace with all-
men^ and holiness y ivithout which no jfian shall
see God (Hebr. xii. 14). For in quarrels the
very light of the soul, the light of good intent,
is blocked. Whence the Psalmist says. Mine
eye is tivubled because of anger (Ps. vi. 8)
And what remains in us of well-doing, if we lose
peace from the heart, without which we cannot
see the Lord ? Do you therefore so act as to
gather the gain of your reward even from those
who through strife might have caused it to
perish. May Almighty God guard your Love
with heavenly grace, and grant you to carry
with you from those who are committed to
you manifold fruit and measure running ove;
to eternal joys.

EPISTLE XLVH.

To Anatolius, Deacon at Constanti-
nople.

Gregory to Anatolius, &c.

Thy Love has written to me that our most
pious lord orders a successor to be appointed
to my most reverend brother John, bishop of
Prima Justiniana, on account of the ailment
of the head from which he sufters, lest per-
chance that city, while without the jurisdiction
of a bishop, should be ruined by its enemies,
which God forbid. And yet the canons no-
where enjoin that a bishop should be super-
seded on account of sickness. And it is

2 In A.V. cxxix. 3.


EPISTLE LIV.


69


altogether unjust that, if bodily ailments come
on, the sick person should be deprived of
his dignity 3. Accordingly this thing can by no
means be done through us, lest sin should
come upon my soul from his deposition. But
it is to be suggested that, if he who bears rule
is sick, an administrator may be found, to
undertake all his charge, and maintain and
fill his place, without his being deposed, in
the government of the Church and custody
of the city ; so that neither may Almighty
God be offended nor the city be found to be
neglected. If, however, the same most rev-
erend John should haply on account of his
ailments request to be relieved from the dignity
of the episcopate, it should be conceded on
his presenting a petition in writing. But
otherwise we are altogether unable, with due
regard to the fear of Almighty God, to do this
thing. But, if he should be unwilling thus
to make petition, what pleases the most pious
Emperor, whatever he commands to be done,
is in his power. As he determines, so let him
provide. Only let him not cause us to be
mixed up in the deposition of one so situated.
Still, what he does, if it is canonical, we will
follow. But, if it is not canonical, we will
bear it, so far as we can without sin of
our own,

EPISTLE L.
To Adrian, Notary.

Gregory to Adrian, Notary of Panormus.

Agathosa, the bearer of these presents, com-
plains that her husband has, against her will,
been converted 4 in the monastery of the abbot
Urbicus. And, since this undoubtedly touches
the credit and reputation of the said abbot,
we enjoin thy Experience to investigate the
matter by diligent enquiry, so as to see
whether it may not be the case that the man's
conversion was with her consent, or that she
herself had promised to change her state. And
should it be found to be so, see to his re-
maining in the monastery, and compel her to
change her state, as she had promised. If how-
ever neither of these things is the case, and you
do not find that the aforesaid woman has com-
mitted any crime of fornication on account of


3 Cf. XIII. 5 for a similar assertion of the unlawfulness of
superseding a bishop, except at his own request, when incapa-
citated by illness. See also VIl. 19. In this epistle may be
observed Gregory's habitual deference to the Emperors, whose
subject he ever declared himself to be, even in matters of eccle-
siastical import, together with his avoidance of giving his own
sanction to anything he regarded as irreligious or uncanonical.
Similarly in the case of an imperial prohibition of soldiers be-
coming monks. See III. 65 ; VIII. 5; X. 24. Cf. also IV. 47,
in the case of Maximus of Salona. We find him, however, in
a letter to the empress, in which this case of Maximus is referred
to (V. 21), making a resijectful protest against imperial inter-
ference in matters of ecclesiastical cognizance.

4 Conversuni, in the usual sense uf adopting monastic life.


whichitis lawful for a man to leave his wife, then,
lest his conversion should possibly be an occasion
of perdition to the wife left behind in the
world, we desire thee, without any excuse
allowed, to restore her husband to her, even
though he should be already tonsured. For,
although mundane law declares that marriage
may be dissolved for the sake of conversion
against the will of either party, yet divine law
does not permit this to be done. For, save
for the cause of fornication, a man is on no
account allowed to put away his wife, seeing
that after the husband and wife have been made
one body by the copulation of w^edlock, it
cannot be in part converted, and in part
remain in the world 5.

EPISTLE LIV.
To Desiderius, Bi.shop of Gaul*.

Gregory to Desiderius, &c.

Many good things having been reported to
us with regard to your pursuits, such joy arose
in our heart that we could not bear to refuse
what your Fraternity had requested to have
granted to you. But it afterwards came to
our ears, what we cannot mention without
shame, that thy Fraternity is in the habit
of expounding grammar to certain persons.
This thing we took so much amiss, and so
strongly disapproved it, that we changed what
had been said before into groaning and sad-
ness, since the praises of Chri.-,t cannot find
room in one mouth with the praises of Jupiter.
And consider thyself what a grave and heinous
offence it is for bishops to sing what is not
becoming even for a religious layman. And,
though our most beloved son Candidus the
presbyter, having been, when he came to us,
strictly examined on this matter, denied it,
and endeavoured to excuse you, yet still the
thought has not departed from our mind, that
in proportion as it is execrable for such a thing
to be related of a priest, it ought to be as-
certained by strict and veracious evidence
whether or not it be so. Whence, if hereafter
what has been reported to us should prove
evidently to be false, and it should be clear
that you do not apply yourself to trifles and
secular literature, we shall give thanks to our
God, who has not permitted your heart to be
stained with the blasphemous praises of the


5 Cf. VI. 48, and XI. 45.

6 Desiderius was bisliop of Vienne, cf. VI. 54. This letter,
with others that follow (Epp. LV., LVL, LVII., LVIIL, LIX.,
LX., LXL, LXIl., LXIV., LXV., LXVl., and possibly also
the preceding Epistle, XXIX.) were carried, as appears from its
conclusion, by Mellitus and his companions, who, in answer to
Augustine's request, were sent by Gregory from Rome to reinforce
the mission to l^)ritain (Bede, //.£". I. 27, 29). See P^-olcgoiirena.,
p. xxvi It is notable as shewing Gregory's views with regard
to the study of secular literature.


70


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


abominable ; and we will treat without mis-
giving or hesitation concerning the granting
of what you request.

We commend to you in all respects the
monks whom togetlier with our most beloved
son Laurentius the presbyter and Mellitus the
abbot we have sent to our most reverend
brotlier and fellow-bishop Augustine, that,
through the succour of your Fraternity, no
delay may stop their onward progress.

EPISTLE LV.
To ViRGiLius, Bishop of Arelate {Aries) 7.

Gregory to Virgilius, &c.

Since by the testimony of Ploly Writ avarice
is called the service of idols, with wliat earn-
estness it ought to be banished from the temple
of God is acknowledged ; and yet (we say it
with groaning) by some priests this is not re-
garded. For fierce cupidity holds the heart
captive, and persuades one that what it com-
mands is lawful, and so proceeds as to slay
with the same sword both the giver and the
receiver. What safe place, then, can hereafter
be of avail against avarice, if the Church of
God is opened to it by bad priests ? How can
he keep the sheepfolds inviolate who invites
the wolf to enter ? Alas for shame ! He pol-
lutes his hands by an unlawful bribe, and
tliinks to lift up others by his benediction,
while himself prostrate under his own iniquity,
and captive notwithstanding to his own am-
bition. Since then this evil of rapacity has
never entered the citadel of your mind, and
you say that you have your hands unpolluted
in the matter of ordinations, give thanks to
Almiglity God, and acknowledge yourselves
to be His debtors in that under His protection
you have remained unharmed by the contagion
of this disease. But this good in you will
profit you less than it might have done if you
have not carefully forbidden this thing in
others also. As in thyself this evil had dis-
pleased thee, thou oughtest to have been
zealous against it in tliy brother also. For,
seeing that the divine precepts admonish us
to love our neighbours as ourselves, it is no
small fault to disregard them, and not to fear
for others what for ourselves we shrink from.
Even now, therefore, most beloved brother,
give thy mind to repairing what thou hast
lost in others through thy negligence in cor-
rection, and restrain whomsoever thou canst
from tills wiekeciness, and insist on a synod
being assemuled for rooting out this same
heresy, to the end that, with reward to thy


7 The bishop of Aries had vicariate jurisdiction committed to
Dim under Rome. Cf. V. 53.


Love, what shall have been condemned, God
granting it, by the ordinance of all may be
better guarded against by all.

Furthermore, it has come to our ears thai
our brother and fellow-bisliop, Serenus of
Massilia {Marseilles)^ receives bad men into
his intimate society, so as to have, in fine, as
his familiar friend a certain presbyter, who,
after lapse, is said to wallow still in his in-
iquities. This you ought to enquire into
closely. And, if it should prove to be so,
let it be your care so to correct this matter
in our stead that both he who has received
such a one may learn not to encourage him by
familiarity, but rather to constrain him by
punishment, and he who has been received
may learn to wash away his sins with tears,
and not to pile up iniquity by unclean living.

Let your Fraternity hold as commended to
you in all respects the monks whom we have
sent to our brother and fellow-bishop Au-
gustine, and take pains so to succour them for
proceeding on their way, and so to concur
with them, that through your assistance they
may be able, under the protection of God, to
arrive speedily at their destination.

EPISTLE LVI.

To Aetherius, Bishop of Lugdunum
{Lyons.)

Gregory to Aetherius, Bishop of Gaul.

The language of your epistles, full of vener-
able gravity, has so engaged our heart's
affection that it would please us to be ever
mingling mutual discourse, to the end that,
if we cannot enjoy your bodily presence,
absence may make no difference with us while
this intercourse goes on between us. For how
great love of ecclesiastical order shines forth
m you, and how great is your regard for
discipline, and how great your earnestness
in the observance of wholesome ordinances,
you shew in that you receive our exhortation
submissively and altogether willingly, and de-
clare that you will inviolably observe it.
Since then you bear a heart prompt for the
amendment of others, and condemn with a free
voice, as becomes you, an evil of old stand-
ing, and seeing that our other brethren and
fellow-bishops also are similarly disposed, it
is your duty to rise unanimously against the
Lord's enemies, and cast avarice out of the
house of God by a synodical definition. In
the giving of ecclesiastical orders let not fierce
hunger for gold find any satisfaction; let not
flatteries filch any advantage ; let not favour
confer anything : let a man's life have the
reward of honour, his modesty promote his
advancement ; that, while this kind of ob-


EPISTLE LVIII.


7r


servance obtains, both he that seeks to rise
by bribes may be judged unworthy, and he
to whom his conduct bears good testimony
may be worthily honoured. Let this be your
care, most beloved brother, let this anxiety ever
keep guard over your tlioughts, so that you may
prove by action that the zeal which you shew-
in your letters is the witness of your heart.
Wherefore continually and instantly press for
the assembling of a synod ; and so earnestly
acquit yourself as to act up to the dignity of
your title in the administration of your oflice.

With regard to what you request to have
granted to your Church on the ground of
ancient custom, we have caused search to be
made in our archives, and nothing has been
found. Wherefore send to us the letters which
you say you have, that from them we may
gather what ought to be granted you.

As to the acts or writings of the blessed
Irenseus, we have now long been searching
for them, but have not succeeded so far in
finding any of them.

Furthermore, let your Fraternity take care
to hold as in all respects commended to you
the monks whom we despatched to our brother
and fellow-bishop Augustine, and for the sake
of God display your charity towards them ;
and so earnestly concur with them in priestly
zeal, and so hasten to help them with your
succour for proceeding on their journey, that,
while there shall be no cause of delay in your
parts to detain them, both they may go on
their way more speedily, and you may find
a reward for what you have done in their
behalf. Given this loth day of July, In-
diction 4 ^.

EPISTLE LVII.
To Aregius, Bishop of Vapincum9.

Gregory to Aregius, Bishop of Gaul.

There being in brotherly love one heart and
one soul, as the mind rejoices in the prosperity
of another, so is it afflicted in his adversity,
since in both it is bound to be partaker by the
law of charity. And so the greater sorrow had
come upon us for your sadness, lest perchance
the affliction of a prolonged grief might batter
\our heart with continual pain, and burden
your life with groans. But, having received
the letters of your Charity, we have been con-
soled with the joy we hoped for, and we give
thanks to Almighty God, for that we now know
that your equanmiity is unimpaired, and that
your mind has been restored to comfort. Nor


_ 8 In two MSS. {Teller.) "die decimo Kalendas Julii, indict.
4," i.e. 22 June, a.d. 6oi. This may be taken as correct, agree-
ing with other dated epistles sent through Mellitus and his
companions.

9 Cf. IX. 107, to the same Aregius.


indeed was it otherwise to be expected of you
than that you would undoubtedly overcome
with priestly patience whatever adversity there
might be.

Further, we well recollect how the zeal of
your Fraternity flamed up of old in u])rooting
simoniacal heresy. Wherefore we exhort that
you give your earnest attention to this, and
that, among other things that we wrote of, it
be condemned by the strict deiinition of
a council ; that so, the bent of our desire being
fulfilled by the help of your solicitude, you
may both offer to Almighty God a most ac-
ceptable oblation in the correction of vices,
and also shew, for the edification of others,
how the care of the pastoral office shines forth
in you. Moreover our experience of your life,
which we have known to be much superior to
that of many, moves us to presume on great
assistance from you in this matter. And so
complete ye your kindness as under God you
have begun, that the good which with a right
aim has been begun in you may, by the help
of God the Creator of all, be brought to com-
pletion.

Furthermore, let your Fraternity bestow
your accustomed charity on the monks whom
we have sent to our most reverend brother and
fellow-bishop Augustine; and so endeavour to
succour them for proceeding on their way, as
well personally as through others as you can,
that, while through your provision they have
no difficulties or delays in your parts, both we
may feel that our confidence in you was not in
vain, and Almighty God may give you ihe
recompense of His grace for the conversion of
the souls on whose behalf they have been
sent.

EPISTLE LVIII.

To DIVERS Bishops of Gaul.

Gregory to Mennas of Telona {Toiihfi),
Serenus of Massilia [Marseilles), Lupus of
Cabillonum [C/idlofis-sur-Saof/e), Aigulfus of
Mettae {Metz), Simplicius of Parisii {^Faris),
Melantius of Rotonius [Rouen), and Licinius ^
bishops of the Franks. A paribus.

Though the care of the office you have
undertaken reminds your Fraternity how you
ought to assist with all your endeavours re-
ligious men, and e.specially those who labour
in behalf of souls, yet it is not beside the pur-
pose that an address by letter from us should
stimulate your assiduity, since, as a fire be-
comes larger from a blast of air, so the pur-
poses of a good disposition are advanced by
commendation. Inasmuch, then, as through


I Licinius (afterwards canonized) was bishop of Andegavum
(Angers).


72


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


the co-operating grace of our Redeemer so
great a multitude of the nation of the Angli is
being converted to the grace of Christian faith
that our most reverend common brother and
fellow-bisliop Augustine asserts that those who
are with him cannot suffice for carrying out
this work in divers places, we have made pro-
vision by sending to him a few monks with
our m.ost beloved common sons Laurentius
the presbyter and Mellitus the abbot. And so
let your Fraternity shew them the charity that
becomes you, and so make haste to aid them
wherever there may be need, that through your
assistance they may have no cause for delay in
your parts, and that both they themselves may
rejoice with you in being relieved by your con-
solation, and you, by affording them your suc-
cour, may be found partakers in the cause in
furtherance of which they have been sent.

EPISTLE LIX.
To Theoderic, King of the Franks*.

Gregory to Theoderic, &c.

The letter of your Excellency, which is the
index of your heart, has so shewn, in its flow
of lucid language, what great prudence is con-
spicuous in you, along with royal power, that
there can be no doubt of the truth of whatever
fame has reported in your praise. And inas-
much as you signify, by what you say in praise
of it, that our exhortation has so pleased your
royal mind that you wish whatever you know
to pertain to the worship of our God, to the
veneration of Churches, or to the honour of
priests, to be both carefully established and in
all ways guarded, we appeal to you with
a renewed exhortation, with a view to your
greater reward, that you would order a synod
to be assembled, and, as we have before written,
cause corporal vices in priests and the prav-
ity of simoniacal heresy to be condemned
by the definition of all the bishops, and to be
cut off within the hmits of your kingdom, and
allow not any longer money to have more
effect than the precepts of the Lord. For,
smce all avarice is the service of idols, whoso-
ever does not watchfully guard against it, and
especially in the bestowal of ecclesiastical
honours, is subjected to the perdition of in-
fidelity, even though he may seem to hold the
faith which he disregards. As, then, against
external enemies, so also against adversaries
of souls among yourselves, take ye earnest
heed, that on account of this your faithful
opposition to God's enemies you may both
reign prosperously here under His protection.


2 Cf. VI. 58, note I.


and also come hereafter by the leading of His
grace to eternal joys.

Furthermore, what benefits your Excellence
bestowed on our most reverend brother and
fellow-bishop Augustine on his progress to the
nation of the Angli we have been told by
ceitain monks who have returned to us from
him. Wherefore, returning abundant thanks,
we beg that you will deign to afford your sup-
port in full measure to these monks also who^
have been sent to him, and to aid them on
their onward journey, so that the more amply
you shew your kindness to them, the greater
return you may expect from Almighty God„
whom they serve.

EPISTLE LX.
To Theodebert, King of the Franks 3.

Gregory to Theodebert, &c.

One who receives with willing mind and
embraces in the bosom of his heart words of
fatherly admonition declares himself without
doubt to be one who would be an amender
of faults. On wdiich account the absolute
promise of your Excellence assures us suffi-
ciently. For we hold in i)lace of a pledge
the words of one who is good for payment.
Therefore let your Excellency vouchsafe, ad-
hering to the commands of our God, to give
zealous attention to the asseuiblingof a synod,
that every corporal vice in piiests, and simo-
niacal heresy, which was the first to arise in
Churches from iniquitous ambition, may under
threat of the censure of your power be re-
moved by the definition of a council, and be
cut ofi' by the roots ; lest, if gold is loved in.
your parts more than God, He who now re-
mains tranquil while His precepts are despised
be felt hereafter to be wrathful in vengeance.
And indeed, because we say all this for your
own behoof, we therefore cease not to press
you again and again, that we may be able,
even by importunity, to do good to our most
excellent and most sweet sons. For it will be
in all respects of advantage to your kingdom,
if what is done in those parts against God be
corrected by the emendation of your Excel-
lency.

Furthermore, what good service your Excel-
lency did to our most reveren^l brother and
fellow-bishop Augustine on his progress to the
nation of the Angli we have learnt from the
report of certain monks who returned to us.
from him. Rendering you the greatest thanks
for this, we beg you to bestow your benefits
abundantly on the monks, the bearers of tnese


3 Cf. VI. 58, note I.


EPISTLE LXII.


73


l^resents, whom we have sent to our said
Ijrother, to the end that, while under your
patronage, they find no difficulties in your
parts, but accomplish easily with the help of
Christ the journey they have undertaken, you
may reap your richer fruit of reward before
the eyes of our God.

EPISTLE LXI.
To Clotaire, King of the Franks ^

Gregory to Clotaire, &c.

Among so many cares and anxieties which
you sustain for the government of the peoples
under your sway, it is to your exceeding praise
and great reward that you are helpers of those
who labour in the cause of God. And, since
you have shewn yourselves by the good things
you have already done to be such that we
may presume still better things of you, we are
moved most gladly to request of you what will
be to your own reward. Now certain monks,
who had proceeded with our most reverend
brother and fellow-bishop Augustine to the
nation of the Angli, have returned and told us
with what great charity your Excellence re-
freshed this our brother when he was present
with you, and with what supports you aided
him on his departure. But, since the works
of those who do not recede from the good
they have begun are acceptable to our God,
w^e beg of you, greeting you with fatherly
affection, to hold as peculiarly commended to
you the monks, bearers of these presents,
whom we have sent to our aforesaid brother,
together with our most beloved sons, the pres-
byter Laurentius and the abbot Mellitus.
And whatever kindness you before shewed to
him bestow ye on them also to the richer
increase of your praise, to the end that, when
Uirough your provision they shall have accom-
plished without delay the journey they have
begun. Almighty God may be the recompenser
of your good deeds, and both your guardian in
prosperity and your helper in adversity.

Furthermore, it has come to our ears that
in your parts sacred orders are conferred with
payment of money. And we are exceedingly
distressed if the gifts of God are not attained
by merit, but pounced upon by bribes. And,
because this simoniacal heresy, which was the
first to arise in the Church, was condemned
by the authority of the a^jostles, we beg of you
for your own reward to cause a synod to be
assembled ; to the end that, having been put
down and eradicated by the definition of all


4 Clotaire II., at this time king of Neustria, his capital being
Soissons. There is no letter to him among those which h:id been
came i by Augustine. But it ajipears from this epistle that the
missionaries had passed through his dominions and had been well
received.


the priests, it may in future find no power in
your parts to endanger souls, nor be allowed
henceforth to arise under any pretext what-
ever, that so our Almighty God may exalt you
against your adversaries in proportion as He
sees that you have zeal in fulfilling His com-
mands, and as you take thought for the salva-
tion of souls which had been in danger of
perishing by the sword of this atrocity.

EPISTLE LXII.

To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks s.

Gregory to Brunichild^ &c.

We render thanks to Almighty God, Who,
among all the other gifts of His loving-kind-
ness that He has bestowed upon your Excel-
lency, has so filled you with a love of the
Christian religion that whatever you know to
pertain to the gain of souls, whatever to the
propagation of the faith, you cease not to
carry into efi'ect with devout mind and pious
zeal. As to the great favour and assistance
wherewith your Excellence aided our most
reverend brother and fellow-bishop Augustine
on his progress to the nation of the Angli,
fame had already not been silent ; and after
wards certain monks, returning to us from
him, gave us a particular account thereof.

And indeed, let others to whom your bene-
factions are less known wonder at these evi-
dences of your Christianity; for to us who
know them by experience they are not a sub-
ject of wonder, but of rejoicing, because
through what you bestow upon others you
delight yourself. Now of what sort and how
great are the miracles which our Redeemer has
wrought in the conversion of the above-written
nation is already known to your Excellency.
On which account you ought to have great joy,
since the succours aftbrded by you claim to
themselves the larger share herein, it having
been through your aid, after God, that the
word of preaching became widely known in
those parts For one who aids the good work
of another makes it his own. But, that the
fruit of your reward may be richer more and
more, we beg of you kindly to afford the sup-
port of your patronage to the monks, the
bearers of these presents, whom we have sent
with our most beloved sons, the presbyter
Laurentius and the abbot Mellitus, to our
aforesaid most reverend brother and fellow-
bishop, because of his telling us that those
who are with him are not sufficient ; and to
vouchsafe to stand by them in all things, to
the end that, when by the good auspices of


5 Brunechild was at this time with her gramlson Thcoderic
in the kingdom of Burgundy, having been expelled from Austrasia,
according to Greg. Turon, a.d. 599.


74


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


your Excellency they shall have had the better
success, and shall have found no delays or
difficulties in your parts, you may call down
the mercy of our God towards you and your
most sweet nephews in proportion as you have
demeaned yourselves compassionately for the
love of Him in causes of this kind.

[(In Collect. Paiili Diac.) Given the tenth
day of the Kalends of July, Indiction 4.]

EPISTLE LXIII.
To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.

Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

What good gifts have been conferred on
you from above, and with what piety heavenly
grace has filled you, this, among all the other
proofs of your merits, intimates evidently to
all, that you both govern the savage hearts of
barbarians with the skill of prudent counsel,
and (what is still more to your praise), adorn
your royal power with wisdom. And since, as
you are above many nations in both these
respects, so also you excel them in the purity
of your faith, we have great confidence in
your amending what is unlawful. P'or the
contents of the letters you have already sent
us are witness how your Excellency has em-
braced our exhortation, and with what devo-
tion you long to fulfil the same. But, since
He Who is the giver of good dispositions is
wont to be their helper also, we trust that He
may direct your causes in His loving-kindness
all the more favourably as He sees you to be
assiduous in His cause. Do you God's work,
and God will do yours. Wherefore order a
synod to be assembled, and, among other
things, as we have before written, studiously
prohibit by the definition of a council the sin
of simoniacal heresy in your kingdom. Ofter
a sacrifice to God by conquering the enemy
that is within, that by His help you may con-
quer the enemies that are without ; and that,
accordmg to the zeal you evince against His
foes, such you may feel Him to be in aiding
you. Believe me, moreover, that, as we have
learnt from the experience of many, whatever
is gathered together with sin is spent with
loss. If, then, you wish to lose nothing un-
justly, endeavour to the utmost to have
nothing got by injustice. For in earthly
matters loss has always its origin in sin. You,
therefore, if you wish to stand above adverse
nations, if you would speedily, with God's
leave, be victorious over them, receive with
trembling the commandments of the same
Almighty God, that He Himself may fight for
you against your adversaries. Who has promised
in Holy Writ, saying, llie Lord shall fight for
you, and ye shall hold your peace {^\o6. xiv. 14).


\In Collect. Patdi Diac. : Data die deciina
Kalerid., Indict. 4. In Reinigiano : Data die
X Kalendas Julii^ Indict. 4.]

EPISTLE LXIV.
To Augustine, Bishop of the Angli^.

Here begins the epistle of the blessed
Gregory, pope of the city of Rome, in exposi-
tion of various matters, which he sent into
transmarine Saxony to Augustine, whom he
had himself sent in his own stead to preach.

Preface. — Through my most beloved son
Laurentius, the presbyter, and Peter the monk,
I received thy Fraternity's letter, in which
thou hast been at pains to question me on
many points. But, inasmuch as my aforesaid
sons found me afflicted with the pains of gout,
and on their urging me to dismiss them speed-
ily were allowed to go, leaving me under the
same painful affliction ; I have not been able
to reply, as I ought to have done, at greater
length on every single point.

A ugus tine's first question .

I ask, most blessed father, concerning
bishops, how they should live with their
clergy : And concerning the offerings of the
faithful which are received at the altars, both
into what portions they should be divided,
and how the bishop ought to deal with them
in the Church.

Answer of Saint Gregory^ pope of the city
of Ro7ne.

Holy Scripture, which no doubt thou know-
est well, bears witness, and especially the
epistles of the blessed Paul to Timothy, in
which he studied to instruct him how he
ought to behave himself in the house of God.
Now it is the custom of the Apostolic See to
deliver an injunction to bishops when or-
dained, that of all emoluments that come in


6 This important epistle is given below as published in the
Benedictine edition, with notes pointing out its main variations
from Bede {H.E. i. 27), and with addition of the Preface, first
published by Mansi {Supplem. ad Concil. tout, vi., p. 385), from
a MS. Codex of the eighth century {Cod. Lucen.). Bede's copy
may be regarded as the most authentic, having been brought
to him from Rome by Nothelm, a.d. 715 — 731 (Bede, H E.
Prcef.). However, he dees not give the Preface, which has
internal evidence of authenticity. Subsequently to Nothelm's
visit to Rome, it would seem that the whole epistle had been
mislaid there, not having been kept among the rest of Gregory's
letters. For St. Boniface, a.d. 736 {Ej>ist. XL. ad Notliehn,
Episc. Caniuar.) requests Noihelm to send him a copy of these
Questions and Answers from England, saying that no copy of
them could at that time be found at Rome. They were, we may
conclude, discovered subsequently. Internal evidence, as well as
historic probability, supports the superior genuineness of Bede's
copy. (Cf. Couficils, &^c., relating to Great Britain and Ire-
la7id,,0\L, 1871. Vol. III., p. 32,) The edition of the Epistle
{Cod. Lucen.) above referred to as published by Mansi, though
containing several variations, agrees in many respects with that
of Bede, and especially in the absence of" the request of Augus-
tine " {obsecratio Augustini) and " the gr^nt of Gregory " {Con-
cessio Gregorii) after the answer to the ninth question. See note
there.


EPISTLE LXIV.


75


four divisions should be made : to wit, one for
the bishop and his household on account of
hospitality and entertainment ; another for the
clergy ; a third for the poor ; and a fourth
for the rei)aration of Churches. But, inasmuch
as thy Fraternity, having been trained in the
rules of a monastery, ought not to live apart
fiom thy clergy in the Church of the Angli,
which by the guidance of God has lately been
brought to the faith, it will be right to in-
stitute that manner of life which in the begin-
ning of the infant Church was that of our
Fathers, among whom none said that aught of
the things which he possessed was his own,
but they had all things common (Acts iv.).

Augustine^ s second question 7.

I wish to be taught whether clerics who
cannot contain may marry ; and, if they marry,
whether they should return to the world.

Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

If, however, there are any clerics, not in
sacred orders, who cannot contain themselves,
they ought to take to themselves wives, and
receive their stipends separately, since we
know that it is written of those same Fathers
whom we have before mentioned, that dis-
tribution was made unto every man according
as he had need. Wherefore thought should
be taken and provision made for their stipends,
and they should be kept under ecclesiastical
rule, that they may lead good lives, and give
attention to the singing of psalms, and by the
help of God preserve their heart and tongue
and body from all that is unlawful. But as
to those who live in community, what is there
more for us to say with regard to assigning
portions, or shewing hospitality, or executing
mercy, seeing that what remains over and
above their needs is to be expended for pious
and religious uses, as the Lord and Master
of us all says. Of what is over give aliiis^
and behold all things are clean unto you (Luke
xi. 41)?

Augustine s third question.

Since there is but one faith, why are the
uses of Churches so different, one use of
Mass being observed in the Roman Church,
and another in the Churches of Gaul ?

Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

Thy Fraternity knows the use of the Roman
Church, in which thou hast been nurtured.
But I approve of thy selecting carefully any-


7 In Bede, and Cod. Luc, this question does not appear, what
follows as a reply to it being in continuation of the answer to
Question I. The form of the beginning of the reply, "Si qui
vero sunt clerici," favours its having been so.


thing thou hast found that may be more
pleasing to Almighty God, whether in the
Roman Church or that of Gaul, or in any
Church whatever, and introducing in the
Church of the Angli, which is as yet new
in the faith, by a special institution, what thou
hast been able to collect from many Churches.
For we ought not to love things for places,
but places for things. Wherefore choose from
each several Church such things as are pious,
religious, and right, and, collecting them as it
were into a bundle, plant them in the minds
of the Angli for their use.

A ugustinis fourth question.
Pray tell me what any one ought to suffer
who may have abstracted anything from a
church by theft ?

Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

In this case thy Fraternity can consider,
with regard to the person of the thief, how he
may be best corrected. For there are some
who commit theft though they have resources,
and there are others who transgress in this
matter out of want. Hence it is needful that
some should be corrected by fines, but some
by stripes, and some more severely, but some
more lightly. And, when any one is some-
what severely dealt with, he siiould be dealt
with in charity, and not in anger ; since to
the man himself who is corrected the punish-
ment is assigned lest he should be given up
to the fires of hell. For we ought so to main-
tain discipline towards believers as good
fathers are wont to do towards their sons,
whom they both smite with blows for their
faults, and yet seek to have as their heirs the
very persons on whom they inflict pain, and
keep what they possess for the very same
whom they seem to assail in anger. This
charity, then, should be retained in the mind,
so that nothing at all be done beyond the
rule of reason.

Thou askest also how they ought to restore
what they have abstracted by theft from
churches. But far be it from us that the
Church should receive back with increase
what it seems to lose of its earthly things, and
seek gain out of losses, [a/., for de daninis^
de vanis. So Bede.]

Augustine's fifth question.

I beg to know whether two brothers may
marry two sisters, who are far removed from
them in descent.

Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.
This by all means may be done. For no-
thing at all is found in Holy Writ which seems
to be opposed to it.


76


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


Augustine' s sixth question.
As far as what generation believers ought
to be joined in marriage with their kin, and
whether it is lawful to be joined in mar-
riage with stepmothers' and brothers* wives?

Ansiver of the blessed pope Gregory,

A certain earthly law in the Roman republic
allows the son and daughter, whether of a
brother and sister, or of two brothers, or of
two sisters, to marry together. But we have
learnt by experience that progeny cannot
ensue from such marriages. And the sacred
law forbids to uncover the nakedness of
kindred. Wlience it follows that only the
third or fourth generations of believers may
be lawfully joined together ^. For the second,
which we have spoken of, ought by all means
to abstain from each other. But to have
intercourse with a stepmother is a grave
offence, seeing that is also written in the
law, thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of
thy father (Lev. xviii. 7). Not indeed that
a son can uncover his father's nakedness;
but, since it is written in the law. They too
shall be one flesh (Gen. ii. 24), he who has
presumed to uncover the nakedness of his
stepmotlier, who has been one flesh with his
father, has in truth uncovered his father's
nakedness. It is also forbidden to have inter-
course with a brother's wafe, who, through her
former conjunction, has become the flesh of
the brother. For which thing also John the
Baptist was beheaded, and crowned with holy
martyrdom. He was not bidden to deny
Christ; and yet for confessing Christ he was
slain ; because the same our Lord Jesus
Christ had said, I a/n the truth (John xiv. 6);
and because John was s!ain for the truth, he
shed his blood for Christ.

August tile's seventh question 9.

I request to have it declared whether to
such as are thus foully joined together separa-
tion should be enjoined, and the oblation of
sacred communion denied them ?

Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

But, since there are many in the nation of
the Angli who while they were yet in unbelief
are said to have been associated in such


8 This allowance of marriage between second cousins seems
to have caused surprise in some quarters. Cf. Epistle of Felix
of Messana to Gregory (XIV. i6). The motive of St. Boniface
in his letter to Nothelm, referred to above under note i, in which
he asked for a copy of these Questions and Answers, seems to
have been a desire to ascertain whether Gregory had really
allowed such marriages. He writes, " in qua inter csetera capi-
tula continetur quod in tertia generatione propinquitatis fidelibus
liceat matrimonia copulare.''

9 This question is not in Bede, or in Cod. Lucens., what
follows being given as a continuation of the preceding answer.
It begins wiTh *' Quia vero." Ci'. note 2.


unholy marriages, they should be admonished,
when they come to the faith, to abstain from
each other, and be made to understand that
this is a grievous sin. Let them fear God's
tremendous judgment, lest for carnal delight
they incur the pains of eternal torment. Yet
they should not on this account be deprived
of the communion of the Lord's body and
blood, lest we should seem to punish them
for what they had bound themselves in through
ignorance before the laver of baptism. For at
this time holy Church corrects some things
with fervour, tolerates some things with gentle-
ness, connives at and bears some things with
consideration, so as often to repress what she
opposes by bearing and conniving. But all
who come to the faith are to be warned not
to dare to perpetrate any such thing : and if
any should perpetrate it, they must be de-
prived of the communion of the Lord's body
and blood, since, as in those who have done it
in ignorance the fault should be to a certain
extent tolerated, so it should be severely
visited in those who are not afraid to sin
in spite of knowledge.

Augustine's eighth question.

I ask whether, if length of way intervenes,
and bishops are not able to assemble easily,
a bishop should be ordained without the
presence of other bishops.

Ansiver of the blessed pope Gregory,

Indeed in the Church of the Angli, wherein
thou art so far the only bishop, thou canst not
ordain a bishop otherwise than without bishops*
For, when bishops shall come from Gaul, they
will attend thee as witnesses for the ordination
of a bishop ^ But we desire thy Fraternity
so to ordain bishops in England that the
bishops themselves be not separated from one
another by long distances, to the end that
there be no necessary cause why they should
not come together in the case of the ordination
of any bishop. For the presence of some
other pastors also is exceedingly advantageous;
and hence they ought to he able to come
together as easily as possible. When there-
fore, God granting it, bishops shall have been
ordained in places not far from each other^
an ordination of bishops should in no case
take place without three or four bishops being
assembled. For in spiritual things themselves,


I It is to be observed that Gregory, though aware of the
existence of British bishops, as his answer to the following ques-
tion shews, does not contemplate their taking part in ordinations.
He may have been unwilling to invue their co-opeiation till
assured of their orthodoxy and submission to the Koman See.
The failure of Augustine's negociations with them has been
attributed to his own imperious attitude towards them. But
it is at least a question whether his instructions did not justify
the position he assumed (see Bede, H.E. II. 2..).


EPISTLE LXIV.


17


that they may be ordered wisely and maturely,
we may draw an example even from carnal
things. For assuredly, when marriages are
celebrated in the world, some married persons
are called together, that those who have gone
before in the way of marriage may be associ-
ated also in the ensuing joy. Why then, in
this spiritual ordination too, wherein man is
joined to God through a sacred mystery,
should not such come together as may both
rejoice in the advancement of him who is
ordained bishop and pour forth prayers to the
Almighty Lord for His protection ?

Augustine^ s ninth question,

I ask also how we should deal with the
bishops of Gaul and of the Britons.

Ans7ver of the blessed pope Gregory.

Over the bishops of Gaul we give thee no
authority, since from the ancient times of my
predecessors the bishop of Arelate {Aries) has
received the pallium, and we ought by no
means to deprive him of the authority that
he has acquired. If therefore it should happen
that thy Fraternity should pass into the pro-
vinces of Gaul, thou shouldest act with the
same bishop of Arelate in such a way that
vices in bishops, if any, may be corrected.
And, if he should by chance be lukewarm
in the vigour of discipline, he must be stirred
up by the zeal of thy Fraternity. To him we
have also written letters ^, bidding him aid
thee with his whole soul, whenever thy
Holiness may be present in Gaul, that you
may together repress in the manners of
bishops all that is contrary to the command
of our Creator. But thou thyself wilt not
have power to judge the bishops of Gaul by
authority of thine own ; but by persuading,
alluring, and also exhibiting thine own good
works for their imitation, and so moulding the
dispositions of the vicious to concern for
holiness ; seeing that it is written in the law,
One passing through the standing corn of an-
other must not put ill a sickle, but rub the cars
with his hand and eat (Deut. xxxii. 25). Thou
canst not, then, put in the sickle of judgment
into the crop that is seen to be committed
to another ; but by kindly good offices thou
canst strip the corn of the Lord from the
chaff of its defects, and by admonishing and
persuading, convert it, as it were by chewing,
into the body of the Church. But whatever
is to be done authoritatively, let it be done
with the aforesaid bishop of Arelate, lest there
should be any disregard of what the ancient
institution of the Fathers has provided. But

2 Cf. XI. 68.


of all British bishops we commit the charge
to thy Fraternity, that the unlearned may be
taught, the weak strengthened by persuasion,
the perverse corrected by authority.

A ugus tine's request .

I request that the relics of Saint Sixtus the
martyr may be sent to us 3.

The grant of Gregory.

We have done what thou hast requested, to
the end that the people who formerly said
that they venerated in a certain place the
body of Saint Sixtus the martyr, which seems
to thy Fraternity to be neither the true body
nor truly holy, may receive certain benefits
from the most holy and approved martyr, and
not reverence what is uncertain. Yet it seems
to me that, if the body which is believed by
the people to be that of some martyr is
distinguished among them by no miracles, and
if further there are none of the more aged who
declare that they had heard the order of his
passion from progenitors, the relics which thou
hast asked for should be so deposited apart
that the place in which the aforesaid body
lies, be entirely blocked up, and that the
people be not allowed to desert what is
certain, and venerate what is uncertain.

Augustifte's tenth question.

Whether a pregnant woman should be bap-
tized, or, when she has brought forth, after
what length of time she should be allowed
to enter the church. Or, to guard also against
her issue being surprised by death, after how
many days it may receive the sacrament of
holy baptism. Or after what length of time
her husband may have carnal intercourse with
her. Or, if she is in her sickness after the
manner of women, whether she may enter the
church, or receive the sacrament of sacred
communion. Or whether a man after inter-
course with his wife, before he has been washed
with water, may enter the church, or even
go to the ministry {ministeriuni : in Bede,
niysteriuni) of sacred communion. All these
things it is right we should have made known
to us for the rude nation of the Angli.

Aiiswer of the blessed pope Gregory.

I doubt not that thy Fraternity has been
asked these questions, and I think that I have
supplied thee with answers to them. But
I believe that thou wishest what thou art able
of thyself to say and think to be confirmed
by my reply. For why should not a pregnant
woman be baptized, fecundity of the flesh


3 This question, with the answer to it, is absent from Bede,
and Cod. Lucens., and may be regarded as an interpolation.


78


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


being no fault before the eyes of Almighty
God ? For, wlien our first parents bad trans-
gressed in Paradise, they lost by the just
judgment of God the immortality which they
had received. Therefore, because Almighty
God would not utterly extinguish the human
race for their fault, He took away immortality
from man for his sin, and yet, in the kindness
of His pity, reserved to him fruitfulness in
offspring. With what reason then can wliat
has' been preserved to the human race by the
gift of Almighty God be debarred from the
grace of holy baptism ? For indeed it is very
foolish to suppose that a gift of grace can
possibly be inconsistent with tliat mystery
wherein all human sin is entirely extinguished.

But as to how many days after her delivery
a woman may enter the church, thou hast
learnt that by the direction of the Old Testa-
ment she ought to keep away xxxiii. days
for a male child, but Ixvi. for a female. It
should be known, however, that this is under-
stood mystically. For, if in the same hour
in which she has been delivered she enters
the church, she subjects herself to no burden
of sin. For it is the pleasure of the flesh, not
the pain, that is in fault. But it is in the
carnal intercourse that the pleasure lies; for
in bringing forth of offspring there is pain
and groaning. Whence even to the first
mother of all it is said, I?i sorrow thou shalt
bring forth children (Gen. iii. i6). If, there-
fore, we forbid a woman after her delivery
to enter the church, we reckon her very
penalty to her for a fault. Moreover, it is by
no means forbidden that either a woman after
delivery or that which she has brought forth
should be baptized without delay, if in peril
of death ; she even in the same hour in which
she is delivered, or it in the same hour in
which it is born. For, as in the case of those
who live and have discretion the grace of the
holy mystery should be seen to with great
discernment, so to those who are in imminent
danger of death it should be offered without
any delay, lest, while time is being sought for
administering the mystery of redemption, death
should shortly intervene, and no way be found
of redeeming the time that has been lost.

Further, her husband ought not to cohabit
with her till that which is brought forth be
weaned. But an evil custom has arisen in
the ways of married persons, that women scorn
to nurse the children whom they bring forth,
and deliver them to other women to be nursed.
Which custom appears to have been devi.sed
for the sole cause of incontinency, in that,
being unwilling to contain themselves, they
think scorn to suckle their offs[)ring. Those
women therefore who, after an evil custom,


deliver their children to others to be nursed
ought not to have intercourse with their
husbands unless the time of their purification
has passed, seeing that, even without the
reason of childbinh, they are forbidden to
have intercourse with their husbands while
held of their accustomed sicknesses; so much
so that the sacred law smites with death any
man who shall go into a woman having her
sickness (Lev. xx. i8). Yet still a woman,
while suffering from her accustomed sickness,,
ought not to be prohibited from entering the
church, since the superfluity of nature cannot
be imputed to her for guilt, and it is not just
that she should be deprived of entrance into
the church on account of what she suffers
unwillingly. For we know that the woman
who suffered from an issue of b!ood, coming
humbly behind the Lord, touched the hem
of his garment, and immediately her infirmity
departed from her (Luke viii.). If then one
who had an issue of blood could laudably
touch the Lord's garment, why sh.ould it be
unlawful for one who suft'ers from a menstruum
of blood to enter in the Lord's Church?

But that woman, thou wilt say, was com-
pelled by infirmity ; but these are held of their
accustomed sicknesses. Yet consider, dearest
brother, how all that we suffer in this mortal
flesh is of infirmity of nature, ordained after
guilt by the fitting judgment of God. For to
hunger and to thirst, to be hot, to be cold, to
be weary, is of infirmity of nature. And to
seek food against hunger, and drink against
thirst, and cool air against heat, and clothing
against cold, and rest against weariness,
what is it but to search out certain healing ap-
pliances against sicknesses ? For in females
also the menstruous flow of their blood is a
sickness. If therefore she presumed well who
in her state of feebleness touched the Lord's
garment, why should not what is granted to
one person in nifirmity be granted to all
women who through defect of their nature are
in infirmity?

Further, she ought not to be prohibited
during these same days from receiving the
mystery of holy communion. If, however^
out of great reverence, she does not presume
to receive, she is to be commended ; but, if
she should receive, she is not to be judged.
For it is the part of good dispositions in some
way to acknowledge their sins even where
there is no sin, since often without sin a thing
is done which comes of sin. Whence also,
when we hunger, we eat without sin, though it
has come of the sin of the first man that we
do hunger. For the menstruous habit in
nomen is no sin, seeing that it occurs natur-
ally ; yet still that nature itself lias been so


EPISTLE LXIV.


79


vitiated as to be seen to be polluted even
without the intention of the will is a defect
that conies of sin, whereby human nature may
perceive what through judgment it has come
to be, so that man who voluntarily committed
sin may bear the guilt of sin involuntarily.
And so females, when they consider them-
selves as being in their habit of sickness, if
they presume not to approach the sacrament
of the body and blood of the Lord, are to be
commended for their right consideration.
But when, out of the habit of a religious Hfe,
they are seized with a love of the same mys-
tery, they are not to be restrained, as we have
said. For, as in the old Testament outward
acts were attended to, so in the New Testa-
ment it is not so much what is done out-
wardly as what is thought inwardly that is
regarded with close attention, that it may be
punished with searching judgment. For,
while the law forbids the eating of many
things as being unclean, the Lord nevertheless
says in the Gospel, Not that zuhich goeth into
the mouth defileth a man, but the things wliich
come forth from the hearty these are they which
defile a man (Matth. xv, ii). And soon after
He added in explanation. Out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts (lb. 19). Hence it is
abundantly indicated that what is shewn by
Ahnighty God to be polluted in act is that
which is engendered of the root of polluted
thought. Whence also Paul the Apostle says,
All things are pure to the pure ; but unto them
that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure
(Tit. i. 15). And immecUately, to declare the
cause of this defilement, he subjoins, For their
mind and conscience is defiled. If, then, food is
not impure to one whose mind is not impure,
why should what with a pure mind a woman
suffers from nature be reckoned to her for
impurity ?

Further, a man after sleeping with his own
wife ought not to enter the church unless
washetl with water, nor, even when washed,
enter immediately. Now the law enjoined on
the ancient people that a man after inter-
course with a woman should both be washed with
water and not enter the church before sunset.
Which may be understood spiritually as mean-
ing that a man has intercourse with a woman
when his mind is joined with delight in thought
to illicit concupiscence, and that, unless the
fire of concupiscence in his mind should cool,
he ought not to think himself worthy of the
congregation of his brethren, seeing himself to
be burdened widi by lewdness of wrong
desire. For, although in this matter different
nations of men have different noiions, and
some are seen to observe one practice and
some another, yet the usage of the Romans


from ancient times has always been for a
man after intercourse with his own wife both
to seek the purification of the bath and to
refrain reverently for a while from entering
the church.

Nor do we, in saying these things, account
wedlock as sin. But, since even the lawful inter-
course of the wedded cannot take place wnthout
pleasure of the flesh, entrance into a sacred
place should be abstained from, because the
pleasure itself can by no means be without sin.
For he had not been born of adultery or fornica-
tion, but of lawful wedlock, who said. Behold I
was conceived in iniquities^ and ijt sin my mother
brought me forth (Ps. 1. 7). For, knowing
himself to have been conceived in iniquities,
he groaned for having been born in sin, be-
cause the tree bears in its branch the vicious
humour which it has drawn from its root.
Yet in these words he does not call the inter-
course of the wedded iniquity in itself, but in
truth only the pleasure of the intercourse.
For there are many things which are allowed
and legitimate, and yet we are to some extent
defiled in the doing of them ; as often we
attack faults with anger, and disturb the tran-
quillity of our own mind. And, though what
is done is right, yet it is not to be approved
that the mind is therein disturbed. For in-
stance, he had been angry against the vices of
transgressors who said. Mine eye is disturbed
because of anger (Ps. vi. 8). P'or, since the
mind cannot, unless it be tranquil, lift itself up
to the light of contemplation, he grieved that
his eye was disturbed in anger, because,
though assailing evil doings froai above, he still
could not help being confused and disturbed
from contemplation of the highest things.
And therefore his anger against vice is laud-
able, and yet it troubles hmi, because he felt
that he had incurred some guilt in being dis-
turbed. Lawful copulation of the flesh ought
therefore to be for the purpose of offsprnig,
not of pleasure ; and intercourse of the flesh
should be for the sake of producing children,
and not a satisfaction of frailties. If, then,
any one makes use of his wife not as seized by
the desire of pleasure, but only for the sake of
producing children, he certainly, with regard
to entering the church or taking the mystery
of the body and blood of tiie Lord, is to be
left to his own judgment, since by us he ought
not to be prohibited from receiving it who
knows no burning though in the midst of fire.
But, when not the love of producing offspring
but pleasure dominates in the act of mter-
course, married persons have something to
mourn over in their intercourse. For holy
preaching concedes them diis, and yet in the
very concession shakes the mind with fear.


So


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


For, when the Apostle Paul said, JV/io cannot
contai7i let him have his 07vn 7vife, he straight-
way took care to add. But I speak this by way
of iti diligence^ 7iot by zvay of command (i Cor.
vii. 7). For whnt is just and right is not in-
dulged : what he s[)oke of as indulged he
shewed to be a fault.

Furthermore it is to be attentively con-
sidered that the Lord in mount Sinai, when
about to speak to the people, first charged
the same people to abstain from women. And
if there, where the Lord spoke to men through
a subject creature, purity of body was required
wdth such careful provision that they who
were to hear the w^ords of God might not have
intercourse with w^omen, how much more
ought those who receive the Body of the
Almighty Lord to keep purity of the flesh in
themselves, lest they be weighed down by the
greatness of the inestimable mystery ! Hence
also it is said through the priest to David
concerning his servants, that if they were pure
from w^omen they might eat the shewbread ;
which they might not receive at all unless
David first declared them to be pure from
women. Still a man who after intercourse
with his wife has been w^ashed with water may
receive even the mystery of sacred com-
munion, since according to the opinion above
expressed it was allowable for him to enter the
church.

Augustine's eleventh question.

I ask also whether after an illusion, such is
accustomeu to occur in dreams, any one may
receive the body of the Lord, or, if he be a
priest, celebrate the sacred mysteries ?

Ansiver of the blessed Pope Gregory,

Such a one the Testament of the old law,
as we have ah'eady said in the last section,
declares indeed to be polluted, and does not
allow to enter the church until the evening, or
without being washed with water. But one
who understands this not only with special
reference to that people at that time, but also
spiritually, will regard it under the same intel-
lectual conception that we have spoken of
before ; namely, that he has, as it were, an
illusion in a dream who, being tempted by un-
cleanness, is defiled in thought by true images.
But he is to be washed with water in the sense
of washing away the sins of thought with tears.
And, unless the fire of temptation has passed
away, he should feel himself to be guilty, as it
were, until the evening.

But in this same illusion discrimination is
very necessary, since it ought to be nicely con-
sidered from what cause it occurs to the mind
of the sleeper. For sometimes it happens from


surfeit, sometimes from superfluity or infirmity
of nature, sometimes from cogitation. And
indeed when it has come to pass from super-
fluity or infirmity of nature, it is by no means
to be viewed with alarm, since the mind is to
be commiserated as havinsr endured it un-
wittingly rather than as having done it. But
when the appetite of gluttony in taking food
is carried beyond measure, and consequently
the receptacles of the humours are loaded, the
mind has therefore some guilt, yet not to the
extent of prohibition from receiving the sacred
mystery, or celebrating the solemnities of mass,
when perchance a festival day demands it, or
necessity itself requires the mystery to be ex-
hibited by reason of there being no other
priest in the place. For, if others competent
to execute the mystery are present, an illusion
caused by surfeit ought not to debar from
receiving the sacred mystery, though immola-
tion of the sacred mystery ought, as I think,
to be humbly abstained from ; provided only
that foul imagination has not shaken the soul
of the sleeper. For there are some to whom
the illusion for the most part so arises that
their mind, though in the body which sleeps,
is not defiled by foul imaginations. With
regard to this, there is one case in which it
is shewn that the soul itself is guilty, not
being free even from its own judgment ; that
is where, while it remembers having seen
nothing when the body was asleep, it still
remembers having fallen into lewdness wdien
the body was awake. But, if the illusion arises
in the soul of the sleeper from foul cogitation
while he was awake, the mind's guilt is patent
to itself. For a man sees from what root that
defilement proceeded, if he has endured unwit-
tingly what he wittingly cogitated. But it is
to be considered whetner the cogitation ensued
from suggestion, or delight, or sinful consent.
For there are three ways in which all sin is
accomplished ; to wit, by suggestion, by delight,
and by consent. Suggestion is through the
devil, delight through the flesh, consent tnrough
the spirit ; since, m the case of the first sm,
the serpent suggested it, Eve, as the flesh,
delighted in it, but Adam, as the spirit, con-
sented to it. And great discernment is needed,
that the mind may sit as judge of itself to
distinguish between suggestion and delight,
between delight and consent. For, when the
evil si^irit suggests sin in the soul, if no delight
in sin should follow, no sin is in any wise com-
mitted. But, when the flesh has begun to take
delight, then sin has its commencement. But,
if it sinks to deliberate consent, then sin is
known to be completed. In suggestion there-
fore is the seed of sin, in delight its nutriment,
in consent its completion. And it often hap-


EPISTLE LXVI.


8i


pens that what the evil spirit sows in the
tlu)ught tlie flesh draws into delight, and yet
the mind does not consent to this delight.
And, while the flesh cannot be delighted with-
out the soul, still the mind, though struggling
against the pleasures of the flesh, is in some
way bound against its will in carnal delight, so
as by force of reason to protest against it and
not consent to it, and yet to be bound by the
delight, but still to groan exceedingly for being
bound. Whence even that chief soldier of the
heavenly army groaned, saying, / see anotJier
law in my members fight iiig against the law of
my mitid^ and bringing me into captivity to the
law of sin which is in my members (Rom.
vii. 23). Yet, if he was a captive, he did not
fight. But he did fight too, and therefore he
was not a captive. And therefore he fought
by the law of the mind, which the law which is
in the members fought against. If he thus
fought, he was not a captive. Behold then,
man is, so to speak, both a captive and free :
free with regard to the righteousness which he
loves ; a captive with regard to the delight
which he endures unwillingly.

EPISTLE LXV.
To Augustine, Bishop of the Angli^.

Gregory to Augustine, i^c.

Though it is certain that for those who
labour for Almighty God ineffable rewards of
an eternal kingdom are reserved, yet we must
needs bestow honours upon them, that by
reason of remuneration they may apply them-
selves the more manifoldly in devotion to
spiritual work. And, since the new Church
of the Angli has been brought to the grace of
Ahnighty God through the bountifulness of the
same Lord and thy labours, we grant to thee
the use of the pallium therein for the solemniza-
tion of mass only, so that thou mayest ordain
bishops in twelve several places, to be subject
to thy jurisdiction, with the view of a bishop of
the city of London being always consecrated
in future by his own synod, and receiving the
dignity of the i^allium from this holy and
Apostolical See which by the grace of God
I serve. Further, to the city of York we desire
thee to send a bishop whom thou mayest judge


4 In the scheme, sketched in this letter, for the constitution of
the Cliurch in England, which Gregory seems to have contem-
plated being carried out in Augustine's own day, he shews serious
Ignorance of the state of things in England at the time, and
consequently of possibilities. Among other things he appears
to have- known little of the ancient British Church, or of the
independent position which its bishops would be likely to assume.
Still it is interesting to observe tiiat the sciieme in its main
features — that of two independent Metropolitans, in the North
and in the South, each vvim his suffragan bishops under them —
was after all eventually realized, and that the present constitution
of the English Church may be traced to this letter ; only that
Canterbury never yielded its primitive dignity, as had been pro-
posed, to London.

VOL. XIII.


fit to be ordained ; so that, if this same city
with the neiglibouring places should receive
the word of God, he also may ordain twelve
bishops^ so as to enjoy the dignity of a metro-
politan : for to him also, if our life is continued,
we propose, with the favour of God, to send a
pallium ; but yet we desire to subject him to
the control of thy Fraternity. But after thy
death let him be over the bishops whom he
shall have ordained, so as to be in no wise
subject to the jurisdiction of the bishop of
London. Further, between the bishops of
London and York in the future let there be
this distinction of dignity, that he be accounted
first who has been first ordained. But let them
arrange by council in common, and with con-
cordant action, whatever things may have to
be done in zeal for Christ ; let them be of one
mind in what is right, and accomplish what
they are minded to do without disagreement
with each other.

But let thy Fraternity have subject to thy-
self under our God not only those bishops
whom thou shalt ordain, and those whom the
bishop of York may ordain, but also all the
priests of Britain, to the end that they may
learn the form of right belief and good living
from the tongue and life of thy Holiness, and,
executing their ofiice well in their faith and
manners, may attain to heavenly kingdoms
when it may please the Lord. God keep thee
safe, most reverend brother. Given on the
tenth day of the Kalends of July, in the 19th
year of the empire of our lord Mauricius
Tiberius, the i8th year after the consulship of
the same lord, Indiction 4.

EPISTLE LXVL
To Edilbert, King of the Angli.

Gregory to Edilbert, &c.

On this account Almighty God advances
good men to the government of peoples, that
through them He may bestow the gilts of His
loving-kindness on all over whom they are
preferred. This we have found to be the case
\\\ the nation of the Angh, which your Glory
has been put over to the mtent that througii
the good things granted to you, heavenly
beneiits might be conferred on the nation
subject to you And so, glorious son, keep
guard with anxious mind over the grace which i
thou hast received from above. Make haste
to extend the Christian laith among the
peoples under thy sway, redouble the zeal
of tny rectitude in their conversion, put down
the worship of idols, overturn the edifices of
their temples 5, build up the manners of thy


5 This direction was modified in a subsequent letter to Mellitus
(XI. 76).


82


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


subjects in great purity of life by exhorting,
by terrifying, by enticing, by correcting, by
shewing examples of well-doing ; that so you
may fmd Him your recompenser in heaven
Whose name and knowledge you shall have
spread abroad on earth. For He Himself will
make the name of your glory even more
glorious to posterity, if you seek and maintain
His honour among the nations. For so Con-
stantine, the once most pious Emperor, recall-
ing the Roman republic from perverse wor-
shippings of idols, subjected it with himself
to our Almighty Lord God Jesus Christ, and
turned himself with his subject peoples with all
his heart to Him. Hence it came to pass that
that man surpassed in praise the name of
ancient princes, and excelled his predecessors
as much in renown as in well-doing. And
now, therefore, let your Glory make haste
to infuse into the kings and peoples subject
to you the knowledge of God, P'ather, Son
and Holy Spirit, that you may both surpass
the ancient kings of your race in renown and
in deserts, and the more you shall have wiped
away the sins of others among your subjects,
the more secure you may become with regard
to your own sins before the terrible scrutiny
of Almighty God.

Moreover, you have with you our most re-
verend brother, Augustme the bishop, learned
in monastic rule, replete with knowledge of
holy Scripture, endowed by the grace of God
with good works. Listen gladly to his ad-
monitions, follow them devoutly, keep them
studiously in remembrance : for, if you listen
to him in what he speaks in behalf of Almighty
God, the same Ahiiighty God will the sooner
listen to him when he prays for you. For, if
(which God forbid) you disregard his words,
when will it be possible for Almighty God
to hear him for you, whom you neglect to
hear for God ? With all your heart, therefore,
bind ye yourselves in fervour of faith to him,
and aid his endeavours by the power which
he gives you from above, that He Whose faith
you cause to be received and kept in your
kingdom may Himself rnake you partakers
of His own Kingdom.

Furthermore, we would have your Glory
know that, as we learn from the words of the
Almighty Lord in holy Scripture, the end
of the present world is already close at hand,
and the reign of the saints is coming, which
can have no end. And, now that this end
of the world is approaching, many things are
at hand which previously have not been ;
to wit, changes of the air, terrors from heaven,
and seasons contrary to the accustomed order
of times, wars, famine, pestilences, earthquakes
in divers places. Yet these things will not


come in our days, but after our days they will
all ensue. You therefore, if you observe any
of these things occurring in your land, by no
means let your mind be troubled, since these
signs of the end of the world are sent before-
hand for this purpose, that we should be
solicitous about our souls, suspectful of the
hour of death, and in our good deeds be found
prepared for the coming Judge. These things,
glorious son, we have now briefly spoken of,
that, when the Christian faith shall have been
extended in your kingdom, our speech to you
may also extend itself to greater length, and
that we may be pleased to speak so much the
more fully as joy multiplies itself in our heart
for the perfected conversion of your nation.

I have sent you some small presents, which
to you will not be small, when received by
you as of the benediction of the blessed
Apostle Peter. And so may Almighty God
guard and perfect in you the grace which He
has begun, and extend your life here through
courses of many years, and after a long life
receive you in the congregation of the heavenly
country. May heavenly grace keep your Ex-
cellency safe, sir son {doinine fill). Given this
loth day of the Kalends of July, the 19th
year of the empire of our most pious lord
Mauricius Tiberius Augustus, the i8th year
after the consulship of the same our lord,
Lidiction 4.

EPISTLE LXVII.
To QuiRicus, Bishop, &c.

Gregory to Quiricus, Bishop, and the other
catholic bishops in Fliberia ^.

Since to charity nothing is afar off, let those
who are divided in place be joined by letter.
The bearer of these presents, coming to the
Church of the blessed Peter, Prince of the
apostles, asserted that he had received letters
for us from your Fraternity, and had lost them,
with other things also, in the city of Jerusalem.
In them, as he says, you were desirous of
enquiring with regard to priests and people
who have been bewildered in the error of
Nestorian heresy, when they return to the
Catholic Church which is the mother of all
the elect, whether they should be baptized, or
joined to the bow^els of the same mother


6 Or Iberia, corrected from Hibernia by the Benedictine

Editors, with the support oi some few MSS. That the letter
was addressed to the bishops of Hibernia (i,e, Ireland) is highly
improbable. Not only is it unlikely that the Eastern heresy
of Nestorianism would have infected Ireland, but the fact also,
mentioned in the beginning of the letter, that the messenger Irom
the bishops addressed had passed through Jerusalem on his way
to Rome evidently points to some Eastern locality. For similar
reasons it cannot well be supposed that ibcria here denotes Spain.
It may have been the territory so-called in the neighbournood
of Armenia, between Cholchis on the West, and Albania on tne
East, now Guygistan.


EPISTLE LXVII.


83


Church by confession only of the one true
faith.

And indeed we have learnt from the ancient
institution of the Fathers that whosoever among
heretics are baptized in the name of the Trinity,
when they return to holy Church, may be re-
called to the bosom of mother Church either by
unction of chrism, or by imposition of hands,
or by profession of the faith only. Hence the
West reconciles Arians to the holy Catholic
Church by imposition of hands, but the East
by the unction of holy chrism. But Mono-
phy sites and others are received by a true con-
fession only, because holy baptism, which they
have received among heretics, then acquires in
them the power of cleansing, when either the
former receive the Holy Spirit by imposition
of hands, or the latter are united to the bowels
of the holy and universal Church by reason of
their confession of the true faith. Those here-
tics, however, who are not baptized in the
name of the Trinity, such as the Bonosiaci and
tlie CataphrygcE^ because the former do not
believe in Christ the Lord, and the latter with
a perverse understanding believe a certain bad
man, Montanus, to be the Holy Spirit, like
unto whom are many others; — these, when
they come to holy Church, are baptized, be-
cause what they received while in their error,
not being in the name of the Holy Trinity, was
not baptism. Nor can this be called an itera-
tion of baptism, which, as has been said, had
not been given in the name of the Trinity.
But the Nestorians, since they are baptized in
the name of the Holy Trinity — though dark-
ened by the error of their heresy in that, after
the manner of Jewish unbelief, they believe
not the Incarnation of the Only-begotten —
when they come to the Holy Catholic Church,
are to be taught, by firm holding and profes-
sion of the true faith, to believe in one and
the same Son of God and man, our Lord God
Jesus Christ, the same existing in Divinity
before the ages, and the same made man in
the end of the ages, because The Word was
made flesh and dwelt among us (Joh. i. 14).

But we say that the Word was made flesh,
not by losing what He was, but by taking what
He was not. For in the mystery of His Licar-
nation the Only-begotten of the Father in-
creased what was ours, but diminished not
what was His. Therefore the Word and the
flesh is one Person, as He says Himself, A'o
mafi hath ascended up to heaven^ but he that
came down fro7?i heaven, even the Sofi of man
7vhich is in heaven (Joh. iii. 14). He Who is
the Son of God in heaven was the Son of man
wlio spake on earth. Hence Joiin says. We
knoiv that the Son of God is come, and hath
given us an understanding (i Joh. v. 20). And


as to what understanding He has given us, he
straightway added, 2 hat we may k7iow the true
God. Whom in this place does he mean as
the true God but the Father Almighty? But,
as to what he conceives also of the Almighty
Son, he added, And that 2ve may he in his true
Son Jesus Christ. Lo, he says that the Father
is the true God, and that Jesus Christ is His
true Son. And what he conceives this true
Son to be he shews more plainly \ This is the
true God, and eter?ial life. If, then, according
to the error of Nestorius the Word were one
and the man Jesus Christ were another, he
who is true man would not be the true God
and eternal life. But the Only-begotten Son,
the Word before the Ages, was made man.
He is, then, the true God and eternal life.
Certainly, when the holy Virgin was about
to conceive Him, and heard the angel
speaking to her, she said, Behold the hand-
maid of the Lord ; be it unto me accoiding
to thy word (Luke i. ^i^). And, when she had
conceived Him, and went to Elizabeth her
kinswoman, at once she heard, Whence am
I wortJiy that the mother of my Lord should
come to me ? Lo, the same Virgin is called
both the handmaid and the mother of the
Lord. For she is the handmaid of the Lord,
because the Word before the Ages, the Only-
begotten, is equal to the Father ; but the
mother, because in her womb from the Holy
Spirit and of her flesh He was made man.
Nor is she the handmaid of one and the
mother of another, because, when the Only-
begotten of God, existing before the ages, of
her womb was made man, by an inscrutable
miracle she became both the handmaid of man
by reason of the divinity and the mother of
the Word by reason of the flesh. It was not
that the flesh was first conceived in the womb
of the Virgin, and the divinity afterwards came
into the flesh ; but that as soon as the Word
came into the womb, immediately the Word,
retaining the excellence of His own nature,
was made flesh. And the Only-begotten Son
of God, through the womb of the Virgin, was
born a perfect man, that is, in verity of flesh
and of rational soul. Whence also He is called
Anointed above his fellows, as the Psalmist
says, God, thy God, hath anointed thee ivith the
oil of gladness above thy fell 02vs (Ps. xliv. 8) 7.
For He is anointed with oil, that is to say with
the gift of the Holy Spirit. But He was
anointed above His fellows, because all we
men first exist as sinners, and afterwards are
sanctified through the unction of the Holy
Spirit. But He Who, existing as God before
the ages, was conceived as man through the


7 xlv. 7.


Z 2


84


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


Holy Spirit in the Virgin's womb at the end
of the ages, was there anointed by the same
Spirit, even where He was conceived. Nor
was He first conceived and afterwards an-
ointed ; but to be conceived by the Holy Spirit
of the flesh of the Virgin was itself to be an-
ointed by the Holy Spirit. This truth, then,
concerning His nativity let all who are brought
back from the perverse error of Nestorius con-
fess before the holy congregation of your Fra-
ternity, anathematising the same Nestorius with
all his followers, and all other heresies. The
venerable synods also which the universal
Chnrch receives let them promise to receive
and venerate ; and let your Holiness without
any hesitation receive them in your assembly,
allowing them to retain their own orders, in
order that, while you both carefully sift the
secrets of their hearts, and teach them through
true knowledge the right things they ought to
hold, and in gentleness make no difficulty or
contradiction with them with respect to their
own orders, you may snatch them from the
mouth of the ancient foe ; and that the retri-
bution of eternal glory with Almighty God may
increase to you the more as you gather together
many who may glory with you in the Lord
without end. Now may the Holy Trinity keep
you in its protection while you pray for us, and
grant you in its love still more manifold gifts.

[In Colbert, and Collect. Paul., " Given on
the tenth day of the Kalends of Jul. Indict. 4."]

EPISTLE LXVIIL
(To ViRGiLius, Bishop of Arelate Aries.)

Gregory to Virgilius, &c.

What affection should be bestowed on
brethren who come to us of their own accord
is apparent from the fact that they are usually
invited to visit us for the sake of charity.
And so, if our common brother the bishop
Augustine should chance to come to you,
let your Love, as is fit, so affectionately and
sweetly receive him as both to refresh him
with the boon of your consolation and teach
others also how fraternal charity should be
cultivated. And, since it often happens that
those who are placed at a distance learn first
from others of things that require amendment,
if he should perchance intimate to your Fra-
ternity any faults in priests or others, do you,
in concert with him, enquire into them with
all subtle investigation. And do you both
shew yourselves so strict and solicitous against
things that offend God and provoke Him
to wrath that, for the amendment of others,
both vengeance may smite the guilty and false
report not afflict the innocent. God keep thee
safe, most reverend brother. Given the loth


day of the Kalends of July, the 19th year
of the empire of our most pious lord Mauricius
Tiberius Augustus, the iSth year after the
same our lord's consulship, Indiction 4.

EPISTLE LXIX.
To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.
Gregory to Brunichild, &c.
Since it is written, Righteousness exalteth
a nation ;. but sin maketh peoples miserable
(Prov. xiv. 34), a kingdom is then beheved to
be stable ^^Xi^w a fault that is known of is
quickly amended. Now it has come to our
ears by the report of many, what we cannot
mention without exceeding affliction of heart,
that certain priests in those parts live so im-
modestly and wickedly that it is a shame for
us to hear of it and lamentable to tell it.
Lest, then, now that the rumour of this iniquity
has extended as far as here, the wrong doing
of others should smite either our soul or your
kingdom with the dart of its sin, we ought to
arise with ardour to avenge these things, lest
the wickedness of a few should be the perdi-
tion of many. For bad priests are the cause
of the ruin of a people. For who may offer
himself as an intercessor for a people's sins,
if the priest who ought to have prayed for it
commits more grievous offences? But, since
those whose place it is to prosecute these
things are stirred neither by care to enquire
into them nor by zeal to punish them, let
letters from you be addressed to us, and let
us send over, if you order it, a person with the
assent of your authority, who together with
other priests may search into these things
thoroughly, and amend them according to the
will of God. For indeed what we speak of is
not a thing to be winked at, since one who
can amend a fault and neglects to do so with-
out doubt makes himself partaker in it. See
therefore to your own soul, see to your grand-
sons, whom you wish to reign happily, see to
the provinces ; and, before our Creator stretches
out His hand to smite, take most earnest thought
for the correction of this wickedness, lest He
afterwards smite by so much the more sharply
as He now waits longer and more mercitully.
Know moreover that you will ofier a great
sacrifice of expiation to our God, if you cat off
speedily from your territories the infection oi
so great a sin.

EPISTLE LXXVI.

To Mellitus, Abbot.

Gregory to Mellitus, Abbot in France ^
Since the departure of our congregation,


8 This letter was sent after the departure of Mellitus with
the band of new missionaries i'roin Rome to Britain (see Pro-


EPISTLE LXXVII.


85


wiiich is with thee, we have been in a state
of great suspense from having heard notliing
of the success of your journey. But when
Almighty God shall have brought you to our
most reverend brother the bishop Augustine,
tell him that I have long been considering
with myself about the case of the Angli ; to
wit, that the temples of idols in that nation
should not be destroyed, but that the idols
tliemselves that are in them should be. Let
blessed water be prepared, and sprinkled in
these temples, and altars constructed, and
relics deposited, since, if these same temples
are well built, it is needful that they should
be transferred from the worship of idols to
the service of the true God ; that, when the
people themselves see that these temples are
not destroyed, they may put away error from
their heart, and, knowing and adoring the true
God, may have recourse with the more fami-
liarity to the places they have been accus-
tomed to. And, since they are wont to kill
many oxen in sacrifice to demons, they should
have also some solemnity of this kind in
a changed form, so that on the day of dedica-
tion, or on the anniversaries of the holy
martyrs whose relics are deposited there, they
may make for themselves tents of the branches
of trees around these temples that have been
changed into churches, and celebrate the
solemnity v/ith religious feasts. Nor let them
any longer sacrifice animals to the devil, but
slay animals to the praise of God for their own
eating, and return thanks to the Giver of all
for their fulness, so that, while some joys are
reserved to them outw^ardly, they may be able
the more easily to incline their minds to inward
joys. For it is undoubtedly impossible to cut
away everything at once from hard hearts, since
one who strives to ascend to the highest place
must needs rise by steps or paces, and not by
leaps. Thus to the people of Israel in Egypt
the Lord did indeed make Himself known ;
but still He reserved to them in His own wor-
ship the use of the sacrifices which they were
accustomed to offer to the devil, enjoining
them to immolate animals in sacrifice to Him-
self; to the end that, their hearts being
changed, they should omit some things in the
sacrifice and retain others, so that, though the
animals were the same as what they had been
accustomed to ofier, nevertheless, as they im-
molated them to God and not to idols, they
should be no longer the same sacrifices. This


legotnena, p. xxvi,), being intended to reach him while still in
1" ranee. In the date given at the end there is evidently an error
with regard to the day of the month. For several of the letters
sent by Mellitus being dated 10 Kal. Jul. (i e. June 22), this,
which was subsequent, cannot have been oiignially dated xv Kal.
Jul. (i.e June 17). 'I'he Indiiiion is given correctly. Gregory
had directed King Ethelbert (XI. 66) to destroy the heathen
temples. He now sees reason to modify any such orders.


then it is necessary for thy Love to say to our
aforesaid brother, that he, being now in that
country, may consider well bow he should
arrange all things. God keep thee safe, most
beloved son. Given this 15th day of the
Kalends of July, the 19th year of the em}) ire
of our most pious lord Mauricius Tiberius
Augustus, the i8th year after the consulship
of the same our lord, Indiction 4.

EPISTLE LXXVIL

To Boniface, Guardian {Defensorem\
IN Corsica.

Gregory to Boniface, &c.

Thy experience is not free from blame, in
that, knowing Aleria and Adjacium, cities
of Corsica, to have been long without bishops,
thou hast delayed admonishing their clergy
and people to choose for themselves priests.
But, since they ought to be no longer without
rulers of their own, hasten thou, on receiving
this authority, to exhort the clergy and people
of these cities severally, that they disagree not
among themselves, but that each city with one
consent choose for itself a priest to be con-
secrated. And, when they have made their
decree, let such person as shall have been
elected come to us. But, if they should be
unwilling to come to an unanimous decision,
being divided in their choice between two per-
sons, let both in like manner come to us, the
decree having been made in tie us.ial way, that,
after enquiry made into their lives and char-
acters, the one who may appear to be most fit
may be ordained. Seeing, moreover, that
many poor persons there are said to be
oppressed and to sufter prejudice, let thy
Experience give heed to this, and not allow
them to be unjustly aggrieved ; but so en-
deavour thyself that neither they who take
action be unreasonably hindered nor those
against whom action is taken be in danger of
sustaining damage unjustly.

Furthermore, it has reached our ears that
some of the clergy, thou being on the spot,
are held in custody by laymen. If this is so,
know that the blame will be imputed to thee,
since, if thou wert a man, it would not have
been the case. And accordingly thou must
needs pay attention in future so that thou
permit not the like to be done; but that, if
any one should have a cause of complaint
against a clerk, he resort to his bishop. And,
if perchance the latter should be suspected,
a commissioner must be deputed by him — or,
if this too should be objected to by the plaintiff,
by thy Experience, — who may compel the
parties to choose arbitrators by mutual consent.
And whatever may be decided by them, let it


86


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


be in all ways so carried out, with due ob-
servance of law, by thy own or the bishop's
care, that there may be no occasion for them to
weary themselves with disputes.

epistlp: lxxviti.

To Barbara and Antonina^.

Gregory to Barbara, &c.

On receiving your epistles, I was in all
manner of ways delighted to liear of your
wellbeing, and I entreat Almighty God that
He would guard you by His protection from
malignant spirits in thouglit, and from perverse
men, and Irom all contrariety; and that He
would, with the grace of His fear, settle you
in unions worthy of you, and cause us all to
rejoice in your settlement ^ But do you, most
sweet daughters, rest your hope on His help,
and, being always under the shadow of His
defence, both by praying and by well doing,
escape the plots of bad men. For, whatever
human comforts or adversities there may be,
there are none, unless either His grace protects
or Flis displeasure troubles you. Rest there-


9 See above, Epp. XXXV., XXXVI., in this book, and I. 34,
note 8, there referred to.

I If the marriage of the parents, Venantius and Italica, took
place, as conjectured in the note to I. 34, in the eleventh Indiction
(a.d. 592-3), and this letter was written in the fourth (at. 600-1),
tiie daughters would not be more than seven or eiyht years of age.
Still, even at this early age, their betrothal may have been
contennplated with a view to their settlement in Hie. But Venan-
tius may have married earlier than 592-3, soon after his return
to a secular life, and so the girls may have been a little older.
Neither, however, if our dates are right, could be more than ten
years old.


fore your hope on no one among men, but
bind your whole soul to trust in Almighty God.
While we sleep, then, He will protect you,
of whom it is written, Behold he that keepeih
Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep (Ps.
cxx. 4) 2.

As to your saying that you are in haste
to approach the threshliold of the blessed
Peter, Prince of the apostles, I wish exceed-
ingly, and wait with fervent desire, to see you
in his church united to husbands well worthy
of you ; that so both you may obtain some
little comfort from me, and I no little joy from
your presence. I have also commended your
causes to my most reverend brother the bishop
John3j and to Romanus the guardian {defen-
sori), that under God they may accomplish
what they have begun.

Your present of two racance 4, which you
sent me word were your work, I accepted
gladly. But yet know ye that I did not
believe the word you sent me. For you are
seeking praise from the work of others, seeing
that you have perhaps never yet put hand
to spindle. Nor yet does this circumstance
distress me, since I wish you to love the
reading of Holy Scripture, tiiat, so long as
Almighty God shall unite you to husbands,
you may know how you should live and how
you should manage your houses.


2 In English Bible, cxxi. 4.

3 Viz. John, bishop of Syracuse. See above, Ep. XXXVI.

4 On the meaning of this word, see XII., note 3.


BOOK XII.


EPISTLE I.

To DoMiNicus, Bishop of Carthage.

Gregory to Dominicus, &c.

How abundant is the charity of your heart
you sliew by its interpreier — your tongue, wliile
so seasoning the words of your epistles with its
sweetness that all you write is pleasant and
delightful. Hence it comes that we embrace
your Fraternity in the arms of love, though
unable to do so in the body. For it is the
ofhce of charity to supply to souls that are in
concord what distance of place denies. And,
since the sickness of our most loving brethren
saddens us even as their health refreshes us,
we give thanks to Almighty God, who has
solaced our sadness by good news. For. hav-
ing heard that you had contracted a very
severe illness, before the receipt of your letter
we were in a state of great distress. But since,
when we are snatched from peril of death, it is
uncertain, dearest brother, for what w^e are
reserved, let us turn the time of resi)ite to the
profit of our souls, and, having to render our
accounts to the coming Judge, let us fortify
our cause before Him with tears and good
works, that we may be counted worthy to have
security given us with regard to the things that
we have done. For in secular causes also
a kind judge frequently grants a respite to this
end, that one who had not been prepared
before may afterwards come to his trial pre-
pared. And what a thing it would be, were
we to neglect for the salvation of the soul what
we carefully attend to in matters of earthly
concern ! And so, since, according to the
words of the Apostle John, no one is without
sin, let us call to mind enticements of thought,
incontinence of tongue, deeds of transgression ;
and let us, while we may, with great knocking,
do away with the stains of our iniquities, that
our just and loving Redeemer may not execute
vengeance according to our deservings, but
according to His mercy be bent to pardon.
And, since we do not sufficiently fulfil our
office by weeping for our own sins only, let us
the more earnestly devote ourselves to the cus-
tody of the flock committed to us, and by per-
suading, by exhorting, by alarming, by preach-
ing, so far as heavenly clemency gives us power,


let us hasten to fulfil our office in very deed,
that, through the bounty of our Creator, we
may look for the longed for reward. But, since
w^e cannot do anything that is good without
divine aid, let us implore Almighty God, most
beloved brother, with united prayers, that He
would direct us, with the flock committed to
us, into the way of His commandments by the
leading of His grace, and Himself, who by the
gift of His mercy has willed us to have the
name of shepherds, grant to us to understand
and do what is well pleasing to Him. More-
over, we have received with the charity where-
with you sent it the blessing of the blessed
martyr Agileiis, transmitted to us by your
Holiness. In the month of September, Indic-
tion 5.

EPISTLE VIIL

To Columbus, Bishop of Numidta'.

Gregory to Columbus, &c.

How serious, and intolerable even to be
heard of, is the complaint of Donadeus, the
bearer of these presents, who describes himself
as having been a deacon, will be made mani-
fest to your Fraternity by the petition presented
by him, which is contained in what is sub-
joined below. But, since it has come to our
ears that he had been deposed for bodily sin,
let your Love make full enquiry into this, and,
if it is so, let him be consigned to penance,
that he may free hims'^lf by tears from the
bond of the profligacy of which he has been
guilty. If, however, he should be proved in-
nocent of any such transgression, all that his
petition contains must be enquired into with
diligent examination by you, together with the
primate of the council, and others our brethren
and fellow-bishops. And, if his complaint is
supported by the truth, let both such strictness
of canonical discipline be brought to bear on
his bishop Victor ^, who has not feared to com-
mit so great a wickedness au;ainst (jod and his
own priestly profession, that he may under-
stand the wickedness of what he has done ;
and let the man himself be restored to his
order ; for it is indeed preposterous, and con-


1 Cf. II. 48, note 8.

2 Victor was Primate of Numidia. See IV. 34, note 4.


88


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


fessedly against ecclesiastical order, that any
one whom his own fault or crime does not
d ^pose from the rank of the office which he fills
should be deprived invalidly at the will of this
or that person.

EPISTLE XXIV.
To John, Subdeacon of Ravenna 3,

Gregory to John, &c.

Some monks who came to me from the
monastery of the late abbot Claudius have
petitioned me that the monk Constantius
should be constituted their abbot. But I was
exceedingly set against them as touching their
petition, because they appeared to me to be
altogether of a worldly mind in seeking to
have a very worldly man for their abbot. For
I have learnt how this same Constantius studies
to possess property of his own : and this is the
strongest evidence that he has not the heart
of a monk. And I have learnt fuither that he
presumed to go alone, without any one of his
brethren with him, to a monastery that is
situate in the province of Picenum. From
this proceeding of his we know that he who
walks without a witness lives not aright : and
how can he maintain the rule for others who
knows not how to maintain it for himself?

Giving him up, therefore, they asked to have
a certain cellarer, Maurus by name, to whose
life and industry there are many testimonies,
the late abbot Claudius also with certain others
having spoken in his praise. Let thy Ex-
perience therefore make careful enquiry ; and,
if his life should be such as fit him for a place
of government, cause him to be ordained abbot
by our brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus.
But, if there is anything decidedly against
him, and they cannot find any suitable person
in tl.eir own congregation, let them choose
some one from elsewhere, and let him whom
they may choose be made abbot. Further,
take care by all means to tell our aforesaid
brother and fellow-bishop to put down with
the utmost earnestness the possession of pro-
perty of their own by four or five of the monks
of the monastery, which it has been found so
far impossible to correct, and to make haste
to cleanse this same monastery from such
a pest ; since, if private property is held there
by monks, it will not be possible for either
concord or charity to continue in this same
congregation. What, indeed, is a monk's state
of life but a despising of the world ? How,
then, do they despise the' world who while
placed in a monastery seek gold ? Wherefore


3 This subdeacon John appears to have been at this time
the pope's representative Ravenna, the seat of the exarch

of Italy.


let thy Experience so proceed that neither the
ordering of the place be deferred, nor any
complaint reach us any more on this subject.

Furthermore, forasmuch as my late most
dear son Claudius had heard me speak some-
thing about the Proverbs, the Song of Songs,
the Prophets, and also about the Books of
Kings and the Heptateuch, which on account
of my infirmity I was unable to commit to
writing, and he himself had dictated them for
transcription according to his own under-
standing of their meaning, lest they should be
forgotten, and in order that he might bring
them to me at a suitable time, so that they
might be more correctly dictated (for, when he
read to me what he had written, I found the
sense of what I had said had been altered very
disadvantageously), it is hence necessary that
thy Experience, avoiding all excuse or delay ,.
should go to his monastery, and assemble the
brethren, and that they should produce fully
and truly whatsoever papers on divers Scrip-
tures he had brought thither ; which do thou
take, and transmit them to me with all possible
speed.

Further, about thy return, having learnt
that thou hast incurred serious trouble, we will
consider by and by. Further, I have not been
pleased to hear what has been told me by
certain persons ; namely that our most rev-
erend brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus
causes my comments on the blessed Job to be
read publicly at vigils ; seeing that this is not
a popular work, and engenders hindrance
rather than advancement to rude hearers. But
tell him to cause the comments on the Psalms-
to be read at vigils, w^hich mould the minds of
secular persons to good manners. For indeed
I do not wish, while I am in this flesh, that
what I may have said should be readily made
known to men. For I took it amiss that Ana-
tolius the deacon of most beloved memory
gave to the lord Emperor, at his request and
command, the book of Pastoral Rule, which
my most holy brother and fellow-bishop Anas-
tasius of Antioch translated into the Greek
tongae. And, as I was informed by letter, it
pleased him much ; but it much dio[)leased me
that those who have what is better should bo
occupied in what is least.

Further, in the third part of the blessed Job,
in the verse wherein it is written, I know that
my Redeemer liveth^ I suspect that my aforesaid
j brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus has a
I corrupt copy. For in the copy in our book-
case this passage is given difterently from what
I I find to be in the copies possessed by others ;
and consequently I have had this passage cor-
rected, so that our often-named brother may
have it as it is in our bookcase. For there are


EPISTLE XXVIII.


89


four words, the absence of which from the
passage may cause the reader no httle diffi-
culty. Execute all these things thoroughly
and speedily. And, if thou canst do nothing
with the most excellent Exarch, shew thyself
not to have neglected to do what is in thy
power.

What shall I say concerning the place of
Albinus, as to which the answer given us is
plainly cont-rary to justice? Thou oughtest,
however, to consider the case attentively.
Furthermore, a little time ago we had enjoined
thy Experience to treat with our most eminent
son the praefect to the end that the care of the
conduits [fonnarujii) should be committed to
Augustus the vicecount, in that he is in all
respects a diligent and energetic man ^. And
thou hast so far so put off the business as not
even to inform us of what thou hast done.
And so, even now, hasten thou with all earnest-
ness to treat with the same our most eminent
son, that the conduits may be entirely com-
mitted to the aforesaid most distinguished
man, to the intent that he may to some extent
succeed in repairing them. For these conduits
are so scorned 'and neglected that, unless
greater attention be given to them, within
a short time they will go utterly to ruin. As
thou knowest, then, how necessary this busi-
ness is, and how advantageous to the general
community, thou must use thy best endeavours
that it may be committed, as we have said, to
the aforesaid man for his careful attention.
Given in the month of January, Indiction 5.

EPISTLE XXV.
To Roman us. Guardian {Defensorem) s.

Gregory to Romanus, &c.

It is well known to thy Experience that
Peter, whom we have made a guardian {de-
fensorei7i), is sprung from the estate belonging
to our Church which is called Vitelas. And
so, since we ought to shew kindness towards
him in such a way that nevertheless the
Church may suffer no disadvantage, we com-
mand thee by this order to charge him strictly
not to presume, under any pretext or excuse,
to marry his children anywhere but in that
estate to wiiich they are bound by law and
their condition ^. In this matter, too, it is
necessary for thy Experience to be very care-


4 The reference is to the conduits or aqueducts for supply ing
water to Rome, which it was the duty of the officer called
" praefectus," who appears to have been at this time resident
at Ravenna, to keep in order.

5 Romanus had been appointed guardian {defensor) of the
patrimony in Sicily. See IX. i8.

6 This was a case of a native of Sicily, who had been ascriptus
gleba, having been appointed a Dejensor Ecclesice. The purpose
of the epi.-tle is to guaid against his supposing that such appoint-
ment exempted his children from the restrictions imposed by their
birth.


ful, and to threaten them, so that on no oc-
casion whatever they may go out of the
property to which by their birth they are
subjected. For, if any one of them (as we
do not believe will be the case) should
presume to depart from it, he may be assured
that our assent will never be given to any
of them dwelling or being married outside the
estate on which they were born, but that also
their land should be superscribed 7. And then
know that you will run no slight risk, if
through your negligence any of them should
attempt to do any of the things which we
forbid.

EPISTLE XXVIII.
To Columbus, Bishop of Numidia^.

Gregory to Columbus, &c.

Inasmuch as it has long been known to us
how thy Fraternity is distinguished for priestly
gravity and ecclesiastical zeal, we have seen
sufficient reason for thy taking part in the
cognizance of things that require rebuke, lest,
if they should be put off through connivance,
every one should suppose that what he is
able to do is allowed him. Now after what
manner our brother Paulinus, bishop of j:he
city of Tegessis is alleged by his clerics and by
those who are constituted in sacred orders,
to have been excessive towards them in
corporal correction, thou needest not to be
told, seeing that, before this complaint reached
us, the matter, as we have learnt from their
statement, had already been made known
to thee. And, since superiors ought not to
have the right of punishing their subordinates
savagely, we have taken care to write to
Victor our brother and fellow-bishop, who
holds the primacy among } ou 9^ that, together
with thy Fraternity, or with others our brethren
and fellow bishops whom you may think fit
to call in, he may take cognizance of and
thoroughly investigate the case between our
aforesaid brother priest and his clergy. And
let thy Love so give the matter thy close and
careful attention, that the things that have
been reported to us may not pass without
a hearing, lest discord should be fomented
in the Church, whence it ought by all means
to be banished. And, if indeed the complaint
of his clergy against him is well lounded,
so take cognizance of his iault, which he has
scorned of his own accord to correct, with the

7 Sed et supersc7-ibi terj-ani eoruju. The meaning may be
that notices should be put on the land to which sucli detanlters
were attached, decla'-iiig that such and sucli persons belonged
to it and were bound to remain on it. Cf. V. 41, note 3, on
the phrase titnlos iuipoiere.

^ See II. 48, note i.

9 For the custom in Africa with regard to the primacy, see
I. 74, note 9.


90


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GRExVf.


force of our ecclesiastical decision that he may
both feel for the present what a grave offence
he has committed, and may learn for the future
that he cannot do more than it is lawful for
him to do. Above all things, tlien, we exhort
thee that thou study ardently to exercise the
zeal which we know thee to have for the sake
of God.

And, inasmuch as our said brother Paulinus
is said to confer ecclesiastical orders through
simoniacal heresy, which is a thing awful to
hear of, let it be thy care, along with the
aforesaid primate or otliers, to enquire thor-
ouglily into this also with all diligence. And,
if it should be found to be so (which God
forbid), effort must be made and action taken
that both he who has not feared to accept and
he who has not feared to give a bribe may be
smitten by a sentence of canonical punishment,
to the end that their correction may avail
as a reproof to many. And, before this deadly
root acquires strength and slays many more,
let it be condemned bv the decision of the
whole council, so that no one may ever dare
to accept or to give anything for any order
whatever, nor any be promoted for favour, but
all for merit, lest both ecclesiastical order be
confounded, and probity of life be held in
contempt, if one that is unworthy should
receive the reward of merit.

Further we have given orders to Hilarus our
Chartulariiis that, if the case should require it,
he refuse not to take part in your enquiry.

If, therefore, it should be necessary, inform
him by letter that you wish him to come to
you, to the end that by treating the matter
together with him you may better determine
what ought to be ordained. In the month
of March, Indiction 5. [N.B. This date is
absejit from several Codices.^

EPISTLE XXIX.

To Victor, Bishop ^

Gregory to Victor, &c.

While on the one hand it is a joy to us
to learn that our brethren are solicitous about
their children in fatherly charity, on the other
we count it no less a matter for sadness when
neither regard for other brethren nor consider-
ation of their priestly office avails to restrain
them from unlawful doings. How serious,
then, and how harsh is the complaint against
our brother Paulinus, bishop of the city of
Tegessis, made by his clerics and by those
who are in sacred orders, I have no doubt
is well known to thy Fraternity, since what has
reached us from a distance cannot have been

I At this time primate of Numidia. See preceding epistle.


hidden from thee who art near at hand. And,
since there is need of great caution lest this
bodily injury which they complain of at his
hands in excess of his powers should be ven-
tured on with allowance, or should grow worse
by being connived at, manifest excesses should
ever be so suppressed by canonical control
that one proceecHng may serve as a reproof
of what is past and a rule for the future.
Accordingly it becomes thee, together with our
most beloved common brother the bishop
Columbus, and with other priests whom you
may think fit to call on, to sift the case
between our above-named brother and his
clergy by means of a thorough investigation.
And, if the complaint of the petitioners stands
with truth, so correct ye tliis thing by a regular
reformation, that he may both be made aware
what evil thing he has done and learn for
the future not to exceed the limits of his office.
And suffer him not, as is said to be the case,
to disregard the rank of thy position, lest his
contempt be to his risk and to thy blame.
For whatever is committed by an inferior,
unless it be carefully corrected, reflects on the
person who occupies the superior place.

That other matter also, namely that the
same our brother Paulinus is said to confer
ecclesiastical orders for money, you should
fully and very strictly enquire into. x\nd,
if it should clearly appear to be so, as we hope
will not be the case, let your zeal for God
so kindle itself to avenge this wrong that both
the avarice of the orciainer may be turned
into a penalty, and, the unlawful ordination
being void of effect, the person ordained may
not enjoy the longed-for object of his ambition.
Herein we exhort you and before all things
admonish you, that your Fraternity study to
be so solicitous that, before the iniquity of
simoniacal heresy shall gain strength in your
parts from the offence of one, it may be cut off
from the root by the pruning-hook of your
sentence after a council diligently held. For
whosoever does not, in consideration of his
office, burn vehemently to correct this atrocity,
let him not doubt that he will have his portion
with him from whom this peculiar enormity
took its beginning. And so, as we have said,
you must act vigilantly and earnestly, that
your council, which up to this time, under
God's keeping, has been preserved from any
bad repute of this kind, may not by any
possibility be polluted and ruined by the
poison of this wickedness.

Furthermore, we have given orders to
Hilarus our Cha?tularius, that, if the case
should require it, he defer not to join you.
Wherefore, should it be necessary, inform him
by your letters of the need ot his coming


EPISTLE L.


91


to you, to the end that you, together with him,
may be able, God hel[)ing you, to deter-
mine all these things in a salutary way.

EPISTLE XXXII.
To ALL THE Bishops of the Council

OF BiZACIUM 2.

Gregory to all, &c.

As it is laudable and discreet to shew due
reverence and honour to superiors, so it belongs
to rectitude and the fear of God, if anything
in them needs correction, not to put it off by
any connivance, lest disease should begin to
invade the whole body (which God forbid),
sickness not being cured in the head. Now
a considerable time ago certain things were
reported to us about our brother Crementius,
your primate, such as to pierce our heart with
no slight sorrow. But througli the pressure of
divers tribulations, and especially from enemies
raging round us, we had not time to enquire
into the matter. And, since it is so serious
that it ought by no means to be passed over
without investigation, we hereby exhort your
Fraternity with all carefulness and activity
to search out in all ways the substantial truth,
in order that either if these things are so, they
may be cut off by canonical punishment, or,
if they are false, the innocence of our brother
may not long lie under the laceration of an
infamous report. Wherefore, that there may
be no torpor of idleness in the enquiry, w^e
admonish you that neither the interest nor the
favour nor the cajoleries of any person what-


8 Cf. IX. 58, note I, and IX. 59^


ever, nor anything else, soften any one of you
in your sifting of what has been reported to us,
or shake you from the path of truth ; but gird
ye yourselves in priestly wise to investigate the
truth. For, if any one should presume to be
sluggish, or to shew himself negligent in this
matter, let him know that he will be a par-
taker in the said crimes before Almighty God,
by zeal for whom he is not moved to enquire
fully into the causes of atrocious wickedness.

EPISTLE L.

To EuLOGTUS, Patriarch of Alexandria.

Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

The bearers of these presents, coming to
Sicily, were converted from the error of the
Monophysites, and united themselves to the
holy universal Church. Having proceeded to
the church of the blessed Peter, Prince of the
apostles, they requested of me that I should
commend them by letter to your Blessedness,
to the end that they may not now be allowed
to suffer any wrong from the heretics that are
near them. And because one of them says
that the monastery in which he was had been
founded by his kindred, he desires to receive
authority from your Holiness that the heretics
who are in it may either return to the bosom
of holy Church or be expelled from the same
monastery. Let it be enough for us to have
indicated this to you : for we know of your
Blessedness that whatever pertains to zeal
for Almighty God you hasten with all fervour
to do. But for me I beg you to pray, since
amid the swords of the Lombards which I
endure I am excessively afflicted by pains
of gout.


BOOK XIII.

In the Sixth Indiction, and the Thirteenth Year from

HIS Ordination.


EPISTLE I.
To THE Roman Citizens.

Gregory, servant of the servants of God, to
his most beloved sons the Roman citizens.

It has come to my ears that certain men
of perverse spirit have sown among you some
things that are wrong and opposed to the
holy faith, so as to forbid any work being done
on the Sabbath day. What else can I call
these but preachers of Antichrist, who, when
he comes, will cause the Sabbath day as well
as the Lord's day to be kept free from all
work. For, because he pretends to die and
rise again, he wishes the Lord's day to be had
in reverence ; and, because he compels the
people to judaize that he may bring back the
outward rite of the law, and subject the per-
il ciy of the Jews to himself, he wishes the
Sabbath to be observed.

For this which is said by the prophet, Ye
shall bring in no bm'den through your gates on
the Sabbath day (Jerem. xvii. 24), could be
held to as long as it was lawful for the law to be
observed according to the letter. Bat after that
the grace of Almighty God, our Lord Jesus
Christ has appeared, the commandments of
the law which were spoken figuratively cannot
be kept according to the letter. For, if any
one says that this about the Sabbath is to be
kept, he must needs say that carnal sacrifices
are to be offered : he must say too that the
commandment about the circumcision of the
body is still to be retained. But let him hear
the Apostle Paul saying in opposition to him,
If ye be circumcised^ Christ profiteth you nothing
(Galat. v. 2).

We therefore accept spiritually, and hold
spiritually, this which is written about the
Sabbath. For the Sabbath means rest. But
we have the true Sabbath in our Redeemer
Himself, the Lord Jesus Christ. And whoso
acknowledges the light of faith in Him, if he
draws the sins of concupiscence through his
eyes into his soul, he introduces burdens
through the gates on the Sabbath day. We


introduce, then, no burden through the gates
on the Sabbath day if we draw no weights
of sin through the bodily senses to the soul.
For we read that the same our Lord and
Redeemer did many works on the Sabbath
day, so that he reproved the Jews, saying,
Which of you doth not loose his ox or his
ass on the Sabbath day, and lead him away
to watering (Luke xiii. 15)? If, then, the
very Truth in person commanded that the
Sabbath should not be kept according to the
letter, whoso keeps the rest of the Sabbath
according to the letter of the law, whom else
does he contradict but the Truth himself?

Another thing also has been brought to my
knowledge ; namely that it has been preached
to you by perverse men that no one ought
to wash on the Lord's day. And indeed if
any one craves to wash for luxury and plea-
sure, neither on any other day do we allow
this to be done. But if it is for bodily need,
neither on the Lord's day do we forbid it.
For it is written, No man ever hated his own
flesh, but nourisheth it a?id cherisheth it (Ephes.
V. 29). And again it is written. Make not pro-
vision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof
(Rom. xiii. 14). He, then, who forbids pro-
vision for the flesh in the lusts thereof cer-
tainly allows it in the needs thereof. For,
if it is sin to wash the body on the Lord's
day, neither ought the face to be washed on
that day. But if this is allowed for a part
of the body, why is it denied for the whole
body when need requires ? On the Lord's
day, however, there should be a cessation of
earthly labour, and attention given in every
way to prayers, so that if anything is done
negligently during the six days, it may be
expiated by supplications on the day of the
Lord's resurrection.

These things, most dear sons, being en-
dowed with sure constancy and right faith,
observe; despise the words of foolish men,
and give not easy belief to all that you
hear of having been said by them ; but


EPISTLE VI.


93


weigh it in the scale of reason, so that, while
in firm stability you resist the wind of error,
you may be able to attain to the solid joys
of the heavenly kingdom.

[In two MSS., one Colbert and Vatic, F.,
" mense Septembri, indict. 6."]

EPISTLE V.
To Etherius, Bishop of Lugdunum {Lyons).

Gregory to Etherius, Bishop.

Although what we say is very distressing
to us, and fraternal compassion rather moves
us to weep than allows us to lay down any-
thing concerning the things we have heard of,
yet solicitude for the government undertaken
by us pricks our heart with an urgent spur
to see with great care to the good of churches,
and to arrange what should be done before
their interests might possibly suffer irretriev-
ably. It has come, then, to our ears from
the report of certain persons that an affection
of the head has so belallen a certain bishop
that it is a matter of groaning and weeping to
hear of what he is wont to do under alienation
of mind. Lest, therefore, while the shepherd is
sick, the flock should be exposed to be torn
by the teeth of the lyer-in-wait (which God
forbid), or the interests of the Church itself
should suffer irretrievably, it is necessary for
us to treat the case with cautious provision.
And so, since during the life of a bishop,
whom unadvoidable infirmity and not crime
withdraws from his ofiice, no reason allows
another to be ordained in his place except on
his resignation % let him, if he is accustomed
to have intervals of sanity, himself make peti-
tion, declaring that he is no longer equal to
this ministry owing to subversion of his in-
tellectual faculties by infirmity, and let him
rcjquest that another be ordained in his place.
Which being done, let another who may be
worthy be solemnly consecrated bishop in his
place, by the election of all ; yet so that, as
long as life shall retain the said bishop in this
world, his due expenses be supplied to him
by the same Church. If, however, he at no
time recovers the faculties of a sound mind,
a trustworthy person of approved life must
be chosen, who may be fit for the government
of the Church, take thought for the benefit
of souls, restrain the unquiet under the bond
of discipline, take care of ecclesiastical pro-
perty, and exhibit himself in all respects ripe
and efficient. And also, should he survive
the bishop who is now sick, he should be
consecrated in his place.

But as to ordinations of presbyters or dea-

I On this head, see also XI. 48.


cons, or of any other order, if cause requires
any to be made in that Church, know that this
is to be reserved to thy Fraternity, to the end
that, it being in thy diocese, thou mayest
enquire concerning the life, manners, and con-
duct of him who is chosen to such office.
And if thou shouldest be satisfied, and there
is nothing in him liable to the censure of
canonical strictness, let him attain to his des-
tined order not otherwise than through or-
dination by thee. Let tliy Fraternity then,
so proceed, and so order these things with
vigilant provision, that the Church of God
may no longer suffer from any neglect, and
that thou mayest warn thy fellow-priests, not
only by word but also by example, to have
a care laudably for venerable places.

EPISTLE VI.
To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks *.

Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

Among other excellencies in you this holds
the chief place beyond the rest, that in the
midst of the waves of this world, which are
wont with turbulent vexation to confound the
minds of rulers, you so bring back your heart
to the love of divine worship and to providing
for the quiet of venerable places as if no other
care troubled you. Whence, since conduct
of this kind on the part of potentates is wont
to be a great defence to subjects, we declare
the nation of the Franks happy beyond other
nations, having been accounted worthy to have
a queen thus endowed with all good qualities.

On learning from the information contained
in your letters that you have built the Church
of Saint Martin in the suburbs of Augusto-
dunum {Autun)^ and a monastery for haiid-
maidens of God, and also a hospital in the
same city, we rejoiced greatly, and returned
thanks to Almighty God, who stimulates th.e
sincerity of your heart to the doing of these
things. In this case, that we may be held
to some degree sharers in your good deeds,
we have granted privileges according to your
wish, to those places for the quiet and pro-
tection of those who live in them ; nor have
we borne to defer even in the least degree
our embracing of your ^Excellency's desires.

Furthermore, addressing you in the first
place with the greeting of paternal charity, we
inform you that to our illustrious sons, but


a On Brunechild, see VI. s, note 4. Having after the death
of her son Childebert II. acted as guardian ot his son Thcode-
bert II., who had received the kingdom of Austrasia with his
Capital at Metz, she had been expelled by the Austrasians in the
year 599, and been received by her other grandson, Theoderic II.,
who reigned over Burgundy with his Capital at Orleans. When
this letter was sent (a.u. 602) Theoderic would be about fifieen
years of age, and, as appears from the letter to himself which
follows, under the management of his grauduiother.


94


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


your servants and legates, Burgoaldus and
Varmaricaiius, we have granted a private in-
terview in accordance with what you wrote to
us ; and they have disclosed to us in detail all
that they said they had been charged with.
It will be our care in time to come to inform
your Excellency of whatever is done wdth re-
gard to these things. For, as for us, whatever
is possible, whatever is profitable, and tends
to the settlement of peace between you and
the republic, we desire, under God, with the
utmost devotion, that it should be accom-
plished.

As to Mennas, our most reverend brother
and fellow-bishop, after we had enquired into
what had been said about him, and found him
in no way culpable, and he having made
satisfaction under oath before the most sacred
body of the blessed apostle Peter, and so
proved himself to be unaffected by what had
been objected against his reputation, we have
allowed him to return to his post purged and
acquitted, since, as it was right, if he were in
any respect guilty, that we should punish his
fault canonically, so it was not right when he
had the support of innocence, that we should
detain him longer, or any way distress him.

Moreover, with respect to a certain bishop
who, as the aforesaid magnificent men have
told us, is prevented by infirmity of the head
from administering his office, we have written
to our brother and fellow-bishop Etherius 3, that
if he should have intervals of freedom from
this infirmity, he should make petition, de-
claring that he is not competent to fill his
own place, and requesting that another be
ordained to his Church. For during the life
of a bishop, whom not his own fault but sick-
ness, withdraws from the administration of his
office, the sacred canons by no means allow
another to be ordained in his place. But, if
he at no time recovers the exercise of a sound
mind, a person should be sought adorned with
good life and conversation, who may be able
both to take charge of souls, and look with
salutary control after the causes and interests
of the same church ; and he should be such
as may succeed to the bishop's place in case
of his surviving him. But, if there are any
to be promoted to a sacred order, or to any
clerical ministry, we have ordained that the
matter is to be reserved and announced to
our aforesaid most reverend brother Eiherius,
provided it belong to his diocese 4, so that,
encjuiry having tlien been made, if the persons
are subject to no fault which the sacred
canons denounce, he himself may ordain


See.


3 See preceding episile.

4 i.e. his metropolitan province, Lyons being a metropolitan


them. Let, then, the care of your EKcellency
conjoin itself with our ordering, to the end
that the interests of the Church, which you
have exceedingly at heart, may not suffer
damage, and that increase of reward may
accrue to the good deeds of your Excellency.

Having been asked likewise concerning a cer-
tain bigamist whether he might be admitted to
a sacred order, we have, according to canonical
rule, altogether forbidden it. For God forbid
that in your times, in which you do so many
pious and religious things, you should allow
anything to be done contrary to ecclesiastical
ordinance.

Moreover the aforesaid magnificent men,
our sons, having delivered us a schedule, have
requested among other things, what they said
had been enjoined on them by your order, that
such a person may be sent from us into Gaul
as may, on the assembling of a synod, correct
under the guidance of Almighty God whatever
has been perpetrated against the most sacred
canons. Herein we recognize the care of your
Glory, how you take thought for the life of the
soul and the stability of your kingdom, seeing
that, fearing our Redeemer, and observing His
precepts in all ways, you act in this case also
so that the government of your kingdom may
long subsist, and that after long courses of
years you also may pass from an earthly to
a heavenly kingdom. At a fitting time, if what
we have said should be pleasing to God, we
will take care to fulfil the venerable desires of
your Excellency.

We, then, for the defence of the places about
which your Excellency has written to us have
been careful to order all things as you wish.
But, lest haply our decrees should be sup-
pressed at any time by the governors of those
places on the ground that they are found to
be interdicted from doing certain things, this
same ordinance must be inserted among the
public acts, that so it may be kept in your
royal archives as well as in ours.

May Almighty God ever keep your Excel-
lency in His fear, and so fulfil your desires and
those of our sons the most excellent kings your
grandsons, through the intercession of the
blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, to whom
you commend them, as to grant you to have
stable joy in their continual welfare, as you
desire. Given in the month of November,
Indiction 6.

EPISTLE VII.

To Theoderic, King of the Franks s.

Gregory to Theoderic, &c.
We have received with joy your written
address to us indicating your health and safety,

5 See preceding epistle, note 2.


EPISTLE IX.


95


and we tliereby perceive that you so transcend
your age in prudence as to make it evident
that it is for the happiness of the nation of the
Franks that the government of royal dominion
has been committed by the favour of heavenly
grace to your Excellency. And this in you
among other things is enough to call for praise
and admiration, that in such things as you
know that our daugliter your most excellent
grandmother desires for the love of Almighty
God, in these you make haste most earnestly
to lend your aid, so that thereby you may
reign both happily here, and in a future life
with the angels^. Seeing, then, that this
comes, by the gift of God, from great discreet-
ness of judgment, we have so speedily and
gladly fulfilled what your Excellency desires as
to shew by the celerity of our execution how
much your good deeds have pleased us.

Furthermore, greeting you with paternal
sweetness, we inform you that all the matters
which you enjoined on the illustrious men your
servants Burgoaldus and Varmaricarius, our
sons, to be transacted with us have been dis-
closed to us in a private interview. And we
praised you greatly, that you both attend
wisely, as becomes you, to the present, and
also make haste so to provide for security in
the future by means of a lasting peace between
you and the Republic that, being made one,
you may extend the stability of your kingdom
salutarily to all time. With regard to this we
will announce to you in time to come what it
may please God to order. For, as to us,
whatever is proved to be advantageous and
conducive to peace, we desire and strive that
it should be brought to pass. The one thing
is that, as our will is with regard to what is
expedient, so should be the will of God, with-
out whom we can do nothing. May the Holy
Trinity make you to advance always in His
fear, and so dispose your heart in moderation
well-pleasing to Him as both to grant to your
subjects now joy from you, and to you from
Himself joy without end hereafter.

EPISTLE VIIL

To Senator, Abbot.

Gregory to Senator, presbyter and abbot of
a hospital (or guest-house, xenodochii).
When the hearts of Catholic Kings, &c.
[See the epistle following (Ep. ix.), with


^ If the accounts given by the Frankish historians be true,
Brunechild's influence over her grandson was not in all respects
such as to prepare him for life vsith the angels. She is said to
have encouraged him in liceiuious living tor I'ear of lijr own
power being undermined by the introduction into his couit of
a lawful queen. {Gre^. Turon., Hist, hranc. XI. 36 : Fredezar.
XXX.,XXXV1I.). " J . ^


which this agrees throughout, as does also
E[)istle X. to Lupo, except for the different
designations of the persons addressed and
places referred to, and the addition in epis-
tles VIII. and IX., after the words "or absolve
her {Jiim) as innocent," of the following para-
graph.]

By a similar definition, according to the
desire of the founders, we decree that none of
those who may in future have been ordained
as abbot or presbyter to the same guest-house
and monastery shall dare by any secret schem-
ing whatever to take the office of the Epis-
copate, unless he has been first deprived of the
office of abbot, and another has been substi-
tuted in his place ; lest, by consuming the
property of the guest-house or monastery in
unfair expenditure, he should cause most
serious pressure of want to the poor and
strangers, or to others who live from its re-
sources.- Moreover, we forbid that the bishop
have licence, without the consent of the abbot
and presbyter, to remove from the same place
any monk for promotion to an ecclesiastical
order, or for any cause whatever, lest usurpa-
tion in this regard should be carried to such
an extent that places which have to be built
up by the acquisition of men be destroyed by
their removal.

EPISTLE IX.
To Thalassia, Abbess.

Gregory to Thalassia, &c.

When the hearts of catholic kino-s are so
inflamed with ardent desire, by divine grace
preventing them, as of their own accord to
demand the things that pontifical admonitions
should provoke them to, such things are to be
granted with cheerful and joyful mind all the
more as the very things which they desire
ought to have been demanded of them, had
they been unwilling to do them. Accordingly,
in accordance with the letters of our most
Excellent royal children, Brunichild and her
grandson Theoderic, to the monastery of Saint
Mary, where there is constituted a congregation
of handmaidens of God, founded in the city of
Augustodunum by the bishop Siagrius of rever-
end memory, over which you preside, we in-
dulge, grant and confirm by the decree of our
present authority privileges as follows ; — Or-
daining that no king, no bishop, no one en-
dowed with any dignity whatsoever, or any one
else whatsoever, shall have power, under show
of any cause or occasion whatsoever, to dimin-
ish or take away, or apply to his own uses, or
grant as if to other pious uses for excuse of his
own avarice, anything of what has been given
to the same monastery by the above-written


q6


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


kin2:'s own children, or of what shall in future
be bestowed on it by any others whatever of
their own possessions. But all things that
have been there offered, or may come to be
offered, we will to be possessed by thee, as
well as by those who shall succeed thee in thy
office and place, from the present time invio-
late and without disturbance, provided thou
apply them in all ways to the uses of those for
whose sustentation and government they have
been granted.

We also appoint that on the death of an
abbess of the aforesaid monastery no other
shall be ordained by means of any kind of
craftiness of secret scheming, but such a one
as the king of the same province, with the
consent of the nuns, shall have chosen in the
fear of God, and provided for the ordina-
tion of.

Under this head we also add, in order that
we may exclude all place for avarice, that no
one of the kings, no one of the priests, or any
one else in person or by proxy, shall dare to
accept anything in gold, or in any kind of con-
sideration whatever, for the ordination of such
abbess, or for any causes whatever pertaining
to this monastery, and that the same abbess
presume not to give anything on account of
her ordination, lest by such occasion what is
offered or has been offered to places of piety
should be consumed. And, inasmuch as many
occasions for the deception of religious women
are sought out, as is said, in your parts by bad
men, we ordain that an abbess of this same
monastery shall in no wise be deprived or de-
posed unless in case of criminality requiring it.
Hence it is necessary that if any complaint of
this kind should arise against her, not only the
bishop of the city of Augustodunum should
examine the case, but that he should call to
his assistance six other of his fellow-bishops,
and so fully investigate the matter, to the end
that, all judging with one accord, a strict
canonical decision may either smite her if
guilty, or absolve her if innocent.

All these things, therefore, which the paper
of this our precept and decree contains we
decree to be observed in perpetuity for thee as
well as for all who may succeed thee in the
same rank and place, and for all whom they
may concern. Moreover, if any one, whether
king, priest, judge, or secular person, being
aware of this our written constitution, should
attempt to contravene it, let him be deprived
of the dignity of his power and honour, and
know that he stands guilty before divine judg-
ment for the iniquity that he has perpetrated.
And, unless he either restore what he has
wrongfully taken away, or lament what he has
done unlawfully with fit penitence, let him be


debarred from the most sacred body and blood
of our God and Lord, the Redeemer Jesus
Christ, and be subject to strict vengeance in
the eternal judgment. But the peace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be to all who observe what
is just to this same place, to the end that they
may both receive here the fruit of their well-
doing, and find the rewards of eternal peace at
the hands of the strict Judge.

EPISILE X.
To Lupo, Abbot.
Gregory to Lupo, Presbyter and Abbot.
When the hearts of catholic kings, &c. 7

EPISTLE XII.
To Paschasius, Bishop of Neapolis

Gregory to Paschasius, &c.

Those who with pure intent desire to bring
to the true faith aliens from the Christian
religion should study kindness, and not as-
perity ; lest such as reason rendered with
smoothness might have appealed to should
be driven far off by opposition. For whoso-
ever act otherwise, and under cover of such
intention would suspend people from their
accustomed observance of their own rites, are
proved to be intent on their own cause rather
than on God's. To wit, the Jews dwelling
in Naples have complained to us, asserting
that certain persons are endeavouring unrea-
sonably to drive them from certain solemnities
of their holidays, so that it may not be lawlul
for them to observe the solemnities of their
festivals, as up to this time since long ago


7 For the rest of this epistle, see preceding Epistle IX., with
which, 77mtatis tnutandis, it is identical, as was Epistle VIII.,
save lor an additional paragraph, given under Epistle VlII. See
what has been said with regard to that Epistle. The genuineness,
or at any rate the freedom Irom interpolation, of all these three
Epistles is disputed. The Benedictine Editors of Gregory's works
defend their authenticity. See their note (b) to Ep. VIll. {Pati-o-
loglce Tonus LXl^II. Sajicti Gregorii Magni toinus tertins).
Tlie purport of all three letters is to confer privileges on, and
provide for the future security and regulation of, three recent
foundations of Queen Brunechild at Augustodunum {Autuii);
viz. I. A hospital, or guest-house {xetiodochiu.'H) in Autun, over
which a Senator, described as " presbyter and abbot," had been
appointed to preside ; 2. A monastery for women, of which
Tiialassia had been appointed Abbess; 3. The Church of St.
Martin in the suburbs, over which Lupo, "presbyter and abbot,"
presided. Tliese foundations are referred to, though not de-
scribed, in Epistle VI. to Brunechild herself, where Gregory
-speaks of having issued decrees for their protection in the future,
which he desires should be kept among the royal archives.
In those times of continual conflict among the Frank potentates
royal founders might natuially wish to protect their ioundations
from disturbance by means oi spiritual fulminations ; and the
queen's desire in this respect might account for the anathemas
in these epistles, which have been said to be characteristic of
a later age than that of Gregory. It may be observed further
that the appointment of the heads of these religious institutions
is, in the letters before us, reserved to " the Icings ol the pro-
vince," instead of free election, subject to episcopal approval,
being left to the inmates, as was usual in other cases. This
might be due, if the letters are genuine, to the request of Brune-
child. whom, as a staunch Catholic and a supporter of tlie
Church, Gregory ever shews himseh' anxious to conciliate. With
regard to his politic flattery of her, or of others similarly
situated, cf. VI. 5, note 4.


EPISTLE XXII.


97


it has been lawful for them and their forefathers
to keep and observe them. Now, if this is
true, these people appear to be taking trouble
10 no purpose. For what is the use, when
even such long unaccustomed prohibition
is of no avail for their faith and con-
version ? Or why should we lay down rules
for the Jews as to how they should observe
their ceremonies, if we cannot thereby win
them ? We should therefore so act that, being
rather appealed to by reason and kindness,
they may wish to follow us, and not to fly
from us; and that proving to them from their
own Scriptures what we tell them, we may
be able, with God's help, to convert them to
the bosom of Mother Church.

Wherefore let thy Fraternity, so far as may
be possible, with the help of God, kindle them
to conversion, and not allow them any more
to be disquieted with respect to their solem-
nities ; but let them have free licence to
observe and celebrate all their festivals and
holidays, even as hitherto both they and their
forefathers for a long time back have kept and
held them.

EPISTLE XVIIL
To CERTAIN Bishops of Sicily.

Gregory to Leo, Secundinus, John, Donus,
Lucidus, Trajan, bishops of Sicily.

Even as we are admonished through the
speech of the apostles to impart one to an-
other spiritual aids, — so, in matters that by
God's ordering w^e may have to settle in virtue
of the government imposed on us for adminis-
tration of the affairs of the poor, it is fit that
priestly succour be not wanting. Accordingly
in sending the bearer of these presents, Adrian
our CJiartuIarius ^, to govern the patrimony of
our Church, to wit in the Syracusan district,
w^e have thought it necessary to commend him
to your Fraternity, that, wherein custom may
demand it, you may afford him your succour,
to the end that, while he is supported by you
with bodily aid for doing his work, and with
the spiritual aid of your prayers for carrying
out with facility whatever he may undertake,
he may be able, God also working with him,
to accomplish prosperously what has been
by us enjoined on him. But, as for your-
selves, you should so acquit yourselves in
good works before the face of Almighty God
that there be not found in your doings any-
thing that may be smitten by the judgment
of God, or for which you may be accused
by any man whatever lying in wait against

8 Adrian, who had already been commissioned as notarius
Sicilia (X. 23), had now been made rector pati-imonii, being
succeeded as notary by Pantaleo (XIII. 34).


you. For we have charged our aforesaid
Charhilarhis that, if he should come to know
of any inordinate doings on the part of our
most reverend brethren the bishops, he should
first himself take them to task by private and
modest admonition ; and, that, if such things
are not amended, he should inform us of them
speedily.

Furthermore, it has been reported to us
that in the times of our predecessor of lioly
memory it was arranged by the deacon Ser-
vusdei, who then had charge of the ecclesias-
tical patrimony, that the priests 9 of your
several dioceses, when you go forth to seal
infants^, should not be immoderately bur-
dened. For a certain sum had been fixed,
and this, as I hear, with your consent, to be
given by the same priests for the services
of the clerks {clericoniui). And this, which
was then approved of, is said to be by no
mean's kept to now. Wherefore I admonish
your Fraternity to endeavour not to be burden-
some to your subjects, and, if they have any
grievances, to abate them, seeing also that
you ought not to have departed from what
had once been determined. For you will
be seeing to your own interest both in the
future and the present life, if you keep those
who have been committed to you free from
grievance.

EPISTLE XXII.
To Rusticiana, Patrician lady.

Gregory to Rusticiana, &c.

As often as any one comes to us from the
royal city, w-e take care to enquire of your
bodily health ; but, my sins being the cause,
I always hear what I am sorry to hear, since,
frail and weak as you already are, it is re-
ported that the pains of gout still grow upon
you. But I pray the Almighty Lord that
whatever befalls your body may be ordered
to the health of your soul, and that temporal
scourges may prepare for you eternal rest,
and that through the pains which have an
end He may grant you joys without end.
As for me, I live in such a state of groaning
and in the midst of such occupations that
it irks me to have arrived at these days which
now I spend, and my only consolation is the
expectation of death. Wherefore I beg you
to pray for me, to the end that I may be soon
released from this prison of the flesh, so as


9 Sacerdotes, meaning here apparently parish priests, though
more commonly, in Gregory's epistles, denoting bishops. The
abuse complained of seems to have been that of cliarging priests
of parishes unreasonably for the remuneration of the clerki\^ho
attended the bishops on their confirmation progresses.

I Ad constgfiandos infantes; i.e. for confirmation, cf. IV. 26,
note 6.


VOL. XIII.


A a


98


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


to be no longer tormented by such great
pains.

Furthermore, I have to inform you that a
certain person has come here, Beator by name,
who gives himself out as comes privatariun ^,
and is doing many things against all, but
principally against your Excellency's people,
or those of your most noble granddaughters,
as though he were making enquiry into matters
of public import. And we indeed will not
permit him to act wrongfully, but neither can
we stand in the way of public interests. Do
you therefore treat as you can with the most
pious princes, that they may countermand
any wrongful proceeding on his part. For
neither is the public interest served by any
kind of turmoil, nor does he appear to reclaim
anything of great amount. I beg that my
most sweet son the lord StVategiuss be greeted
in my behalf, whom may Almighty God nourish
for Himself and for you, and ever comfort
you by His own grace and by the young lord's
life. Further, what should I write to you
concerning your return hither, knowing as
you do how much I desire it? But, when
I look to the obligations of the business
that detains you, I am in despair ; and so
I implore the Creator of all that, wherever
you are, and wherever you may be, He would
protect you by the extension of His right hand,
and preserve you from all evil.

EPISTLE XXVL
To Anthemius, Subdeacoti.

Gregory to Anthemius, Subdeacon of Cam-
pania.

It has reached our ears that our brother
and fellow-bishop Paschasius 4 is so idle and
negligent in all ways that he is in no respect
recognised as bishop ; and that so neither his
own Church, nor the monasteries, nor any,
whether the sons of the Church 5, or the
oppressed poor, are conscious of any earnest-
ness of love on his part towards them ; nor
does he afford any help in what is just to
those who supplicate him, and (what is a still
more serious tlnng to say) he cannot bear
on any account to receive the counsels of the


2 This designation may mean a kind of private secretary to
the Emperor, or one to whom the secret service of the govern-
ment was committed.

3 See II. 27, note 2.

4 Bishop of Naples. A few epistles not included in this trans-
lation are addressed to him as such.

5 Fz/zi eccIesicF, or, according to the authority of MSS.,
simply J'?///. Cf. III. 56, where the expressioi occurs. It is
understood to denote the lay members of any Church, among
whom those of the highest social position were called nohilcs (see
below), and others plehs. IMandates for the election of bishops
are addressed to clero, nobililnis, ordini^ et plebi {?i% in II. 6),
or to clero ordini, et plebi (as in I. 58), or occasionally clero et
nobilibus (as in I. 80) ; ordo being understood to denote persons
of position, though not ranking as nobles.


wise and of such as admire what is right,
so that he might at any rate learn from an-
other what he cannot attend to of himself;
but, passing over the things that pertain to
a pastor's charge, he occupies himself with
his whole attention unprofitably in the build-
ing of ships. Whence, as is reported, it has
come to pass that he has already lost four
hundred solidly or more. This also is added
to his faults, that he is said to go down daily
to the sea with one or two clerics in so mean
a guise as to be the talk among his own
people, and to seem to strangers so vile and
despicable that he is judged to have nothing
in him of the character or venerableness of
a bishop. If this be so, know that it is not
without fault of thine, who hast delayed to
rebuke and restrain him, as is fit. Seeing,
then, that all this not only discredits him, but
also evidently brings reproach on the office
of the priesthood, we desire thee to summon
him for this thing before other priests^, or
some of his noble sons 7, and exhort him that,
shaking oft' the vice of sluggishness, he be not
idle, but vigilant in the care of his Church
and of the monasteries, exhibit fatherly charity
to his sons, stand up for the defence of the
poor with discretion in cases that are com-
mended by justice, and receive gladly the
counsels of the wise, to the end that both that
city may be comforted by his solicitude, and
he himself succeed in covering the faults of
his idleness. If however, as we do not believe
will be the case, after this our exhortation
he should venture to be negligent after his
accustomed manner, he must by all means
be sent to us, that in our presence he may
learn what it becomes a priest to do, and how
to do it, after the fear of God. Given in the
month of March, Indiction 6.

EPISTLE XXVIL
To Anthemius, Subdeacon.

Gregory to Anthemius, Subdeacon of Cam-
pania.

As often as we hear things of our brethren
and fellow-bishops that shew them to be to
blame and cause us sadness, necessity compels
us in no slight degree to take thought for their
amendment. Seeing, then, that it has been
reported to us that the bishops of Campania
are so negligent that, unmindful of the dignity
and character of their office, neither towards
their Churches nor towards their sons do they
shew the care of paternal vigilance, nor con-
cern themselves about monasteries, nor bestow
their protection on the oppressed and the poor,

6 i.e. bishops, as commonly meant by sacerdotos.

7 See above, note 5.


EPISTLE XXXIV.


99


we therefore enjoin thee and hereby give thee
authority to call them together, and strictly
admonish them in virtue of our mandate, that
they be not any longer idle, but so evince their
priestly zeal and solicitude, and be so vigilant
in what it becomes them justly and according
unto God to do, that no murmur concerning
them may exasperate us any more. If, how-
ever, thou shouldest find anv one of them to
be negligent after this being done, send him
to us without allowing any excuse, that by
regular exercise of discipline they may be
made to feel how serious a matter it is to
refuse to be corrected in things that are repre-
hensible and exceedingly to be condemned.

EPISTLE XXXL
To Phocas, Emperor®.

Gregory to Phocas Augustus.

Glory to God in the highest who, according
as it is written, changes times, and transfers
kingdoms, seeing that He has made apparent
to all what He vouchsafed to speak by His
prophet. That tJie most High ruleth in the king-
dom of men ^ and giveth it to ivho7nsoever he will
(Dan. iv. 17). For in the incomprehensible
dispensation of Almighty God there are alter-
nate controlments of mortal life ; and some-
times, when the sins of many are to be smitten,
one is raised up through whose hardness the
necks of subjects may be bowed down under
the yoke of tribulation, as in our affliction we
have long had proof. But sometimes, when
the merciful God has decreed to refresh the
mourning hearts of many with His consolation,
He advances one to the summit of govern-
ment, and through the bowels of His mercy
infuses the grace of exultation in Him into the
minds of all. In which abundance of exulta-
tion we believe that we shall speedily be con-
firmed, who rejoice that the Benignity of your
Piety has arrived at imperial supremacy. Let
the heavens rejoice^ and let the earth be glad
(Ps. xcv. 11) ; and let the whole people of the
republic, hitherto afflicted exceedingly, grow
cheerful for your benignant deeds. Let the
proud minds of enemies be subdued under the
yoke of your domination. Let the crushed
and depressed spirits of subjects be revived
by your mercy : let the power of heavenly
grace make you terrible to your enemies, your
piety kind to your subjects. Let the whole
republic have rest in your most happy times,
the pillage of peace under colour of processes
at law being exposed. Let plottings about


^ Phocas succeeded Mauricius as Emperor in November,
A.u. 602. With regard to CJregory's adulatory tone towards this
sanguinary usurper and his consort Leontia, see Prolegomena,
p. xxvii.


wills cease, and benevolences exacted by force.
Let secure possession of their own return to
all, that they may rejoice in having without
fear what they have acquired without fraud.
Let every single person's liberty be now at
length restored to him under the yoke of
empire. For there is this difference between
the kings of the nations and the emperors of
the republic, that the kings of the nations are
lords of slaves, but the emperors of the re-
public lords of freemen. But we shall better
speak of these things by praying than by
putting you in mind of them. May Almighty
God in every thought and deed keep the heart
of your Piety in the hand of His grace ; and
whatever things should be done justly, what-
ever things with clemency, may the Holy Spirit
who dwells in your breast direct, that your
Clemency may both be exalted in a temporal
kingdom, and after courses of many years attain
to heavenly kingdoms. Given in the month of
June, Indiction 6.

EPISTLE XXXIV.
To Pantaleo, Notary

Gregory to Pantaleo, &c.

Thy Experience remembers what and what
kind of oath thou tookest over the most
sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter.
Whence also we committed to thee without
fear the charge of enquiry in the patrimony of
the Syracusan district. It is, then, incumbent
on thee to have thine own good faith and the
fear of the same blessed apostle Peter ever
before thine eyes, and so to act that neither
with men in this present life nor with Almighty
God in the last judgment thou mayest be open
to blame. Now from the report of Salerius
our chartularius we have learnt that thou hast
found the niodins in which the liusbandinen
{coloni) 9 of the Church have been compelled
to give their corn to be one of twenty-five
sextarii^. This we altogether execrated, and
were sorry thou hadst been late in making it a
subject of enquiry. We rejoice, therefore, at
thy telling us that thou hast broken the said
modius and made a just one. But, inasmuch
as the aforesaid chartularius has taken care to
mention also what has already been collected
under thy Experience by the fraudulent deal-
ings of the farmers [conductores) ^ from two
territories, therefore, even as with a view to
the future, we rejoice that thou hast acted
zealously in breaking the unjust mouius^ so
also we think of sins in the past ; lest, if what
the farmers have fraudulently taken away from

the peasants ^riisticis)^ accrL>es to* us^ wij should

I ' ' I .2

9 Cf. I. 44, note 1. I Cf. ib.^ note 4^. « Cf. ib., note^s-

3 Cf ib., MOVe >,.,'' /', ) ' , ,


A a 2


100


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


be implicated in their sins. And accordingly
we desire thy Experience, with all faithfulness,
with all integrity — having regard to the fear of
Almighty God, and recalling to mind the strict-
ness of the blessed apostle Peter — to make a
list throughout each several estate {massam)^
of poor and indigent husbandmen, and with
the money found to have been got by fraud to
procure cows, sheep, and swine, and distribute
them among the several poor husbandmen.
And this we desire thee to do with the advice
of the most reverend lord bishop John s, and
Adrian our chartularius and rector ^. If, more-
over, it should be necessary for the sake of
consultation, our son also the lord Julian
should be called in, so that no one else may
know, but all be kept quite secret. Do you
therefore consult among yourselves whether
this same assistance should be given to the
said poor husbandmen in money or in kind.
But, whatever be the common fund, first, as I
have said, make a list, and afterwards take
piins to distribute to each according to the
degree of his poverty. P'or I, as the teacher
of the Gentiles testifies, have all and abound ;
nor do I seek money, but reward (Phil. iv.).
So act therefore that in the day of judgment
thou mayest shew me fruit of thy labour from
the service that has been committed to thy
Experience. If thou do this purely, faithfully,
and strenuously, thou wilt both receive it back
here in thy children, and hereafter wilt have
plenary retribution in the scrutiny of the
Eternal Judge.

EPISTLE XXXVIIL

To Phocas, Emperor.

Gregory to Phocas Augustus.

It pleases us to consider, with rejoicings
and great thanksgivings, what praises we owe
to Almighty God, that the yoke of sadness
has been removed, and we are come to times
of liberty under the imperial Piety of your
Benignity. For that your Serenity has not
found a deacon of the Apostolic See resident
at the court according to ancient custom, is
not owing to my negligence, but to most grave
necessity. For, while all the ministers of this
our Church shrunk and fled with fear from
times of such oppression and hardship, it was
not possible to impose on any of them the
duty of going to the royal city to remain at
the court. But now that they have learnt
that your Clemency, by the ordering of God's
grace, has attained to the summit of Empire,


4 Cf. ib.j'.no^e 5. '', ' S'B'-shop of Syracuse. Cf. V. 17.
'Adrian, previously addrussed as fiotarins Sicilicp (^. 23),
had been succeeded by Pantaleo and made rector patrUnonii

(xiir. iS). ' ' '■" '


those who had before greatly feared to go
there hasten even of themselves to your feet,
moved thereto by joy. But, seeing that some
of them are so weak from old age as to be
hardly able to bear the toil, and some are
deeply engaged in ecclesiastical cares, and the
bearer of these presents, who was the first of
all our guardians {defensores)^ has been long
well known to me for his diligence, and ap-
proved in life, faith, and character, I have
judged him fit to be sent to the feet of your
Piety 7. I have accordingly, by God's per-
mission, made him a deacon, and have been
at, pains to send him to you with all speed,
that he may be able, when a convenient time
is found, to inform your Clemency of all that
is being done in these parts. To him I beg
your Serenity to deign to incline your pious
ears, tiiat you may find it in your power to
have pity on us all the more speedily as you
learn the more truly from his account what
our affliction is. For in what manner by the
daily swords, and by how many invasions, of
the Lombards, lo now for the length of five
and thirty years, we have been oppressed, by
no words of description can we fully express.
But we trust in the Almighty Lord, that He
will complete for us the good things of His
consolation which He has begun, and that,
having raised up pious lords in the republic,
He will also extinguish cruel enemies. And
so may the Holy Trinity guard your life for
many years, so that we may the longer rejoice
in the good of your Piety, which we have re-
ceived after long waiting.

EPISTLE XXXIX.

To Leontia, Empress.

Gregory to Leontia Augusta.

What tongue may suffice to speak, what
mind to think, what great thanks we owe to
Almighty God for the serenity of your empire,
in that such hard burdens of long duration
have been removed from our necks, and the
gentle yoke of imperial supremacy has returned,
which subjects are glad to bear? Glory, then,
be given to the Creator of all by the hymning
choirs of angels, thanksgiving be paid by men
on earth, for that the whole republic, which
has endured many wounds of sorrow, has now
at length found the balm of your consolation.
Hence we must needs implore the more ear-
nestly the mercy of Almighty God, that He
would keep the heart of your Piety ever in His
right hand, and dispose your thoughts by the
aid of heavenly grace, to the end that your
Tranquillity may be able to rule those who


7 The person thus sent was Boniface (see below, Ep. XL.,
and XIV. 8), who afterwards became pope.


EPISTLE XLI.


lOI


serve you the more righteously as you know
more trulv how to serve the Sovereii^n of all.
May He make you His champions in love of
the catholic fiiith, having, of His benign deahng,
made you our emperors. May He infuse into
your minds zeal together with gentleness, that
you may always be able with pious fervour not
to leave unavenged whatever is done amiss
with regard to God, and in case of any de-
linquency against 3'ourselves to bear and spare.
May He give us in your Piety the clemency of
Pulcheria Augusta, who for her zeal for the
catholic faith was called in the holy synod the
new Helena {Act. i synodi CJialcedonetisis).
May the Almighty mercy of God grant to you
fuller length of days to live with our most
pious lord, that the longer your life is extended,
the more strongly may the consolation of your
subjects be confirmed.

I ought perhaps to have requested that your
Tranquillity should hold as especially com-
mended to you the Church of the blessed
apostle Peter, which up to this time has
laboured under grievous plots against it. But,
knowing that you love Almighty God, I ought
not to ask what you will exhibit of your own
accord out of the benignity of your piety. For
the more you fear the Creator of all, the more
fully may you love the Church of him to whom
it was said. Thou art Peter ^ and upon this rock
I 70 ill build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it ; and to whom it is
said. To thee I ivill give the keys of the kingdom
of heaven ; and whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth shall be boutid in heaven ; and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven (Matth. xv. 18). Whence it is not
doubtful to us with what strong love you will
bind yourself to him through whom you ear-
nestly desire to be loosed from all sins. May
he, then, be the guardian of your empire, may
he be your protector on earth, may he be an
intercessor for you in heaven : • that through
your relieving your subjects from hard burdens,
and causing them to rejoice in your empire,
you may, after many years, rejoice in the
heavenly kingdom.

EPISTLE XL.

To Cyriacus, Patriarch of Con-
stat tin ople.

Gregory to Cyriacus. &c.

Observing diligently, most dear brother,
how great is the virtue of peace from the
Lord's voice, which says, ^Jy peace I give U7ito
you (Joh. xiv. 27), it becomes us so to abide
in the love thereof as in no wise to give place
to discord. But, since we cannot otherwise
live in its root except by retaining in mind and


in deed the humility which the very author of
l^eace has taught, we entreat you with befitting
charity, that, treading down with the foot of
your heart the profane elation which is always
hostile to souls, you make haste to remove
from the midst of the Church the offence of
a perverse and proud title, lest you should
possibly be found divided from the society of
our peace. But let there be in us one spirit,
one mind, one charity, one bond in Christ,
who has willed us to be his members. For
let your Holiness consider how hard it is, how
indecent, how cruel, how alien from the aim of
a priest, not to have that peace which you
preach to others, and so abstain from offending
your brethren out of pride. But study this
rather, how you may prostrate with the sword
of humility the author of vain and profitless
elation, to the end that in such a victory the
grace- of the Holy Spirit may claim you as
a habitation for Himself, so that what is written
may be plainly fulfilled in you ; the temple of
God is holy, which temple ye are (2 Cor. vi.

We commend to you in all things the bearer
of these presents, our most beloved common
son, the deacon Boniface, that in whatsoever
may be needful he may find, as is becoming,
the succour of your Holiness.

EPISTLE XLL
To EuLOGius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria.

A conversation having arisen one day be-
tween me and my familiar friends about the
customs of churches, one who had studied the
art of medicine in the great city of Alex-
andria told us that he had a fellow-student
attending the same lectures, a boy of extreme
depravity, who, he said, had been suddenly
ordained a deacon. And he added that he
had procured ordination by bribes and gifts \
for he acknowledged that this custom had pre-
vailed in the holy Alexandrine Church. On
hearing this I was amazed, and exceedingly
surprised that the tongue of the most lioly and
blessed man the lord Eulogius, which recalls
so many heretics to the catholic faith, has not
extirpated simoniacal heresy from the holy
Alexandrine Church. And who will there be
whose exhortation or correction will be able to
amend this, if his great and admirable teach-
ing shall have left it without amendment ?

Wherefore, for the absolution of your soul, for
the increase of your reward, that your works may
be in all respects perfect before the eyes of the
tremendous Judge, you ought to make haste
utterly to pull up and eradicate simoniacal


I02


EPISTLES OE ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


heresy, which was the first to arise in the
Chnrcli, from your most holy See, which is
oiir's ^.

J^'or on this account it comes to pass that
the hoHness of ecclesiastical orders falls away
from very many, because persons are promoted
to these orders, not for their life and deeds,
but for bribes. But if meritorious character,
and not bribes, be sought after, unworthy
persons will not come to ordination. And by
so much the more will reward begin to accrue
to you as any good men who have been pro-
moted to sacred orders shall have devoted
themselves to the care of winning souls.

EPISTLE XLII.

To EuLOGius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

We return great thanks to Almighty God,
that in the mouth of the heart a sweet savour
of charity is experienced, when that which is
written is fulfilled. As cold ivater to a thirsty
soul, so is good news from a far country (Pro v.
XXV. 25). For I had previously been greatly
disturbed by a letter from Boniface the C/iar-
tjilarius, my respotisalis, who dwells in the
royal city, saying that your to me most sweet
and pleasant Holiness had suffered from failure
of bodily sight. From this letter I was smitten
by heavy sorrow. But suddenly, by the pros-
pering grace of our Creator and Redeemer,
I received the epistle of your Blessedness, and,
learning that the bodily trouble of which I had
heard was cured, I rejoiced exceedingly, since
gUdness of heart succeeded which was as great
as the bitterness of the sadness which had
come before. For we know that, with the help
of Almighty God, your life is the health of
many. P"or sailors sail secure through the
waves when an instructed and skilful steers-
man sits at the helm.

Moreover in my joy for your health I have
this additional cause for exultation, that I have
learnt how through your mouth the enemies of
the Church are decreased in number, and the
flocks of the Lord multiplied. For through
the ploughshare of your tongue heavenly corn
increases daily, and is multiplied in the garners
on high ; so that in you we rejoice that ^vhat
is written is fulfilled, W/iere there is ?nuch in-
crease, there is manifest the slretigth of the oxen
(Prov. xiv. 4). Whence we gather plainly that
the more you bring back fugitives to the ser-


8 See VII 40, for Gregory's view of the three sees of Rome,
Antioch, and Alexandria, all representing the see of St. Peter.


vice of Almighty God, the more merit you
have with Him. And by how much the more
merit you receive, the more fully can you
obtain what you ask for. I beseech you there-
fore to pray the more earnestly for me a sinner,
since both pain of body, and bitterness of heart,
and immense ravages of mortality among the
swords of so many barbarians, afflict me ex-
ceedingly. In the midst of all these things it
is not temporal but eternal consolation that
I require, which of myself I am not able to
win by prayer, but which I trust that I shall
obtain by the intercessions of yoiir Blessedness.
Last year I received no letters from your Holi-
ness, and I was much distressed. It is true
that your blessing, which you sent without
a letter, was both given and received. But,
since your tongue delights me more than your
gifts, I was less gratified than I might have
been by what was given. But I directed our
common son, the deacon Epiphanius, to write
to Alexander and Isidore, deacons of your
most holy Church, to acknowledge the receipt
of what had been sent.

I wrote to you, further, that I had got ready
large pieces of timber for making masts and
rudders, but that the small ship which had
come could not carry them ; and you have
since written nothing in reply. Wherefore, it
you need them, write to our common son
Boniface, whom we are now sending as our
representative fesponsaleni) to the royal ciiy,
that he may send me word that tiiey may be
prepared, and that they may be found ready
when your Blessedness shall send for them.

Furthermore, we have sent you a small
cross, in which is inserted a blessing from the
chains of your lovers the apostles Saint Peter
and Saint Paul: and let this be continually
applied to your eyes, seeing that many miracles
have been wont to be wrought through this
same blessing.

May Almighty God inspire the heart of your
Blessedness to be careful to pray for me con-
tinually, and may He protect you and all yours
with His right hand, and after many courses
of years bring you to the heavenly kingdom.

We have received, corresponding with your
description of them, the blessings 9 of Saint
Mark, sent to us by your most blessed Fra-
ternity, and we return thanks for your kind-
ness, since irom these outward things we learn
what you are towards us inwardly.


9 Eulogias, apparently in the same sense as benedict iones,
used elsewhere as denoting presents.


BOOK XIV.


EPISTLE II.

To ViTALis, Guardian {Defensorem)

OF Sardinia.

Gregory to Vilalis, &c.

From the information given us by thy Ex-
perience we find tliat the hospitals [or guest-
houses, xenodocJiia\ founded in Sardinia are
suffering from grievous neglect. Hence our
most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Jan-
uarius ^ would have had to be most strongly
reprehended, did not his old age and sim-
plicity, and the sickness which thou hast told
us of coming on besides, keep us in check.

Seeing, then, that he is so situated that he
cannot be fit to order anything, do thou warn
the steward of that Ciiurch, and Epiphanius
the archpresbyter, under our strict authority,
that they themselves at their own peril en-
deavour themselves carefully and profitably to
set those same hospitals {xenodochia) in order.
For, if there should be any neglect there here-
after, let them know that they will not be able
in any manner, or to any extent, to excuse
themselves before us.

Further, since the proprietors of Sardinia
have petitioned us that, seeing that they are
afllicted by diverse burdens, thou mightest go
to Constantinople for their redress, we grant
thee leave to go. And we have also written
to our most beloved son Boniface, desiriiig
him to do liis best to lend thee his aid in
obtaining redress for that province.

Moreover, with regard to the Churches which
thou hast informed us are without priests ^^ we
have written to our aforesaid most reverend
brother and fellow-bishop Januarius, that he
should supply them ; yet so that all be not
<:hosen for the episcopate from his own Church.
For it becomes him so to supply other Churches
as not to cause want in his own of persons who
may be of advantage to it.

As to what thou hast told us of persons
having been preferred to the government of
certain monasteries who, while they were in
a lower monastic order, had fallen into sin,
they ought not indeed to have undertaken the
office of abbot excei)t after entire reformation
•of life and after due preceding penance. But


^ See I. 62, note g,

2 S'xcerdotes, here as elsewhere meaning bishops.


since, as thou sayest, they have undertaken the
office of abbots, heed must be given to their
life, manners, and attention to duty. And, if
their conduct should not be found inconsistent
with their office, let them persevere in the order
in which they are. Otherwise let them be re-
moved, and others ordained who may profit
the souls committed to them.

Furthermore, in the case of the monastery
of Saint Hermas, which was founded by our
brother in the house of the religious lady Pom-
pon iana, inasmuch as it should be treated with
tenderness rather than with strictness, let thy
Experience endeavour to deal sweetly with the
said lady, to the end that neither may she, to
her own sin, disregard tlie Avill of the founder,
nor thou fail to provide salubriously for the
advantage of the monastery. Further, as to
the girls of whom the aforesaid Pomponiana
had formerly changed the religious dress, and
converted them in the monnstery 3, thou must
by no means sufi'er them to be withdiawn from
her, or disquieted ; but let them continue,
God protecting them^ in the state of life in
which they are.

With regard to the recovery of the property
of Churches, or of monasteries, or any other
devoted to pious uses, about Avhich thou hast
written, those who are interested must be ad-
monished that it is for them to seek in all wa}s
to recover it with thy support and aid. But,
if they should haply prove negligent, or in any
case if such as ought to recover it should not
be found, then do thou search it all out and
so get it back, when discovered, as not to
appear to take legal action against any one
with a high hand. As to wh.at thou hast told
us with respect to the hospitals {xenodochia) of
Hortulanus and Thomas, we so far have no
knowledge. Wherefore let thy Exi)erience
look diligently into the order of the Emperor
so far given, and arrange all according to its
tenour, and make knowai to us whatever thou
hast done.

Concerning what thou hast written about
our brother and fellow-bisho}) Januarius at the
time when he celebrates the sacrifice often
suftering such chstress that he can hardly after
long intervals return to the place in the canon


3 " Convertit in monasterio. ' Conversio, as usually, means
here monastic profession.


I04


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


where be has left off, and as to many doubting
whether they should receive the Communion
from bis consecration, they are to be admon-
ished to be in no alarm at all, but communi-
cate with full faith and security, since a per-
son's sickness neither alters nor defiles the
benediction of the sacred mystery. Neverthe-
less our said brother should by all means be
exhorted privately, that, as often as he feels
any trouble coming on, he should not proceed
to celebration, lest he thus expose himself to
contempt, and cause offence to the minds of
the weak.

Furthermore, the religious lady Pomponiana 4
has complained to us that the inheritance of
her late son-in-law Epiphanius — of which the
said Epiphanius had appointed his wife Ma-
trona, daughter of the aforesaid Pomponiana,
to be usufructuary for the benefit of the monas-
tery which he had directed to be founded in
his house, and for its benefit also in all ways
after the extinction of the usufruct — together
with other things which are proved to belong
to the same Matrona by right of possession,
have been unjustly taken away by thy Ex-
perience and by our most reverend brother
and fellow-bishop Januarius, and that nothing
therefore has so far been paid to her daughter,
or been of profit to the monastery. Now if
the truth is so, and thou art aware of having
done anything unl)ecomingly, without any
delay restore what has been taken away ; or
at any rate, if thou thinkest it to be otherwise,
lest the opposite party should seem to be
aggrieved prejudicially, by no means defer sub-
mitting the case to arbitrators chosen with her
concurrence, that it may be declared by a
definite decision whether her complaint be
true and just.

EPISTLE IV.

To Fantinus, Guardian {Defensorem) of

Panormus.

Gregory to Fantinus, &c

Such things about our brother and fellow-
bishop Exhilaratus, as thou thyself also know-
est, have come to our ears as ought by all
means to be visited with severe punishment.
But, since it has been smoothed over by our
most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Leo 5,
who has also declared that he was judge in
that case, we have thought it fit that he
[i.e. Exhilaratus] should be sent back to his
Church, considermg that what we have inflicted
on him by keeping him here so long may be
enough for him. Therefore we enjoin thy


4 As to this Pomponiana (<i/. Poinpaiana), cf. I. 48 ; XI. 25.

5 Bishop of Catana in Sicily. Cf. IV. 36.


Experience to pay attention to his manners
and deeds, and to admonish him frequently, to
the end that he may shew himself solicitous in
extending kind charity to his clerks {clericis)^
and, should need require, in correcting faults.
But we desire thee also to admonish his clergy
that they exhibit humility towards him, and
the obedience which the Lord commands, nor
in any respect presume to behave proudly with
regard to him. And if any one of them, that
is, either bishop or clerk, should disregard thy
admonition, do thou, under this authority from
us, either correct the sin of disobedience by
canonical coercion, as thou seest fit, or make
haste to send a report to us, that we may be
able to arrange how the rein of discipline may
keep from going off their road those whom the
goad of evil inclination provokes to trans-
gression.

EPISTLE VII.
To Alcyson, Bishop of Corcyra.

Gregory to Alcyson, &c.

Not undeservedly does the ambition of an
elated heart require to be quelled, when, dis-
regarding the force of the sacred canons, the
excess of rash presumption in coveting unlaw-
fully what belongs to others is shewn to be
not only harmful in causing expense, but also
ojDposed to the peace of the Church. Having,
then, perused thy Fraternity's epistles, we have
learnt what has been done formerly or of late
by the bishop of the City of Euria with regard
to the camp of Cassiopus ^, which is situated
in thy diocese, and we are distressed that
those who should have been debtors to thy
Church for charity bestowed upon them,
should rather become its enemies, no shame
restraining them ; and at last that, in a way
contrary to ecclesiastical arrangement, con-
trary to priestly moderation, contrary to the
ordhiances of the sacred canons, they should
attempt to withdraw the aforesaid camp
from thy jurisdiction and subject it to their
own power, so as to become as it were masters
where they had before been received as
strangers. Concerning which matter, seeing
that Andrew, our brother of venerable me-
mory, Metropolitan of Nicopolis, with the
support also of an imperial order whereby the
cognizance of this case had been enjoined on
him, is known to have determined in a sen-
tence promulged by him, as has been made
manifest to us, that the aforesaid camp of


6 Castrujii Cassiopi, which appears to have been a fortress
in the isle of Corcyra, to which refugees from the mainland of
Epirus had resorted in time of war. Euria vvas one of the
sees in Epirus Vetus under the jurisdiction of which these retugees
had Iseen ; and it seems that the bishop of Euria had been com-
plained of by Alcyson, bishop of Corcyra, for asserting juris-
diction over them in their new abode. See also Kp. VI 1 1.,
which follows, and Ep. XIII.


EPISTLE VIII.


los


Cassiopus should remain under the jurisdiction
of thy Church as it always has been, we, ap-
proving of the form of that sentence, confirm
it, as justice approves, by the authority of the
Apostohc See, and decree that it remain firm
in all respects. For no reason of equity, no
canonical order, sanctions that one person
should in any way occupy the parish ^ of an-
other. Wherefore, though the guilt of this
contentiousness seems to require no slight
strictness of treatment, in that they have re-
turned evil for good, nevertheless care should
be taken that kindness be not overcome by
excess, nor that what is due to strange breth-
ren, when they are suffering constraint too,
be denied them, lest charity should be judged
to have no operation in the minds of bishops,
if those to whom great compassion is due
sliould be left without the remedy of consola-
tion. It is right, then, that the priests and
clergy of the city of Euria be not repelled
from habitation of the aforesaid camp of Cas-
siopus, but that they should have leave also
to deposit with due reverence the holy and
venerable body of the blessed Donatus, which
they have brought with them, in one of the
churches of the aforesaid place such as they
may choose. Yet so that protection be pro-
cured for thy Love, in whose diocese this
camp is situate, by the issue of a security
whereby the bishop of Euria shall promise not
to claim for himself any power therein, or any
privilege, or any jurisdiction, or any authority
in future, as though he were cardinal bishop ;
but tiiat, peace being restored by the favour
of God, they shall return by all means to their
own places, taking away with them, if they
will, the venerable body of Saint Donatus.
So, this promise being kept in mind, neither
may they dare on any pretext whatever to
claun further to themselves any right of rule
there, but acknowledge themselves guests
there at all times, nor may the Church of thy
Fraternity hi any degree incur prejudice to its
rights and privileges.

EPISTLE VIIL
To Boniface, Deacon.

Gregory to Boniface, Deacon at Constan-
tinople ^.

As often as the discord of those who ought
to have been preachers of peace makes us sad,
we should study with great solicitude that
cause of contention may be removed, and
that those who differ among themselves may
return to concord. Now what has been done


7 Parochiam, in the then usual sense of what is now called
"x. diocese.

8 See XIII. ^8, note 1.


with respect to the camp of Cassiopus, which
is situate in the island of Corcyra, and how
the bishop of Euria is endeavouring to with-
draw it from the jurisdiction of the bishop of
Corcyra, and iniquitously to subject it to his
own jurisdiction, it would be very tedious to
tell 9. But, that your Love may understand
all things fully, we have sent to you the letters
of our brother Alcyson, the bishop of Corcyra,
and have caused his man to go to you to in-
form you of everything more particularly by
word of mouth. This, however, we briefly
mention, that an order having been surrepti-
tiously obtained from the late Emperor Mau-
ricius, which order, having been given in
opposition to the laws and sacred canons, had
no effect, and the dispute between the parties
remaining undecided, he gave another order
to our late brother Andrew, then Metropolitan
of Nicopolis, to the effect that, as both parties
were subject to his jurisdiction, he should take
cognizance of the case and terminate it canon-
ically. The said Metropolitan, having taken
cognizance of the case and pronounced sen-
tence, of which we send you a copy, decided
the aforesaid camp of Cassiopus to be under
the power and jurisdiction of the bishop of
Corcyra, in whose diocese it always was ; and
we, approving his sentence, have thought fit
to coniirm it by the authority of the Apostolic
See. And, lest what we decreed should be so
strict as to seem to have no admixture of
benignity, we took care so to order the matter
for the time being (as the text of our sentence
which we send to thee shews) that neither
should the bishop or clergy of the city of
Euria incur the necessity of residence, nor
the privileges of the Church of Corcyra be
in any way disturbed. But inasmuch as at
the very beginning of procee(iings an order
was surreptitiously got from the most serene
lord the Emperor, and (contrary to the judg-
ment of the Metropolitan of Nicopolis, which
rested on ecclesiastical propriety and canoni-
cal reason) the aforesaid camp of Cassiopus is
said to have been handed over to the bishop
of Euria (a thing we cannot hear witiiout grief
or tell without groans), with still greater wrong
to the bishop of Corcyra and his clergy, in
such sort as (sad to say) to take away entirely
the jurisdiction of the Church of Corcyra, and
give as it were to the bishop of Euria the whole
principal jurisdiction there ; this being so, we
nave thought right to deliver our sentence to
no one, lest we should seem to do anything
contrary to the order of our most clement
lord the Emperor, or (which God forbid) in
contempt of him. Wherefore let thy Love

9 Cf. preceediiig epistle.


io6


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


diligently represent the whole matter to his
Piety, and steadily insist that the thing is
altogether unlawful, altogether bad, altogether
unjust, and greatly opposed to the sacred
canons. And so may he not allow a sin of
this sort to be introduced in his times to the
prejudice of the Church. But represent to
him what is contained in the judgment of the
aforesaid late metropolitan on the business,
and in what manner his decision had been
confirmed by us, and endeavour so to act that
our sentence, with an order from him, may be
sent to those parts, to the end that we may
be seen to have paid due deference to his
Serenity, and to have corrected reasonably
what had been presumptuously done amiss.
In this affair pains must by all means be taken
that, if it can be effected, he may contribute
also his own order, enjoining the observance
of what has been decided by us. For if this
is done, all place for subornation hereafter
will be shut out. Make haste, then, so to
exercise thy vigilance, with the help of Al-
mighty God, for abating these wrongs, that
neither may the will of those who attempt per-
verse things obtain any advantage now against
the ancient settlement of ecclesiastical usage,
nor a nefarious proceeding gain ground for
example afterwards.

Furthermore, that thou mayest know what
wrongs and what oppressions the above-written
Alcyson, our brother and fellow-bishop, asserts
that he endures from the agents {actionariis)
of the Church of Thessalonica, we have for-
warded to thy Love the letter which he has
sent to us. And do thou accordingly cause
the respoiisalis of the aforesaid Church to come
to thee, and take cognizance of the case in
his presence, and write to our brother and
fellow-bishop Eusebius, on such heads as
reason may suggest to thee, that he may pro-
hibit his men from acting unjustly, and warn
them not to oppress inferiors, but rather help
them in whatever may be just. This also we
desire ; that thy Love should write to him
who may have been ordained as Metropolitan
in the city of Nicopolis, to the end that he
may take cognizance of the case with regard
to the injuries which our aforesaid brother
Alcyson complains of having been inflicted on
his Church, and decide what is just, seeing
that the matter itself is stated not to have
been decided by his predecessors, but reserved.

EPISTLE XII.

To Theodelinda, Queen of the
Lombards.

Gregory to Queen Theodelinda.
The letters which you sent us a little time
ago from tlie Genoese parts have made us


partakers of your joy on account of our learn-
ing that by the favour of Almighty God a son
has been given you, and, as is greatly to your
Excellency's credit, has been received into the
fellowship of the catholic faith ^°. Nor indeed
was anything else to be supposed of your
Christianity but that you would fortify him
whom you have received by the gift of God
with the aid of Catholic rectitude, so that our
Redeemer might both acknowledge thee as
His familiar servant, and also bring up pros-
perously in His fear a new king for the nation
of the Lombards. Wherefore we pray Al-
mighty God both to keep you in the way of
His commandments, and to cause our most
excellent son, Adulouvald ", to advance in His
love, to the end that, as he is in this world
great among men, so also he may be glorious
for his good deeds before the eyes of our
God.

Now as to what your Excellency has re-
quested in your letter, that we should reply
in full to what our most beloved son, the
abbot Secundus has written ', who could think
of putting off his petition or your wishes,
knowing how profitable they would be to
many, did not sickness stand in the way ? But
so great an infirmity from gout has held us
fast as to render us hardly able to rise, not
only for dictating, but even for speaking, as
also your ambassadors, the bearers of these
presents, are aware, who, when they arrived,
found us weak, and when they departed, left
us in the utmost peril and danger of our life.
But, if by the ordering of Almiglity God I
should recover, I will reply in full to all that
he has written. I have, however, sent by the
bearers of these presents the Synod that was
held in the time of Justinian of pious memory,
that my aforesaid most-beloved son may ac-
knowledge on reading it that all that he had
heard against the Apostolic See or the Catholic
Church was false. For far be it from us to


10 i.e. the child had been baptized a catholic. It would seem
from Gregory's way of speaking, and the absence of allusion to
the conversion of the fatlier, mat king Agilulph had not yet
announced his Arianism. Paul Diaconus alleges that he did
so eventually through the intluence of Theodelinda.

11 The child who had been baptized (^al. Adaloaldus, or Adoal-
dus). He succeeded his father as king ot the Lombards, a.d. 6i6,
being still a boy, reigning imder his mother's guardianship.
According to Paul Diaconus, Gregory's hopes vsere for a short
time fulfilled : — " Under them Churches were restored, and many
endowments were bestowed on venerable places ;" — but belore
long he became insane, and after ten years (a u. 626) was deposed,
Arioald being appointed to succeed him (^H ist. Longob. iv. 43).

I On thesuijject of the "Three Chapters," as appears from
what tollows. It is evident that the able and conscientious queen
Theodelinda never found herself able to accept the ruling ol the
See of Rome on this question (cf. IV. 2, note 3) ; and she seems now
to have employed the abbot Secundus to draw up a statement
of the arguments on her side, inviting Gregory to reply to them.
He did not, however, on this account cease to address hei
cordially as a good Catholic. He seems to have condoned in hei
what he so strongly condemned in others as involving them in
schism. On the scliism arising from the matter of the '" Three
Chapters," see I. 16, note 3 ; and Frolegont., p. x.


EPISTLE XVL


107


accept the views of any heretic whatever, or
to devio^te in any respect from the tome of
our predecessor Leo, of holy memory; but
we receive whatever has been defined by the
four holy synods, and condemn whatever has
been rejected by them.

Further, to our son the King Adolouvald
we have taken thought to send some phylac-
teries ; that is, a cross with wood of the holy
cross of the Lord, and a lection of the holy
Gospel enclosed in a Persian case. Also to
my daughter, his sister, I send three rings,
two of them with hyacinths, and one with
an albula 2, which I request may be given
them through you, that our charity towards
them may be seasoned by your Excellency.

Furthermore, while paying you our duty
of greeting with fatl erly charity, we beg you
to return thanks in our bal alf to our most
excellent son the King your consort for the
peace that has been made, and to move his
mind to peace, as you have been accustomed
to do, in all ways for the future ; that so,
among your many good deeds, you may be
able in the sight of God to find reward in
an innocent people, which might have perished
in offence.

EPISTLE XIII.
To Alcyson, Bishop of Corcyra3.

Gregory to Alcyson, &c.

To brethren who bethink themselves and
return to wholesome counsels kindness is not
to be denied, lest a fault seem to weigh more
in the minds of bishops than charity. We
have therefore received, in the presence of
thy Love's responsales^ Peter, reader of the
Church of Euria, who came to us with letters
from our brother and fellow-bishop John, and,
when the letters which he had brought had
been read, we took care to ask him if he had
anything to say against the allegation of those
thy responsales. And on his stating that he
had been charged with r^othing, and had no
answer to make, beyond what the epistle of
his bishop contained, we decreed without
tardiness, under God, what was agreeable to
the canons. After a long time, however, the
above-written Peter produced a document
which he asserted had been given him by his
bishop ; and so the case underwent delay.
But inasmuch as in this document the above-
mentioned bishop was found to say that he
had hoped to have leave to deposit the holy
and venerable body of the blessed Donatus
in the church of the blessed John which is


2 Some precious stone, prol^ably of a white colour.
3 See XIV. 7.


within the camp called that of Cassiopus, say-
ing that he is prepared, on account of its being
proved to be in thy diocese, to give thy Love
a security that no prejudice to thee should
thence arise, we thought it right that his
petition should not be left without effect, now
that in a time of necessity he desires pro-
vision to be made for him in such a way as
to secure his acknowledgment in all respects
of the jurisdiction of thy Church. Moved
therefore by this reason, we exhort thy Frater-
nity by this present letter, that, without any
delay or excuse thou afford opportunity for
depositing the venerable body of the above-
written Saint in the aforenamed Church of
tlie blessed John ; on condition only that
he previously protect thee by a security in
writing that he will never on any plea what-
ever claim to himself any jurisdiction or
privilege in the aforesaid Church or camp,
as though he were the bishop of the place,
but guard there inviolably all the right and
power of thy Church, the place being in thy
diocese. At the same time it becomes thee
also, as the same our brother has requested,
to reply to him that whenever, peace being
restored by the mercy of God, he may be
at liberty to return to his own place, it shall
be lawful for him to take away with him,
without any objection made, the aforesaid
venerable body. Herein, lest what is done
should seem to be personal, and occasion
should possibly be found for stirring up the
contention anew, your successors also should
be in all respects included in this promise
to keep things as they are, to the end that
through this preventional security neither may
he in future presume to claim anything there
in thy diocese against equity and the decrees
of the sacred canons, nor the rights of thy
Church ever in any manner sustain any pre-
judice from such concession.

EPISTLE XVI.

From Felix Bishop of Messana4 to
St. Gregory.

To the most blessed and honourable lord,
the holy father Pope Gregory, Felix lover of
your Weal and Holiness.


4 Messina in Sicily. This Felix cannot be identified with
Felix, bishop of the same See, to whom previous letters (viz. I. 66,
together with two others, I. 40, and II. 5, which have not been
translated) had been addressed. For he had been succeeded
in the see by Dunns, probably in the 14th Indiction, i.e. a.u. 595-6,
(see VI. 9), when Gregory's reply to Augustine's interrogatories,
which is the main subject of the epistle before us, had not yet l^een
sent. Augustine does not appear 10 have even arrived in Bi itain till
A.D. 597. But there seems to be no reason against the supposi-
tion tliat a second Felix had succeeded Dunns at INIessina before
the death of Gregory, the last mention of Donus being in the
superscription of Ep. XVIII. in Book XIII., assigned to the
i6th Indiction, i.e. a. i). 602-3.


io8


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


The claims under God of your most blessed
Weal and Holiness are manifest. For, though
the whole earth was filled with observance
of the true faith by the preaching and doctrine
of the apostles, yet the orthodox Church of
Christ, having been founded by apostolical
institution and most firmly established by the
faithful fathers, is further built up through
the teaching of divine discourses, while in-
structed by your hortatory admonition. To
it did all the most blessed apostles, endowed
witli an equal participation of dignity and
authority 5, convert hosts of peoples; and by
salutary precepts and admonitions, piously
and holily, brought such as were foreknown
in the grace of divine predestination from
darkness to liglit, from error to the true faith,
from death to life. Following the merits of
these holy apostles, and perfectly acting up
to their example, your honoured Paternity
adorns with them the Church of God by
probity of manners and holiness of deeds ;
and, strong in sacred faith and Christian
manners, enjoins what should be done to
please God, and unceasingly follows and fulfils
pontifical duties, thus observing the precepts
of divine law; since (as says the Apostle)
Not the hearers of the law are just before God,
but the doers of the law shall be justified (Rom.
ii. 13).

As we were meditating on these things,
news was brought us by certain who came
from Rome that you had written to our com-
rade Augustine (afterwards ordained Bishop
for the nation of the Angli, and thither sent
by your venerable Holiness), and to the Angli
(whom we have long known to have been
converted to the faith through you), that
persons related in the fourth degree of de-
scent, if married, should not be separated^.
Now this was not formerly the custom either
in those or in these parts, when I was brought
up and taught together with you from infancy ;
nor have I read of it in any decrees of your
predecessors, or in the institutes of other
Fathers generally or specially, or learnt that
,it had been allowed hitherto by any of the
wise. But I have found from your holy
predecessors, and from the rest of the holy
Fathers, assembled as well in the Nicene
synod as in other holy councils, that this
[i.e. this prohibition of marriage^ should be
observed down to the seventh degree of de-


5 See also below — " the apostles in the first place who were
prelates of the Apostolic See." It would seem from these ex-
pressions that the Sicilian hisliops went on the tradition of St. Paul
and St. Peter ha\iiig been joint founders of tlie Roman Churcli :
and throughout tlie epistle, though the supieniacy of the See of
Rome is acknowledged, it is not spoken of as derived especially
from St. Peter.

6 See XL, 64 {ResJ>ousio ad Interrog. vi.).


scent ; and I know that this is carefully seen
to by men who live aright and fear the Lord.
While these things were being discussed among
us, other things also supervened, concerning
which it seems necessary for us to consult
your authority. For there came to us both
Benedict, bishop of the Syracusan Church,
and also others of our brethren, being bishops,
weeping, and saying that they were greatly
disturbed and afflicted in mind on account
of the immoderate proceedings of secular and
lay persons, in consequence of which some
unjust things were also being said against
them.

There are also some churches in our pro
vince about the consecration of which doubt
is felt ; and, because both of their antiquity
and of the carelessness of their custodians,
it is unknown whether they have been dedi-
cated by bishops or not. As to all these
things we beg to be instructed by your Holi-
ness, and by the authority of your holy see ;
and we ask to be informed by your letters
whether what, as we have before said, we
have heard that vou had written to our afore-
said comrade Augustine and to the nation
of the Angli was written specially to them
or generally to all ; and we desire to be fully
informed both on this matter and on the
others above written.

For we do not signify to you what we have
read, and what we know to be observed by
the faithful, by way of finding fault (which
be far from us) ; but we seek to know what
we may reasonably and faithfully observe in
this matter. And, since no slight murmuring
is going on among us on this question, we
seek an answer from you, as from the head, as
to what we should reply to our brethren and
fellow bishops ; lest we should remain doubt-
ful in the matter, and lest this murmuring
should remain among us both in your times
and in times to come, and your reputation,
which has always been good and excellent,
should be lacerated or disparaged through
detractions, or your name (which God forbid)
should be evil spoken of in succeeding times.
For we, observing under God what is right
with humble heart, being bound to you in one
bond of charity, and defending your religion
in all things as faithful pupils, seek knowledge
of what is right from you. For we know that,
as the apostles in the first place who were
prelates of the holy See, and their successors
afterwards, have always done, so you also take
care of the universal Church, and especially
of bishops, who on account of their contem-
plation and speculation are called the eyes
of the Lord ; and that you think continually
about our religion and law, as it is written,


EPISTLE XVII.


109


Blessed is he who shall vieditate ift the latv of
the Lord day and flight (Ps. i. 2). Which
meditation of yours is not only seen by reading,
through the outward expression of letters, but,
by the grace of Christ abounding in you, is
known to be immoveably engrafted in your con-
science; while the most holy law of Christ
the Lord in no wise departs from your heart ;
as says the Prophet in the Psalms, The month
of the righteous zvill meditate wisdom^ and his
tongue 7vill be talking of judgments : the laiv
of God is in his heart (Ps. xxxvi. 30) ; written
not with ink, but in secret by the Spirit of the
living God ; not therefore on tables of stone,
but on the tables of the heart. Let all gloom
of darkness, we pray you, be dispelled by
your most wise replies and assistance, that the
morning star may shine upon us through you,
most holy Father, and a dogmatic definition
causing joy to all everywhere, because the
glorious Fathers of holy Church are known
to have preached proper and most pious
dogmas unto secure inheritance of eternal life.
Subscription. May the Lord keep you safe
and well-pleasing to God for ever, holy father
of fathers, while you pray for us.

EPISTLE XVII.
To Felix, Bishop of Messana.

To our most reverend brother, the Bishop
Felix. Gregory, servant of the servants of
God 7.

Our Head, which is Christ, to this end has
willed us to be His members, that through
His large charity and faithfulness He might
make us one body in Himself, to whom it
befits us so to cling that, since without Him
we can do nothing, through Him we may be
enabled to be what we are called. From the
citadel of the Head let nothing divide us,
lest, if we refuse to be His members, we be de-
serted of Him, and wither as branches cast off
from the vine. That we may be counted worthy,
then, to be the habitation of our Redeemer,
let us abide with the whole desire of our heart


7 The genuineness of this epistle is, to say the least, open
to grave suspicion. Jaffe {Regesta Pont. Lit. Spur.) rejects it
as spurious. Its style in some parts reminds us of Gregory, and
it contains passages identical with what he had written elsewhere :
but its prolixity, bad composition, and repetitions are unworthy
of his pen. It reads like an unskilful imitation of his style. Nor
is it difficult to understand why such a letter may have been
forged. If, as supposed in our note to Ep. XVI., a letter from
Sicily had been addressed to Gregory not long before his death
with reference to his answers to Augustine's questions, to which
letter he had been unable to reply, it was not unlikely that .such
a letter as the one before us would afterwards be composed in his
name. For anxiety might naturally be felt to vindicate from
inconsistency the teaching of the Roman See on the subject of
marriages of consanguinity. Such a letter, too, if forged, would
be likely to attempt an imitation of Gi'egory's style, and to bring
in (as this does) extracts from his previous writings. It may be
observed that the plea set forth of the directions to Augustine
havln?; been meant only as temporary concessions is not borae out
by tile aciual language of thoae directions. See XI. 64.


I in His love. For he says, He that loveth me
zvill keep 7ny tvord^ and my Father will
love him^ and we zvill make our abode zvith
hi?n (Joh. xiv. 23). Now thy Love, most
dear brother, has demanded of us that we
should reply to thy enquiries with the authority
of the Apostolic See. And, though we make
haste to do this, not at length but succinctly
(because of certain pressing cares that have
come upon us, through the hindrance of our
sins), yet we commit what follows to thy
attention for wider enquiry, and investigation
of other institutes of holy fathers. For a mind
worn and weighed down with burdens and
pressing cares cannot effect so much good,
or speak of these things so freely, as can one
that is joyful and free from depression. We
have not therefore given the preference to such
cares as wishing to deny to thy Holiness this
and such other information as we might find
to be needful, but in order that what is here
found deficient may be more fully enquired
into.

For, following the examples of thy prede-
cessors, thou hast thought it right to consult
the Apostolic See, in which thou hast been
brought up and educated, on three points ;
that is on marriages of consanguinity, on
vexation of bishops by subordinates, and on
doubt with respect to the consecration of
churches. Know then that w^iat I wrote to
Augustine, bishop of the nation of the Angli
(who was, as thou rememberest, thy pupil),
about marriages of consanguinity was written
specially to him and to the nation of the
Angli which had recently come to the faith,
lest from alarm at anything too austere they
should recede from their good beginning ;
but it was not written generally to others. Of
this the whole Roman city is my witness.
Nor did I thus order in those writings with the
intention that, after they had been settled
in the faith with a firm root, they should not
be separated, if found to be below the proper
degree of consanguinity, or should be united,
if below the proper line of affinity, that is as
far as the seventh generation. But for those
who are still neophytes it is very often right
in the first place to teach them, and by word
and example to instruct them, to avoid un-
lawful things, and then afterwards, reasonably
and faithfully, to shut out things that they may
have done in matters of this kind. For ac-
cording to the Apostle who says, / have fed you
with milk, fiot zvith meat (i Cor. iii. 2), we
have allowed these indulgences for them only,
and not (as has been said above) for future
times, lest the good which had been planted
so far with a weak root should be rooted up,
but that what had been bei^un should rather


no


EPISTLES OF ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.


be made firm, and guarded till it reach per-
fection. Certainly, if in these things we have
done anything otherwise than as we ought
to have done, know that it has been done,
not of wantonness, but in commiseration.
Wherefore, too, I invoke God as my witness,
who knows the thoughts of all men, and to
whom all things are naked and open. For,
if I were to destroy what those wlio came
before me estabhshed, I should be justly
convicted of being not a builder but an over-
thrower, as testifies the voice of the Truth,
who says. Every kingdo?n divided against itself
shall not stand{l.\\kQ xi. 17) ; and every science
and law divided against itself shall be de-
stroyed. And so it is needful for us all with
one accord to hold to the appointments of
our holy Fathers, doing nothing in conten-
tion, but, unanimous in every aim of good
devotion, to obey, the Lord helping us, the
divine and apostohcal constitutions.

O how good is charity, which through love
exhibits absent things in an image to one's self
as though they were present, unites things
divided, sets in order things confused, asso-
ciates things unequal, consummates things
imperfect ! How rightly the excellent preacher
calls it the bond of perfectness, since the other
virtues indeed produce perfectness. but yet
charity so binds them that they cannot now be
unloosed from the mind of him that loves. This
being duly considered, in what has been already
spoken of I indulged charitably; nor did I
give a command, but advice ; nor did I deliver
a rule to be held to by any who should come
after, but shewed of two dangers which might
be more easily avoided. If, then, in secular
affairs every one should have his own right
and his proper rank preserved to him, how
much more in ecclesiastical arrangements
ought no confusion to be induced, lest discord
should find place there whence the blessings
of peace ought to proceed. And this will
be thus secured, if nothing is yielded to
power, but all to equity. On this account our
heart rejoices greatly with your greatness,
because we find you so earnest in your doings
as to have a care for us, and at pains to
enquire about such things by questioning us,
to tne end that such things may acquire for
you not only glory with men, but also rewards
of recompense with the Almighty Lord.

But with regard to vexation of bishops,
about which you wish to consult us, we know
that the life of prelates ought to be perturbed
by no excesses, since it is very unfit that those
who are called thrones of God should be
disturbed by any motion from kings or sub-
jects. For, if David who was the most righ-
teous of kings presumed not to lay his hand


on Saul who was evidently already rejected of
God, how much more should heed be taken that
none lay the hand of detraction or vituperation
or indiscreetness or dishonour on the Lord's
Anointed, or on the preachers of holy Church,
since vexation or detraction of them touches
Christ, in whose stead they fill the office of
legates in the Church 1 Hence all the faithful
should be exceedingly cautious not either
secretly or publicly, by detractions or vitu-
perations rend their bishop, that is, the Lord's
Anointed, considering that example of Mary
[i.e. Miria7n\ who for speaking against Moses
the servant of God because of the Ethiopian
woman was punished with the uncleanness of
leprosy (Num. xiii.) ; and that of the Psalmist,
2 ouch ?iot mine anointed^ and do my prophets no
harm (Ps. civ. 15)^. And in the divine law
we read, Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor
curse the ruler of thy people (Ex. xxii. 28).
Hence great care should be taken by sub-
ordinates, whether clerical or lay, that they
dare not to blame rashly the lives of their
bishops or superiors, if perchance they see
them do anything blam cable, lest from their
position of reproving evil they be sunk into
greater depths through the impulse of elation.
They are to be admonished also that, when
they consider the faults of their superiors, they
grow not too bold against them. But let
them so consider with themselves the things
that are bad that, constrained by divine fear,
they refuse not to carry the yoke of reverence,
seeing that the things done by bishops and
superiors are not to be smitten with the sword
of the mouth, even when they may seem to be
such as may be properly blamed ; since we
are aware that it has been laid down by our
predecessors and by many other holy bishops
that sheep should not readily blame their
shepherds, or presume to criminate or accuse
them, because, when we sin against our su-
periors, we go against His ordinance AVho gave
them to us. Hence Moses, when he had learnt
that the people complained against himself
and Aaron, said, For ivhat are we? Not
against us is your 7nurmuri?ig but against God
(Ex. xvi. 8). Wherefore subordinates of either
order are to be admonished that, when they
observe the deeds of their masters, they re-
turn to their own heart, and presume not in
upbraidings of them, since The disciple is not
above his master, ?wr the servant above his lord
(Matth. X. 24).

Concerning doubt as to the dedications of
churches, about which among other things you
have wished to consult us, you ought duly to
hold to this which we have received as handed


Ps. cv. 15.


EPISTLE XVII.


1 1 1


down to us from those who have gone before
us ; namely, that, as often as doubt is enter-
tained as to the baptism or confirmation of
any persons, as well as the consecration of
churches, and there is no certain account to be
given, either from writings or witnesses, as to
whether persons have been baptized or con-
firmed, or whether churches have been con-
secrated, that such persons should be bap-
tized and confirmed, and that such churches
should be canonically dedicated, lest such
doubt should become ruin to the faithful ;
inasmuch as what does not appear by certain
proofs to have been duly done is not in such
case done a second time. This, divine grace
supporting us, we desire so to hold ; and we
enjoin it on you, as you have requested, to
hold and teach ; and we wish not wantonly to
break through, but faithfully to observe, what
has been determined by holy Fathers before
us. Wherefore we implore the mercy of our
Redeemer to assist you with His grace, and
give unto you to carry into effect what He has
granted you to will, since in this matter the
good gifts of retribution by so much the more
accrue to us as the zeal of labour is increased.


But we decree that every one of those who
have been faitlifully taught, and already stand
ineradicably planted with a firm root, shall
observe his descent even to the seventh gener-
ation. And as long as they know tliemselves
to be related to each otiier by aftinity, let them
not presume to approach the association of
this union ; nor is it lawful, or shall be law-
fully for any Christian to marry a woman of
his own kindred whom he has lived with as
a wife, or whom he has stained by any un-
lawful pollution ; since such intercourse is
incestuous and abominable to God and to all
good men. But we read that it has long been
determined by holy Fathers that incestuous
persons are not to be reckoned under any title
of wedlock. And so we desire not to be
blamed by you or any other of the faithful
in this matter, seeing that in our indulgence
herein to the nation of the Angli we have
acted, not as laying down a rule, but as taking
thought lest they should leave imperfect the
good which they had begun, &c. 9


9 The rest of this long prolix epistle? not being of any peculiar
inierest, has not been translated.


SELECTIONS
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH


FROM THE


HYMNS AND HOMILIES


OF


EPHRAIM THE SYRIAN,


AND FROM THE


DEMONSTRATIONS


OF


APHRAHAT THE PERSIAN SAGE;


EDITED, WITH AN INTRODUCTORY DISSERTATION, BY

JOHN GWYNN, D.D., D.C.L.,

REGIUS PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF DUBLIN.


PREFACE.


In the following- selection from the voluminous writings of Ephraim, the great light
of the Syrian Church of the fourth century, I have endeavored to give adequate speci-
mens of his Hymns and of his Homilies ; but have not included any part of his Com-
mentaries on Holy Scripture. These last contain much that is worthy of study, but would
not be found attractive to the general reader ; nor could they be fairly represented by
a series of extracts such as the limits of the present volume would admit of

The Hymns (with small exceptions, presently to be specified), and the Homilies,
which I have selected, appear now for the first time in an English version ; and are trans-
lated from Syriac texts which have come to light within the last fifty years, in the great
collection of manuscripts acquired by the British Museum by the purchase of the library
of the monastery of the Theotokos in the Nitrian Desert, in Egypt.

To these I have added eight chosen from the iw eniy-ihree Demonstratio7is , or Epistles,
of Ephraim's contemporary Aphrahat. These also appear for the first time in English, and
are translated from a Syriac text, long lost, and lately recovered from the same famous
collection.

Of the Hymns of Ephraim, I have placed the Nisibene series first, including forty-
six of the total number (originally seventy-seven ; but a few are lost). The first
twenty-one, relating to the history of Nisibis and of its Bishops, I have given in full,
because of their special interest and historic value. The translation of these is the
work of the Rev. Joseph T. Sarsfield Stopford, B. A. (Dublin), Rector of Castle Combe
in the Diocese of Gloucester. It follows the text edited by Dr. Bickell (Leipzig, 1866),
from Nitrian MSS.

Of the Hymns O71 the Nativity, which stand next in order, the first thirteen have
already appeared in the Oxford " Library of the Fathers" (1847), translated by the
Rev. J. B. Morris, M. A., from the text printed in the great Roman edition, ^S. Eplwcemi
Syri Opera Syriaca (Rome, 1743). These were all of the series known when that edition
was published; but since then six complete hymns, and some fragments of the
same have been recovered from Nitrian MSS. I have reprinted Mr. Morris's
version of the thirteen, with some modifications, and have subjoined the Nitrian six,
rendered from the text published by Professor Lamy, of Louvain, in Tom. II of his
edition of Ephraim (Mechlin, 1889). These last, and the series of fifteen Hymns
For the Epiphany which follow them, have been translated by the Rev. Albert Edward
Johnston, B. D. (Dublin), formerly Assistant-Lecturer in Divinity in the University of
Dublin, and now Principal of the Church Missionary Society's College, Benares, l^he
remaining series, of seven Hymns On the Faith, also called Tlie Pearl, is borrowed,
like the thirteen On the Nativity, from Mr. Morris's version.

I have carefully revised and in parts rewritten all these translations of the Hymns,
chiefly with a view to bringing into some approach to uniformity the style and method
of rendering of a collection which thus includes the w^ork of three independeiit trans-

115


ii6 PREFACE.

lators. While very sensible of the high merit of Mr. Morris's work, and conscious that
by retouching and altering it I may incur the blame of presumptuousness, I have
thought it expedient to tone down somewhat of the exceeding severity of his faithful-
ness to his original, and to remove some of the harsh expressions and harsher inver-
sions which make his version, valuable as it is to the student, almost repulsive, and
often barely intelligible, to the English reader. Of his learned Notes, I have retained
a few, some of them in a curtailed form, of those which seemed most useful for the
illustration of the text.

The three Ho77iilies of Ephraim, which follow the Hymns, have been translated by
Mr. Johnston from Professor Lamy's text (as above, Tom. I., 1889).

The selections from the Demonstrations of Aphrahat are the work of the same trans-
lator, and follow the text of Dom Parisot's edition, forming Tom. I of the Patrologia Syriaca
(Paris, 1894).

The versions of i\\e Homilies and of the Demonstrations, being all the work of one and
the same hand, have called for but few and trivial alterations from the editor. I have,
however, revised them throughout; and am responsible for the general accuracy of the
rendering of the originals in these, and in the whole of the selections now presented to
the public.

In the Introductory Dissertation prefixed to the work, I have drawn largely on the
materials supplied by the Prolegomena of Dr. Bickell's Carmina Nisibena, and of Pro-
fessor Lamy's S. Ephrcemi Hymniet Sermones, Tom. I. and Tom. II.; and by Dr. Forget's
Treatise De Vita Aphraatis, and the Preface of Dom Parisot to Tom. I. of the Patrologia
Syriaca.

John Gwynn.

Trinity College, Dublin, ^ist March, 1898.


CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTORY DISSERTATION.

Preliminary 1 19

FIRST PART.

EPHRAIM THE SYRIAN.


I. Summary of the authenticated facts of his life

II. Materials for his biography

III. The life as amplified by mediaeval biographers

1. His early years

2. Siege of Nisibis

3. Removed to Edessa ,

4. Work as a teacher

5. Journey to Egypt and sojourn there

6. Visit to St. Basil of Caesarea ,

7. Return to Edessa

8. Controversies

9. Persecution by Valens ."

10. Penitent sent to Ephraim by St. Basil ; St. Basil's death ■

11. Exertions in relief of famine

1 2. His Testament

13. Death and burial

IV. Recapitulation of authentic facts of life

V. Historical criticism of mediaeval amplifications

(i.) The miraculous details

(ii.) The demonstrably incorrect or contradictory statements

1. Ephraim's alleged heathen parentage ,

2. The first and third sieges of Nisibis

3. Constantius and Constans

4. The alleged sojourn in Egypt

5. Interval between visit to St. Basil and the persecution of Valens

6. Death of St. Basil before that of Ephraim

VI. Rectification of the Vatican text of the Life

1. Date of his baptism mistaken

2. Jitlian substituted for Valens

VII. Chronology of life of Ephraim

VIII. His writings ; their characteristics

1. Commentaries

2. Homilies

3. Hymns

IX. The selections included in the present collection

X. Probable dates of his works

117


20
21
21

21

23

23

25
26
27
28
29

31

32
33

yi

zi
yi
38
38

38
39
41

41
43

43
44

44
44

44
46

46

47
47

50
51


ii8 CONTENTS.


SECOND PART.

APHRAHAT THE PERSIAN SAGE.

1 . Name of author of Demonstrations long unknown 152

2. Their subjects and arrangement 153

3. Dates of composition 1 53

4. Extent and limits of their circulation 1 53

• 5. Ascribed to Jacob of Nisibis 155

6. Re-appearance of name of Aphrahat , 155

7. His Nationality Persian, and probably heathen 156

8. Evidence that he was a cleric,, and a Bishop 157

9. His writings little concerned with current controversies 1 58

10. Possibly suspected of a Nestorian tinge 1 59

1 1 . Their popularity in the Armenian church , . . . 160

12. First printed in the Armenian version . 160

13. Discovery of the Post-Syriac original , 161

14. Was Aphrahat prior to Ephraim ? 161

15. His use of Holy Scripture 162

16. Literary and theological Value of his writings 162


SELECTIONS FROM EPHRAIM.


HYMNS.


Nisibene Hymns 165

On the Nativity 221

For the Epiphany 263

On the Faith ( The Pearl) 291

HOMILIES.

On 02ir Lord 305

On Admonition and Repentance 330

On the Sinftil Woman 336

SELECTIONS FROM APHRAHAT.

DEMONSTRATIONS.

I. Of Faith 345

V. Of Wars 352

VI. Of Monks , 362

VIII. Of the Resurrection of the Dead 37 5

X. Of Pastors 383

XVII. Of Christ the Son of God. , 387

XXI. Of PersecntioJi . 392

XXII. Of Death and the Latter Times 402


INTRODUCTORY DISSERTATION.


EPHRAIM THE SYRIAN


AND


APHRAHAT THE PERSIAN SAGE.


PRELIMINARY.

The two Fathers of the Syrian Church, from whose writings the present Volume
presents a selection, are from more than one point of view fitly associated as examples
of the leaders of Syriac theological thought and literature. They are the earliest Syriac
authors of whom any considerable remains survive ; and they both represent the re-
ligious mind of the Syrian Church, but little affected by influences from without, other
than the all-pervading influence of the Jewish and Christian Scriptures.

Syriac Literature is, on the whole, of derivative growth. It consists largely of ver-
sions or adaptations from the Greek. The Syriac language, in the hands of those to
whom the Syriac Church owes the admirable version of the Scriptures known as the
''Peshitto, " proved itself capable of reproducing adequately, not only the sublime con-
ceptions of God and of man's relations to God which belong to the cognate Hebrew
of the Old Testament, but also — the wider, subtler, and more complex religious ideas
for which the writers of the New Testament found their fit vehicle in the Greek. But
the Peshitto, great as its value must have been to the religious life of Syriac-speaking
Christians, never became to them what Luther's Bible has been to Germany, and the
"Authorized" Bible of King James's translators to England — an inspiring force in
literature, not merely to elevate and enrich its language, but to quicken it in every
branch. Syriac literature was indeed deeply penetrated by the Syriac Bible, but its
level was never raised above mediocrity. For the most part it is imitative not ori-
ginal ; — nay, it rarely succeeds in assimilating so as to make its own what it has
borrowed. The Syriac translator, if he worked on the writings of a Greek divme,
would often paraphrase or even interpolate ; if of a Greek historian, would subjoin a
continuation ; but he would seldom venture farther. Those who essayed independ-
ent authorship were few. A home-grown Syriac literature began with Ephraim and
Aphrahat ; but [setting aside a very small number of the writers who followed] it may
almost be said to have ended with them. These two, and these alone, in place of
being imitators or translators, were translated and imitated by the writers of foreign
nations. Aphrahat's literary lot was the singular one, that his work survived in an
alien tongue for alien readers, when the original had wellnigh perished out of themem-

119


120 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


ory of his own people. To Ephraim pertains the high and unique distinction of
having originated — or at least given its living impulse to — a new departure in sacred
literature ; and that, not for his own country merely, but for Christendom. From him
came, if not the first idea, at all events the first successful example, of making song
an essential constituent of public worship, and an exponent of theological teaching ;
and from him it spread and prevailed through the Eastern Churches, and affected even
those of the West. To the Hymns, on which chiefly his fame rests, the Syriac ritual in
all its forms owes much of its strength and richness ; and to them is largely due the
place which Hymnody holds throughout the Church everywhere. And hence it has
come to pass that, in the Church everywhere, he stands as the representative Syrian
Father, as the fixed epithet appended to his name attests — " Ephraim the Sjyn'a?i/' —
the one Syrian known and reverenced in all Christendom.

Of the two, it has been usual of late to reckon Aphrahat as the elder. Further
on, it will be shown in this Dissertation that the reasons for so reckoning him are in-
adequate. For the present it suffices to note that they were contemporaries — both living
and writing about the middle of the fourth century, and that priority of treatment can-
not with confidence be claimed for either. On grounds of convenience, therefore, we
may properly proceed to deal first with Ephraim, as being indisputably far the first in
order of importance, of copiousness, and of celebrity.


FIRST PART

EPHRAIM THE SYRIAN.
I. — Summary of the Authenticated Facts of his Life.

All that is known, on early and trustworthy evidence, of the person and life of
Ephraim may be briefly summed up. He was born within the Roman pale, in the
ancient and famous city of Nisibis in Mesopotamia, in, or before, the earliest days of
the reign (a. d. 306-337) of Constantine the Great : he was a disciple of St. Jacob,
Bishop of that city, who died a.d. 338 : and he lived in it, under Jacob and the three
Bishops who successively followed him, through three unsuccessful sieges laid to it by
Sapor, King of Persia, down to its final surrender under the terms of the ignominious
peace concluded with Sapor by the Emperor Jovian after the defeat and death of his
predecessor Julian (a.d. $6^). Nisibis was then abandoned by its Christian inhabi-
tants ; and Ephraim finally settled at Edessa, and took up his abode as a " Solitary".
in a cell on the "Mount of Edessa" — a rocky hill close to the city, where many
anchorites sought retreat. Here he rose into repute as a teacher, and a champion
against heresy ; and no less as an ascetic and saint. The fame of St. Basil, metro-
politan of Csesarea in Cappadocia (370-379), drew him from his solitude to visit that
great prelate and doctor, and from him he received the diaconate ; but (though some
affirm that he was advanced to the priesthood) it is agreed that he never became a Bishop.
He died at an advanced age, in his retreat, in the year ^j^ according to most author-
ities, but some suppose him to have lived to 378. He was a most copious MTiter, and
left an immense quantity of writings of which a large part is extant, — Sermons,
Commentaries, and Hymns. These constitute such a body of instruction in the sub-
stance of Scripture and the faith of the church, that they have justly earned for him the
title of ma/pono, or teacher. And not only have his Hymns done much to shape the
ritual of the Syrian Churches, in which large portions of them are embodied, but to his


I. HIS EARLY YEARS. . 121

Sermons this singular honour is paid, that lessons selected from them were appointed,
and are still read, in the regular course of public worship.

II. — Materials por his Biography.

Fuller details, of more or less authentic character, are forthcoming in many quar-
ters. In Syriac, we have two Lives, a longer and a shorter ; but whether the latter is
an abridgment of the former, or is rather the nucleus from which the other has been ex-
panded, is questionable. Of both alike, the date and the authorship are undetermined.
The longer of the two is entitled, the History \iash ilha] of the holy Mar Ephraim. It
varies not a little in the two copies of it [the Vatican and the Parisian] which have been
edited ; ^ and contains many things that are not easily credible, and some things that
are irreconcilable with one another, or with established facts. In the main facts, how-
ever, this History is borne out by the Greek authorities — the narrations of three fifth-
century historians, Socrates, Sozomen and Theodoret, the brief notices of Jerome, De
Viris Illusirihus (392), and of Palladius, in his Lausiac History (circ. 420) ci., and (what
is of most weight) the almost contemporary biographical particulars contained in the
Encomium pronounced on Ephraim by Gregory of Nyssa. Other Greek Lives are ex-
tant ; — one which bears the name of a writer coeval with Gregory, Amphilochius of
Iconium, but is certainly by a later hand ; one anonymous, and one ascribed to Simeon
the Metaphrast, a writer of the tenth century. ^

We proceed to give an outline of the contents of the Syriac History, adding to it
here and there such further noteworthy details or incidents as have reached us from the
other sources indicated. Further on, it will be our business to examine this narrative
and ascertain how far its statements are in themselves credible, or attested by other
and earlier evidence.

III. — The Life, as Amplified by Mediaeval Biographers.

I. His Early Fears. — Ephraim, according to this biography, was a Syrian of Meso-
potamia, by birth, and by parentage on both sides. His mother was of Amid (now
Diarbekr) a central city of that region ; his father belonged to the older and more famous
City of Nisibis, not far from Amid but near the Persian frontier, where he was priest of
an idol named Abnil (or Abizal) in the days of Constantine the Great {Z'^(i-Z?>7)- This
idol was afterwards destroyed by Jovian (who became Emperor in 363 after the extinc-
tion of the Flavian dynasty by the death of Julian). In Nisibis, then included within
the Roman Empire, Ephraim was born. The date of his birth is not stated, but it
cannot have been later than the earliest years of Constantine's reign. Though the son
of such a father, he was from his childhood preserved, by Divine grace which " chose
him like Jeremiah from his mother's womb," from all taint of idolatrous worship and its
attendant impurities, to be, like St. Paul, a "chosen vessel" to spread the light of
truth and to quench heresy. The biographer records farther on, but without fixing
its time, an intimation of his future work which Ephraim himself relates in his "Testa-
ment" as belonging to the days ''when his mother carried him on her bosom." He
saw in dream or vision a vine springing from his mouth, which grew so high as to
fill all that was under the heavens, and produced clusters whereon the fowls of the air

' The former in the Roman edition, Opera Syr.^ Tom. Ill, p. xxiii ; the latter in Lamy's Hynuii ct Ser-
moncs, Tom. II.

'■^ Of these, the one, which is ascribed to Amphilochius, is perhaps the basis on which the longer Syriac
Life was constructed.


122 . EPHRAIM SYRUS.


fed, and which multiplied the more, the more they were fed on. These clusters (the
Testament explains) were his Sermons ; the leaves of the vine, his Hymns.

But his entrance into the Christian fold was not to be without hindrance and suf-
fering. His father, finding the youth one day in converse with some Christians, was
filled with anger, chastised him with cruel and almost fatal severity, and repaired to
the shrine of his god to seek pardon for his son by sacrifice and prayer. A voice issuing
from the idol rejected his intercession, warned him that his son was destined to be the
persecutor of his father's gods, and commanded his expulsion from home. The father
obeyed : the son received the sentence with joy, and went out from his father's house,
carrying nothing with him and not knowing whither he went. His way was divinely di-
rected to the famous and saintly Bishop, Jacob of Nisibis, to whom he told his story and
by whom he was affectionately welcomed and admitted into the number of " Hearers,"
— that is, Catechumens in the first stage of preparatory instruction. From the first he
showed himself a diligent disciple, in fasting and prayer, and in daily attendance on the
teaching of the Scriptures. He frequented the Bishop's abode, imitated his virtues,
attracted his special notice, and acquired a high place in his love as well as in that of all
the Church.

A slanderous charge, however, was laid against him in his youthful manhood, which,
but for supernatural interposition granted to his prayer, would have ruined hisgood name.
A damsel of noble birth had been seduced by an official {Paramonarius, i.e., sacristan,
or perhaps ralher, steward) of the church, named likewise Ephraim. When pregnancy
ensued and her frailty was detected, she at the instance of her paramour charged Ephraim
the pious Catechumen as being the author of her shame. Her father laid the matter be-
fore the Bishop, who in much grief and consternation summoned his disciple to answer the
accusation. The youth received it at first in amazed silence; but finally made answer,
' ' Yea, I have sinned ; but I entreat thy Holiness to pardon me. " Even after this seeming
acknowledgment of guilt, however, the Bishop was unconvinced, and prayed earnestly
that the truth might be revealed to him : but in vain, — a more signal clearing was in store
for the humble and blameless youth. When the child of shame was born, and the father
of the frail damsel required him to undertake the charge of it, he repeated his seeming
confession of guilt to the Bishop ; he received the infant into his arms : he openly en-
tered the church carrying it ; and he besought the congregation with tears, saying,
" Entreat for me, my brethen, that this sin be pardoned to me." After thus bearing for
some days the burden of unmerited reproach, he perceived the great scandal caused to
the people, and began to reflect that his meek acceptance of calumny was doing harm.
On the following Sunday, therefore, after the Eucharist had been administered, he ap-
proached the Bishop in church in presence of the people, carrying the infant under his
mantle, and obtained his permission to enter the bema (not the pulpit, but the raised
sanctuary where the altar stood). Before the eyes of the astonished congregation, he
produced the babe, held it up in his right hand, facing the altar, and cried aloud, "Child,
I call on thee and adjure thee by the living God, who made heaven and earth and all
that therein is, that thou confess and tell me truly, who is thy father?" The infant
opened its mouth and said, "Ephraim the paramonarius. " Having thus spoken, it
died that same hour. The people and the Bishop received this miraculous vindication
of the wrongfully accused with amazement and tears ; the father of the sinful mother
fell on his knees and cried for forgiveness ; the true partner of her sin fled and was seen
in Nisibis no more; Satan was confounded ; and Ephraim was restored to more than
all the favour and affection he enjoyed before.

Not long after, the young disciple received a singular proof of the high esteem in


3. REMOVAL TO EDESSA. 123


which he was held by his Bishop. When summoned with the other prelates to the
great Council of Nicsea (a.d. 325), Jacob took Ephraim with him as his attendant or
secretary, and brought him into that holy Synod. It is to be inferred that a youth so
chosen must have shown early maturity and zeal for the Faith. His presence on this
first great battlefield of the Church's war against heresy must have given a keen stimulus
to his polemic activity, and influenced his subsequent life as a student and teacher of
theology.

2. Siege 0/ N^isibis. — After some years his course of assiduous study, obedience, and
devout piety, was rudely broken by the alarm of war. Soon after the death of Constantine
(a.d. 337), Sapor, king of Persia was moved to seize the opportunity offered by the re-
moval of the great Emperor and the inexperience of his sons, and to attempt the recovery
of the provinces on the Tigris which had been ceded by Narses his predecessor to Diocle-
tian (under the treaty of a.d. 297), so as to push his border westward in advance of the
line which had for forty years defined the eastern limits of the Roman Empire. To
this end it was essential that he should obtain possession of Nisibis,^ the strength and
situation of that city marking it as a necessary safeguard for the frontier he sought to
attain ; and to it accordingly he laid siege in great force. After seventy days' successful
resistance, he had recourse to a novel mode of assault by which the city was wellnigh
overpowered. The river (Mygdonius ^) which flowed through it was by his orders em-
banked and its waters intercepted, and then let loose so as to bear with destructive
rush against the city wall. It gave way ; and Sapor prepared to enter and take pos-
session. To his dismay he found his advance vigorously repelled ; he saw the breach
filled by a fresh wall, manned and equipped with engines of war. The holy Bishop
Jacob and the devout Ephraim, by their unceasing prayers within the church and their
exhortations, had stimulated the garrison and the people to accomplish this work with
incredible rapidity, and had secured the divine blessing on its timely completion. But
a more amazing sight than the newly-built wall awaited Sapor. On the ramparts there
appeared a Figure in royal apparel of radiant brightness, — the Emperor Constantius in
outward semblance ; though he was known to be far off, in Antioch. Sapor in blind
fury assailed this majestic phantom with missiles, but soon desisted when he perceived
the futility of his attack. His final discomfiture was brought to pass by Ephraim.
Having first sought and obtained the Bishop's sanction, he ascended a tower whence
he could view the besieging host, and there he offered prayer to God that He should
send on them a plague of gnats and mosquitos, and show by what puny agents Divine
Power could effectually work the ruin of its adversaries. The prayer was instantly an-
swered by a cloud of these insects, tiny but irresistible assailants, descending on the
Persian host. Maddened by this plague, the horses flung their riders ; the elephants
broke loose and trampled down the men ; the camp was thrown into irretrievable con-
fusion ; a storm of wind, rain, and thunder (adds another chronicler) enhanced the
panic ; and Sapor was forced to raise the siege and retire with ignominy and heavy loss
instead of success.

Soon after, the saintly Bishop Jacob died, in the fulness of his virtues and his fame ;
and Ephraim in deep affliction conducted his funeral.

3. Removal to Edessa. — Our biographer then, passing over the remaining years of
Constantius, goes on to the accession of Julian (a.d. 361). The troubles of the inter-
vening period he assigns to the reign of Constans, whom (though he died before his


1 The strong and ancient city . . . which, since the time of Lucullus had been deservedly esteemed the
bulwark of the East. Gibbon, Decline and Fall, ch. xviii.

2 Now called Jaghjagh,— an affluent of the Khabiir (Chaboras) which joins the Euphrates at Circesium.


124 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


brother Constantius) he supposes to have reigned after him and before Julian. He
records the persecutions suffered by the Christians under the latter, the judgment that
overtook him in his defeat and death by the hands of the Persians, the succession of
Jovian, and the treaty concluded by him with Sapor, under which Nisibis was surren-
dered to Persia and emptied of its Christian inhabitants. Of Ephraim he tells us only
that he raised his voice against Julian and his persecutions, and remained in Nisibis
until its surrender, and then retired to a place called Beth-Garbaia,^ where he had been
baptized at the age of eighteen and had received his first instruction in the Scriptures
and in psalmody. Persecution having arisen there against the Church, he fled to Amid,
where he spent a year ; and thence proceeded to Edessa (now Urfa), which city, as soon
as he came in sight of it, he fixed on as his permanent and final abode. As he was
about to enter it, an incident occurred which nearly all the narratives of his life relate
with variations, and which the historian Sozomen states to have been recorded in one
of the writings of Ephraim himself. Beside the river Daisan which surrounds the city,
he saw some women washing clothes in its waters. As he stood and watched them,
one of them fixed her eyes on him and gazed at him so long as to move his anger.
'* Woman," he said, " art thou not ashamed.'^ " She answered, " It is for thee to look on
the ground, for from thence thou art ; but for me it is to look at thee, for from thee was
I taken." He marvelled at the reply and acknowledged the woman's wisdom ; and
left the spot saying to himself, *' If the women of this city are so wise, how much more
exceedingly wise must its men be ! "

Other authorities (including Ephraim's contemporary, Gregory of Nyssa, who pro-
fesses to collect the facts of his Eiicomium exclusively from Ephraim's own written
remains) give a somewhat different turn to this story. According to them, Ephraim ap-
proached the city, praying and expecting to meet at his first entrance there some holy
and wise man by whose converse he might profit. The first person whom he en-
countered at the gate was a harlot. Shocked and bitterly disappointed, he eyed her, and
was passing on ; but when he noticed that she eyed him, in turn, he asked the meaning
of her bold gaze. In this Aversion of the incident, her answer was, "■ It is meet and fit that
I gaze on thee, for from thee, as man, I was taken ; but look not thou on me, but rather
on the ground whence thou wast taken." Ephraim owned that he had learned some-
thing of value even from this outcast woman ; and praised God, who from the mouth of
such an unlooked-for teacher, had fulfilled his desire for edification.

Another woman of Edessa is related by some of these authorities to have accosted
the holy man, expecting that, even if she failed to tempt him to unchastity, she might
at least move him to the sin, against which he strove no less sedulously to guard him-
self, of anger. He affected to yield to her solicitation ; but when she invited him to fix
on a place of assignation, he proposed that it should be in the open and frequented
street. When she objected to such shameless publicity, he replied, ' ' If we are ashamed
in sight of men, how much more ought we to be ashamed in the sight of God, who
knows all secret things and will bring all to His judgment ! " By this reply the woman
was moved to repentance and amendment, and gave up her sinful life, — and finally (as
some add) retired from the world into a convent.

In Edessa, Ephraim at first earned a humble livelihood in the service of a bath-
keeper, while giving his free time to the task of making the Scriptures known to the
heathen who then formed a large part of the population of the city. But before long
he was led, by the advice of a monk whom he casually met, to join himself to one of

1 Not elsewhere named : perhaps we ou^ht to read Beth-Garme ; for which see B. 0. II., Be Monophy-

sitis, s. V.


4. WORK AS A TEACHER. 125

the Solitaries (or anchorites) who dwelt in the caves of the adjacent " Mount of Edessa"
(a rocky range of hills, now Nimrud Dagh). There he passed his time in prayer,
fasting, and study of the Scriptures.

But a divine intimation was sent to call him back from his retreat into active life in
the city. A vision came to the Solitary under whom Ephraim had placed himself.
This man, as he stood at midnight outside his cell after prayer and psalmody, saw an
angel descending from heaven and bearing in his hands a great roll written on both sides,
and heard him say to them that stood by, *'To whom shall I give this volume that is
in my hands.?" They answered, "To Eugenius ^ the Solitary of the desert of Egypt."
Again he asked, " Who is worthy of it .'* " They answered, " Julian the Solitary. " The
Angel rejoined, "None among men is this day worthy of it, save Ephraim the Syrian
of the Mount of Edessa."

He, to whom this vision came, at first regarded it as a delusion ; but he soon found
reason to accept it as from God. Visiting Ephraim's solitary cell, he found him engaged
in writing a commentary on the Book of Genesis, and was amazed at the exegetical
power shown in the work of a writer so untrained. When this was speedily followed
by a Commentary on Exodus, the truth of the vision became apparent, and the Solitary
hastened to the ' ' School " of Edessa and showed the book to " the doctors and priests, and
chief men of the city." They were filled with admiration, and when they learned that
Ephraim of Nisibis was the author, and heard of the vision by which his merit was
revealed, they went at once to seek him out in his retreat. In his modesty he fled from
their approach ; but a second divine vision constrained him to return. In the valley
where he had sought to hide, an Angel met him and asked, "Ephraim, wherefore fleest
thou .-^ " He answered, " Lord, that I may sit in silence, and escape from the tumult of
the world." " Look to it," rejoined the Angel, "that the word be not spoken of thee,
Ephraim hath fled from me as a7i heifer whose shoulder hath draw7i hack from the yoke '
(Hos. iv. 16, X. II — quoted loosely). Ephraim pleaded with tears, " Lord, I am weak
and unworthy ; " but the Angel silenced his excuses with the Saviour's words. No man
lighteth a candle and putteth it under a bushel, hut on a candlestick that all may see the light
(St. Matth. V. 5, St. Luke, xi. '^'^. Accepting the rebuke, Ephraim returned to Edessa,
with much prayer for strength from on high, to combat false doctrine. There he was
ill received, and taunted as one who had fled in hypocritical affectation of reluctance,
and was now returning in vainglorious quest of applause. This reproach he met with
the meek reply, " Pardon me, my brethren, for I am a humble man ;" at which they
cried out the more against him, "Come, see the madman, the fool !" He held his
ground notwithstanding, and taught many.

But this work which his adversaries failed to put down, the over-zeal of an admirer
brought to a sudden close. One of the recluses of the Mount, having occasion to visit
the city, saw him and followed him crying, " This is the fan in the Lord's hand, where-
with He wilt purge all His floor, and the tares of heresy : this is the fire whereof our
Lord said, I am come to send fire on the earth " (St. Matth. iii. 12, St. Luke, xii. 49).
Hearing this, certain chief men of the city, heretics, heathens, and Jews, seized him and
drew him outside the gates, stoned him and left him wellnigh dead. Next morning he
fled back to his cell on the Mount.

4. Work as a Teacher. — There, he gave himself to the w^ork of refuting with his pen

^ So the Paris text : the Vatican has " Origen." The person meant is probably the Eugenius who came
from Egypt with 70 disciples to Nisibis, to introduce the ascetic life into that region, and lived there from the
time of the consecration of St. Jacob till the surrender in 363. His life is related in the inedited MS. Ad'd.
12174 (Lives of Saints), of the British Museum.


126 EPHRAIM SYRUS.

the heresies and misbeliefs of his time, which he had thus been hindered by violence
from combating in speech. Disciples gathered round him, and a school formed itself
under the teacher in his retirement. The names are recorded by our narrator of
Zenobius, Simeon, Isaac, Asuna, and Julian. Others add those of Abraham, Abba,
and Mara. All these are named with favour in his Testament (a document of which we
shall treat hereafter) except Isaac ; but two others, Paulinus and Aurit {or Arnad) are
denounced as false to the Faith.

The biographer introduces into his narrative of this stage of Ephraim's life an ac-
count of his famous dream of the vine (above referred to), which foreshowed his future
fertility as a writer, as related in his Testament. It will be given farther on, in his own
words.

Remote and isolated as was his abode, the fame of the illustrious Basil, Archbishop
of Csesarea in Cappadocia, reached him there, and moved in him a desire to see and
hear so great a divine. He prayed for divine guidance in the matter ; and in answer
a vision was sent to him. Before the Holy Table there seemed to stand a pillar of fire,
whereof the top reached unto heaven, and a voice from heaven was heard to cry,
" Such as thou seest this pillar of fire, such is the great Basil."

5. Journey to Egypt, a?id Sojourn there. — Thus encouraged, Ephraim set out on his
journey, taking with him an interpreter, for he was unable to speak Greek. In the
first instance, however (according to the History), he made his way, not to Cappa-
docia, but to a seaport (not named by the writer — but probably Alexandretta is meant)
where he took ship for Egypt. In the voyage the ship encountered perils, first in a
storm, and afterwards from a sea-monster, but was delivered from both by his faith,
which enabled him with words of power and the sign of the cross to rebuke the winds
and waves into calm, and to slay the monster. Arrived in Egypt, he made his way to
the city Antino (apparently Antinoe or Antinoopolis), ^ and thence towards the famous
desert of Scete, in theNitrian valley — then, and still, the place of many monasteries. Here
he found an unoccupied cave, in which, as a cell, he and his companion took up their
abode for eight years. His habits of life in this retreat — and (as it appears) at Edessa
— were of the most austere. His food was barley bread, varied only by parched corn,
pulse, or herbs ; his drink, water ; his clothing, squalid rags. His flesh was dried up
like a potsherd, over his bones. He is described as being of short stature, bald, and
beardless. He never laughed, but was of sad countenance. Other authorities, Gregory
especially, dwell much and with admiration on his profuse and perpetual weeping.^

In this Egyptian retreat he is related to have proved himself a victorious adversary
against the Arians. On his arrival he had sought out and found a monk named Bishoi,
to whom, because of his special sanctity, he had been divinely directed before he quitted
Edessa ; and with him he had sojourned for a week, communing with him by means
of a miraculous gift which endowed each with the language of the other. By this gift

^ This city lay quite out of the region of the Nitrian monasteries. Possibly in the original form of this
biography, the " Enaton " {i. e. the Ninth District) of Alexandria was named as the place of Ephraim's sojourn,,
and subsequent transcribers changed the word into Antino.

2 As represented by Gregory, Ephraim was a veryDemocritus among saints :

" As with all men to breathe is a natural function unceasing in exercise, so with Ephraim was it to weep.
There was no day, no night, no hour, no moment however brief, in which his eyes were not wakeful and
filled with tears, while he bewailed the faults and follies, now of his own life, now of mankind. By groans
he made a channel for the streams of his eyes ; or rather, by the outflow of the eyes he looked his groans.
. . . There was no interval of time between them, groans succeeding to tears and they again to groans, as
in a sort of circle ; so that it was impossible to distinguish w'hich made the beginning and which was the
cause of the other. Any one who makes acquaintance with his writings will perceive this characteristic ;
for he will be found lamenting not onlvin his treatises on penitence, or" morals, or right conduct, but even
in his panegyrics, in which it is the habit of most winters to show an aspect of rejoicing. But he was every-
wiiere the same, and abounded perpetually in this gift of compunction."


6. VISIT TO ST. BASIL OF C^SAREA. 127

he was enabled to carry on controversy with Egyptian heretics, many of whom he
reclaimed to orthodoxy. Over one of these, an aged monk who had been perverted to
heresy by the possession of a demon, he exercised a further miraculous power for his
restoration, by casting out the evil spirit and restoring the old man at once to his right
mind and to the right faith. This gift of language, and the intercourse of Ephraim with
Bishoi, are told only in the Vatican form of the History, which adds that he not only
spoke Egyptian, but wrote discourses in that tongue. The other version of it represents
him as having learned to speak Egyptian in the ordinary way. It is to be noted that the
name of Bishoi (in Greek, Pasoes) is known as that of the founder (in the fourth cen-
tury) of the monastery of Amba Bishoi, still occupied by a community of monks, in
the Nitrian Desert ; and that in those sequestered regions the tradition of Ephraim's
visit to Bishoi was lingering even within the last century and probably still lingers. To
this subject we shall have occasion to recur, further on.'

6. Visit to St. Basil of dssarea. — This long sojourn ended, he resumed his purpose of
visiting Basil, and left Egypt for Csesarea (which our narrator evidently supposes to be
a maritime city — probably confusing it with the Csesarea which was the metropolis of
Palestine).'' He was anxious that his first sight of the great Archbishop should be
on the Feast of the Epiphany, and he succeeded in so timing his journey as to arrive
the day before that Feast. On enquiry, he learned that Basil would take his part in its
celebration in the great church ; and thither accordingly on the morrow he and his
interpreter repaired. On the same day (adds our historian) was the commemoration
of St. Mamas. ^ At first, when he saw the great Prelate in gorgeous vestments attended
by his train of richly-robed clergy, the heart of the humble ascetic failed him : this man
so surrounded wnth state and splendor could not be (he thought) the pillar of fire revealed
to him in his vision. But when Basil ascended the hema to preach, Ephraim, though
he could understand little if anything of the orator's eloquence, was speedily brought
to another mind. As he listened he saw the Holy Ghost (in the form of a dove, says
Gregory, as also the Vatican History, — or, according to another account/ of a tongue
of fire), speaking from his mouth, (Gregory says, hovering by his ear and inspiring his
words); and he joined in the applause which each period of the oration drew from the
audience, — so vehemently that while others were content to utter the cry of approval
{aha) but once, he reiterated it {aha, aha). Basil noticing this sent his Archdeacon to
invite the stranger into the Sanctuary ; but the invitation was modestly declined.
Another version of the story places this invitation before the sermon, attributing to Basil
a spiritual insight which discerned the holy man's presence and identified him. Again
the Archdeacon was sent to summon him — this time, by name: ^ ' Come, my lord
Ephraim, heior e ih.Q bema ; the Archbishop bids thee. " Amazed to find himself thus
discovered, Ephraim yielded, and praised God, saying, "Great art Thou in very truth ;
Basil is the pillar of fire ; through his mouth speaks the Holy Ghost. " He begged, how-
ever, to be excused from coming into the Archbishop's presence publicly, and asked to
be allowed instead to salute him privately in the " Treasury," " after the Sacred Obla-
tion." Accordingly, when *^ the Divine Mysteries'* had been completed, the Arch-
bishop's Syncellus repeated the invitation, saying, " Draw near, Apostle of Christ, that
we may enjoy thy presence." He complied, and in his mean rags, silent, and with


' For this monastery, see below, p. 143, note '. For the history of Pesoes, see Palladius, Hist. Lansiaca, XV.

■•2 Caesarea, the see of Basil, lay far from the sea, in the heart of the inland province of Cappadocia. The
Caesarea of the Acts of the Apostles (Stratonis), the metropolis of Palestine, was a seaport.

3 The feast of St, Mamas (a Cappadocian martyr) falls in Auj^ust, not in January. A sermon of St. Basil
for that feast is extant (Hom. XXIII.). Probably the author of this History knew that sermon, and was thus
led to mention the commemoration here, carelessly disregarding the time of year.

•* To the pseudo-Amphilochius.


128 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


downcast looks, stood before the magnificent Prelate. Basil rose from his seat, received
him with the kiss of brotherhood, then bowed his head, and even prostrated himself
before the humble monk, greeting him as the " Father of the Desert," the foe of unclean
spirits ; and asked the purpose of his journey, — "Art thou come to visit one who is a
sinner? The Lord reward thy labor." He then proceeded to give the Holy Eucharist
to both the strangers. In the interchange of speech (through the interpreter) that ensued,
Basil enquired how it was that one who spoke no Greek had followed his discourse with
such applause. When he heard, in reply, of the visible manifestation of the Holy Ghost,
he exclaimed, " I would I were Ephraim, to be counted worthy by the Lord of such a
boon ! " Ephraim then entreated of him a boon ; "I know, O holy man, that whatso-
ever thou shalt ask of God, He will give it thee : ask Him, therefore, to enable me to
speak Greek. " Basil in reply disclaimed such intercessory power, but proposed that
they should join in prayer for the desired gift, reminding him of the promise, " He will
fulfil the desire of them that fear Him " (Ps. cxlv. 19). They prayed accordingly for a
long space; and when they had ceased, Basil enquired, "Why, my Lord Ephraim,
receivest thou not the Order of Priesthood, which befits thee .'^ " " Because I am a
sinner," answered Ephraim (through the interpreter). "I would thy sins were mine ! "
exclaimed Basil. He then desired Ephraim to bow his head, laid his hand on him and
recited over him the Prayer of Ordination to the Diaconate, inviting him to respond.
Forthwith, to the amazement of all, Ephraim answered in Greek, with the due form,
"Save, and lift me up, O God." And thenceforth he was able to speak Greek with
ease and correctness. He persisted, however, in declining the higher Order of the
Priesthood ; but his interpreter was admitted both Deacon and Priest by Basil before
they departed. Their sojourn lasted about a fortnight. Other writers, however, call
Ephraim a Priest ; and there is a passage where he himself seems to speak of himself,
as holding the Priesthood {koJi niyo) ; ^ but Palladius, Jerome, Sozomen, and others of
the best-informed writers, confirm our History. He is in fact frequently styled Ephraim
the Deacon, as if to emphasize the fact that one so high in repute never rose above that
lowly rank.

Traces of Ephraim's influence are to be found in two places of Basil's writings. It
can scarcely be doubted that he points to Ephraim when i^De Spiritu Sancto, xxix. 74),
in defending the familiar formula " Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy
Ghost," — and again {Homil. in Hexaem. ii. 6), in explaining the action of the Spirit on
the waters (Genesis i. 2) — he appeals to the authority of an unnamed man of great
knowledge and judgment, " as closely conversant with the knowledge of all that is
true, as he is far removed from worldly wisdom," a " Mesopotamian," a "Syrian."
From him he says he learned — in the former instance, that "^wJ" was to be inserted
before the name of the Holy Ghost as well as before that of the Son ; — and, in the latter,"
that the Spirit was not to be conceived as being "-carried upon" the waters (as the
Septuagint represents) ; but (as the Peshitto more truly represents the Hebrew), as
'^ hroodijig upon " them, to cherish them into life — as a bird on her nest. The verb
thus variously rendered is common to the Hebrew with the cognate Syriac ; and the
explanation of it given by Basil is in fact found in Ephraim's extant Commentary on the
passage of Genesis : ^ but he understands the "spirit " to be the wind — not (as Basil)
the Holy Ghost.

7. Return to Edessa. — Ephraim's return to Edessa was hastened bv the tidings that in his
absence no less than nine new heresies had appeared there. His way thither lay through

^ Parcenesis xxvi. 11 (Opera Syr.), Tom. III. p. 467. The word, however, is perhaps not to be taken literally
2 opera Syriaca, Tom. I., p. 8.


8. CONTROVERSIES. 129


:Samosata ; and there he fell in with a chief man of the city, a heretic, who was passing
by with a train of attendant youths. As the holy man sat by the wayside to eat bread,
these followers mocked him, and one of them wantonly smote him on the cheek. The
injury was borne in meek silence ; but it was speedily avenged on the smiter, by a viper
which came out from under a stone whereon he sat, and bit him so that he died on the
spot. His master and companions hastened after Ephraim, and overtook him as he
was begging his food in a village beyond the city which he had just passed through.
At their entreaty he turned back with them, and by his prayers restored the dead youth
to life. The nobleman and his followers, seeing this miracle, were converted to the
•orthodox faith.

8. Controversies, — Arrived at Edessa, he engaged at once in the conflict against the
multiform heresies of the place, old and new — Manichean and Marcionite, as well as
-Arian. Of all the forms of error he encountered, the one that gave him most grief and
trouble was that which had been originated about the year 200 by a Syrian, Bardesan.^
Of this heresiarch he writes, in one of his Nisihene Hymns (the 51st ; ' not included in
the following selection) :

I. I have chanced upon tares, my breth- With the goodly and pure reading

ren, Of the Scriptures of truth.

That wear the color of wheat, ,1 1 t 1.1
_ , , , , , 3- A heard as I read them

lo choke the erood seed ; tt 1 , 1 1 ...

^ . f- , I 1 1 1 How he blasphemes justice,

Concernmpf which the husbandmen are . , ^ c ^^ ^

^ , , And o-race her lellow-worker.
commanded.

Take them not away nor root them

out ;
And though the husbandmen heeded

not,
The seed waxed stronger than they,
Grew and multiplied and covered and 4. This then that I read was grievous

choked them. For soul and for body alike ;


For if the body be not raised,
It were foul reproach for grace.
To have created it unto corruption ;
And it were slander against justice,
To send it unto destruction.


And between these partners it casts

2. I have chanced upon a book of Bar- The severance of despair.

daisan, The body it cuts off from its resurrec-
And I was troubled for an hour's space ; tion,

It tainted my pure ears. And the soul from her comrade,

And made them a passage And the loss which the serpent threw
For words filled with blasphemy. on us

I hastened to purge them Bardaisan counts it for gain.

The controversy against the disciples of this man gave to the literary work of Ephra-
im an impulse to which his fame is largely due. His polemic in the above instance
took, as we see, the form of a hymn ; and his biographer informs us that it was in this
controversy he first was led to adopt hymnody as a vehicle for teaching truth and con-
futing error. Of his hymns we possess some which can be confidently assigned to an
earlier period — the first twenty-one of the Nisibene collection (which are the Nisibene
Hymns proper), belonging to the epoch of the third siege (a. d. 350); but those are
songs of triumph and thanksgiving, or of personal eulogy and exhortation, — not of con-
troversy. The idea of the controversial use of hymnody he borrowed (we are told)

6 In Syriac, Bardaisan {son of Daisan), so called from his birthplace beside the river above mentioned.
'' See Bickell, Carmina Nisihena, p. loi.

VOL. XIII. — 0


130 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


from his adversaries. It appears that Harmodius, the son of Bardesan, had popularized
the false teaching of his father, as embodied in a series of a hundred and fifty hymns
(in profane rivalry with the Psalms of David), by setting them to attractive tunes, which
caught the ear of the multitude, and inclined them to receive his doctrines. So Ephra-
im himself tells us (attributing the work, however, to Bardesan solely) in his Homily
(metrical) LIII. , ^' Against Heretics'' (not included in our selection). ''He fashioned
hymns, and joined them with tunes ; and composed psalms, and brought in moods.
By weights and measures, he portioned language. He blended for the simple poison
with sweetness. The sick will not choose the food of wholesomeness. He would
look to David, that he might be adorned with his beauty, and commended by his like-
ness. An hundred and lifty psalms, he likewise composed."*

To confute the heresies thus circulated, Ephraim borrowed the tunes employed by
Harmodius ; and his hymns, set to these tunes, soon carried the day in favor of ortho-
doxy, partly by the force of their truth, partly by their superior literary power, and
partly by the help of a choir formed among the nuns whom he employed to sing them,
morning and evening, in the churches. Thus the rival hymnody of heresy was super-
seded, and the hymns of Ephraim gained the place they have ever since held in the
Church, wherever Syriac is the ecclesiastical language, — even though H is no longer the
vernacular.

He celebrated this victory in the following strain of triumphant I'mprecation : —

'* Cursed be our trust [if it be] on the Seven ; ^ the ^ons which Bardaisan confesses I

Anathema [be he] who says, as he said : that from them descend the rain and the
dew !

Anathema who affirms, like him : that from them are the showers and the frosts !

Cursed be he who says, as he said : that from them are the snow and the ice !

[Cursed be he who affirms, like him] : that from them are the seeds for the husband-
men I

Anathema who confesses, as he confessed : that from them are the fruits for the
labourer !

Anathema who believes, like him : that from them are famine and plenty 1

Anathema who confesses, as he taught : that from them are summer and winter!

Anathema be on the man : and on the woman who thus speaks !

Anathema be on the house : wherein it is thus affirmed !

Anathema his doctrine which rests : its trust on the Sevenfold!

Cursed be he who reproaches his Creator : and ascribes dominion to the Seven !

Cursed be he who reads the Scriptures : and becomes a gainsayer of the Scriptures 1

Cursed be he who reads the Prophets : and breaks the words of the Prophets 1

Cursed be he who reads the Apostles : and abides not by their words I "

To this is subjoined a verse, the response of Balai (Balseus) a disciple : —

"■ The Lord exalt thy horn : O Church that art faithful !

For the King, and the Kings son : are established in thine ark."

Another demonstration of Ephraim's zeal against heresy, which the compiler of the
^w/or)' judiciously omits, is (unhappily for the fame of both) attested, and with evident
approval, by Gregory of Nyssa.

^ Opera Syriaca, Tom. II., p. 554 , see also Homily I.

9 The Seven ^om (or Beings) of Bardesan's heresy ; see 0pp. Syr. II., p. 550.


9. PERSECUTION BY VALENS. 131

Apollinaris, who was his contemporary, and whose erroneous teaching he held in
abhorrence, had committed his heresies to writing in two volumes which he gave into
the keeping of a woman, a follower of his sect. Ephraim approached this woman and
persuaded her to lend him the books, pretending that he agreed with the doctrine of their
author and desired to use them in controversy against its opponents. At her instance
he returned them in a short time ; but before so doing, he treated them with fish-glue
in such fashion that the leaves of each cohered into a solid mass, while to outward ap-
pearance they were unharmed. Soon after, he challenged Apollinaris to meet him in
a public disputation concerning the articles of faith which the heretic had impugned.
The latter sought to decline the controversy, pleading his old age ^ and infirmities ; but
consented to it, — only on condition, however, that he should be allowed to read from
these volumes the statement and defence of his tenets therein written by him. On
these terms, the disputants met. Apollinaris was called on to maintain his thesis, and
his writings w^ere placed in his hands ; but when he went to open the books, it was in
vain. No part of either volume would yield to his fingers ; he was obliged to desist
and to retire, baffled and ashamed ; in such dismay as to bring on an illness that nearly
proved fatal.

Another incident of this period, related in the History, is a miracle (a genuine one
this time, if true) wrought by Ephraim on a paralytic. Seeing him as he sat and begged
at the door of a church in Edessa, the holy man asked him: ''Wilt thou be made
whole.''" "Yea, my Lord ; lay thy hand on me," was the reply. With the words,
*' In the Name of Christ, arise and walk," he was cured instantly ; and departed, glori-
fying God.

At the end of four years, messengers came to him from Basil, summoning him to
come and receive consecration to the Episcopate, for some see unnamed (to which, as
Sozomen relates, he had been elected ; — Hist. Eccles. II. 16). When he learned their
errand, he feigned madness, going to and fro in the streets in unseemly fashion, in
motley garb, eating bread as he went and letting his spittle run down. Thus he suc-
ceeded in evading the undesired elevation : the messengers, shocked at his behaviour,
returned without him, and reported that they found him a madman. "O hidden pearl
of price " (cried Basil) '' whom the world knows not ! Ye are the madmen, and he
the sane."

The city and the Mount of Edessa suffered in these days from an invasion of the
Huns, who plundered, murdered, and ravished, without mercy, — not even sparing the
cells and convents. This calamity Ephraim is said to have recorded, in writings which
have not reached us.

9. Persecutio7i by Valens. — From another peril the Edessenes were saved by their
faith and constancy. In the days of their Bishop Barses (361-378), the Arian Emperor
Valens (364-378), in the course of his persecution of the orthodox, approached the city
and summoned the inhabitants to wait upon him in his camp and hear his pleasure
there. They disregarded the command, and gathered into the great Church of St.
Thomas,^ where they and their Bishop continued unceasingly in prayer. The historian

1 The heretic Apollinaris seems to have been a younger man than Ephraim, whom he survived by some
years. Possibly his father, the elder Apollinaris, is here intended. But he is not recorded as having taught
heresy.

'■^ To this church were translated the bones of St. Thomas the Apostle, from his burial place in India, in
the time of Eulogius the successor of Barses (378-387), — as we learn from Barhebraeus, Clirouicon Eccles. I. 21
(p. 65 of Abbeloos and Lamy's edition). Buf the above narrative, as confirmed by Socrates {IV. 18), shows
that it had been built and was held in special reverence before that. It is the church at which our History
places the healing of the paralytic (above). Sozomen's account (VI. 17) in the main agrees ; also Theodoret^
(IV. 17).


132


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


Socrates, a trustworthy and early (fifth century) authority, confirms our History here ;
and explains that Valens had ordered their Church to be surrendered to the Arians, and
was enraged against them for resisting his decree, and against his Prefect Modestus for
failing to carry it out. Valens then, finding them contumacious, ordered one of his gen-
erals (this same Modestus, according to Sozomen, who also relates the story) to enter the
city and put the people to the sword. As Modestus, who was a humane man, sought
to persuade them to yield, he met a w^oman leading her two sons to the Church. He
strove to stop her, warning her of the danger she incurred ; but her reply was, *' I hear
that they who fear God are to be slain, and I am in haste to win the crown with the
rest." *' But what of these boys.? " he asked. " Are they thy sons .? " "They are," she
answered, ''and we pray, both I and they, that we may be made an oblation to the
Lord." Amazed at her resolve, he reported the matter to Valens, to convince him that
the Edessenes were prepared to die rather than submit. The Emperor was moved to
relent ; the people and their Bishop and priests came forth ; he heard their plea, was
ashamed of his cruel purpose, pardoned their disobedience, and departed. This well-
attested incident is to be assigned to 371, or to the preceding or ensuing year.''
This victory of faith was celebrated by Ephraim in the following verses : —


''The doors of her homes Edessa
Left open when she went forth
With the pastor to the grave, to die,
And not depart from her faith.
Let the city and fort and building
And houses be yielded to the king ;
Our goods and our gold let us leave ;
So we part not from our faith !
Edessa is full of chastity,
Full of prudence and understanding.


She is clad in discernment of soul ;
Faith is the girdle of her loins ;
Truth her armour all-prevailing ;
Love her crown, all-exalting.
Christ bless them that dwell in her,
Edessa, whose name is His glory.
And the name of her champion her

beauty !
City that is lady over her fellows,
City that is the shadow
Of the Jerusalem in heaven ! "


After all was thus restored to peace and orthodoxy, Ephraim withdrew to his retreat
on the Mount, which he is not recorded to have again quitted, save on one occasion,
to be presently related.

10. Penitent sent to Ephraim by Basil : BasiVs Death. — The death of Basil (at the end
of 378) is said by our author to have caused great grief to Ephraim, and to have been
lamented by him in hymns. But (as will be shown below) this is hardly possible, even
if the latest date for Ephraim s death be accepted.

Another miraculous incident connected with Ephraim's biography, belongs to the
year of Basil's death. A woman of high rank, but of evil life, in Csesarea, being moved
to penitence, wrote on a paper a full confession of her sins, and gave it to Basil, who
at her entreaty laid it with prayer before the Lord. Her repentance and his intercession
prevailed so far, that the record of all her guilt disappeared from the paper, save of
one sin, more heinous than the rest. Disappointed thus of her hope of full pardon, she
had recourse again to Basil, supplicating that this sin too might be wiped out. He
encouraged her to persevere in prayer, and advised her to repair to the Mount of Edessa,
to Ephraim, and through him obtain her desire. To Ephraim accordingly she made
her way, and cried to him, saying, " Have pity on me, thou holy one of God." When
he heard Basil's advice and her petition, he disavowed all such power to prevail with


3 Baronius, Annates, IV. p. 308, The Vatican Life reads Julian for Valensm this narrative, thus introduc-
ing inexplicable perplexity into the chronology. Julian died before Ephraim became a resident of Edessa.


HIS TESTAMENT. 133


God as Basil had ascribed to him, and advised her rather to hasten back and obtain her
Archbishop's farther intercession. She returned accordingly to Caesarea ; but, as it
seemed, too late : Basil had died before her arrival, and she met his corpse as it was
carried to burial. In despair, she prostrated herself in the dust, proclaimed her story
to all that stood by, and upbraided the dead saint, "Woe is me, servant of God ! why
didst thou send me far away that I should return too late and meet thee borne to the
g-rave ! The Lord judge betwixt me and thee, who hast sent me to another, when thyself
couldst have absolved me ! " One of the attendant clergy, desiring to learn what was
the sin for which pardon was so hard to win, took from her the paper she held, and
opening found it blank. The last and deadliest of her list had vanished like the rest :
and ''thus, by the prayers of Basil and of Ephraim, and by the woman's faith and
perseverance, her sins were all of them blotted out.'"'

After this occurrence, the History places the following narrative of Ephraim's last
intervention in earthly concerns. It is related likewise by Palladius (Ephraim's younger
contemporary) and by Sozomen.

1 1. Exertions in Relief of Famine. — In a season of severe famine, he ascertained that
grain was being hoarded in the stores of certain persons who gave nothing to the
starving poor. When he rebuked their inhumanity, they excused themselves on the
plea that none was to be found of such probity as to guarantee fairness and honesty in
the distribution of relief. Ephraim at once offered his services, and was accepted as
their agent throughout the famine season, to dispense large sums as the treasurer and
steward of their bounty. Among other things, he provided three hundred letters,
partly for removing the sick to stations where they were duly tended, partly for carrying
the dead for interment. A body of helpers worked with him in administering relief,
and their care extended not merely through the city, but to the country and villages
adjacent. The year of dearth ended, a year of plenty ensued ; Ephraim retired to
his cell, — this time to leave it no more. He died a month after the close of the
charitable labours. Of them his biographer, following for once the better instinct
which recognizes higher worth in services of love than in ascetic practices or in miraculous
pretensions, writes thus : — "God gave him this occasion that therein he might win the
crown in the close of his life."

12. His Testament. — In his Testament, which professes to have been composed in
immediate anticipation of his end, he laid on his disciples a solemn charge that his body
should be buried humbly, covered with no garment save his tunic {cotheno). Gregory
of Nyssa adds that a rich friend who, though informed of his prohibition, had provided
beforehand for this pilrpose a costly robe, was punished by the possession of an evil
spirit, which tormented him until, on his confession, the dying saint relieved him, casting
out the demon by prayer and laying on of hands.

From the extant Syriac of this document '' (which is metrical), the following have
been selected as the most striking verses :

" I Ephraim am at point to die : and I write my testament ;
That I may leave for all men a memorial : of whatsoever is mine,
That though it be [but] for my words : they that know me may remember me.
Woe is me, for my times are ended : and the length of my years is fulfilled ;
The spinning for me is shortened : the thread is nigh unto cutting ;
The oil fails in the lamp : my days are spent, yea, mine hours ;

4 Printed in Overbeck's Eplircvmi S. Opera Sclccfa, p. 137 ; also in the (Roman) Opera Gra'ca, at end of Tom.

n., p. 395.


134 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


The hireling has finished his year : and the sojourner has fulfilled his season.
Around me are the summoners : on this side and that are they that lead me away.
I cry aloud, [but] none hears me : and I complain, [but] none delivers.

'^ Woe to thee, Ephraim, for the judgment: when thou shall stand before the Son's
judgment-seat.
And around thee they that know thee : on the right hand and the left,
Lo ! there shalt thou be confounded : woe to him who is put to shame there !
Jesu, do Thou judge Ephraim : nor give his judgment to another ;
For w^hoso has God for his Judge : he finds mercy in judgment ;
For I have heard from the wise : yea, I have heard from men of knowledge.
That whoso sees the face of the King : though he has offended, he shall not die.

*' By him who came down on Mount Sinai : and by him who spake on the rock.

By that Mouth which spake the '' ElV : ' and made the bowels of creation tremble,

By him who was sold in Judah : and by him who was scourged in Jerusalem,

By the Might which was smitten on the cheek : and by the Glory which endured

spitting.
By the threefold Names of fire : and by the one Assent and will,
I have not rebelled against the Church : nor against the might of God.
If in my thought I have magnified the Father : above the Son, let Him have no mercy

on me !
And if I have accounted the Holy Spirit less : than God, let mine eyes be darkened !
If as I have said, I confessed not : let me go into outer darkness !
And if I speak in hypocrisy : let me burn with the wicked in fire !

^' I adjure you my disciples : with adjurations that may not be loosed.
That my words be not set aside: that ye loose not my commandments.
Whoso lays me beneath the altar : he shall not see the Altar of heaven ;
For it is not meet that foul stench : should be laid in the Holy Place ;
Whoso has laid me within the temple : he shall not see the temple of the Kingdom.

*' Take nought from me as memorial : ^ my beloved, my brothers, my sons.
For as much as ye have a memorial : that which ye have heard of Jesus.
For if ye take aught from Ephraim : into reproach will Ephraim come ;
For He, my Lord, will say unto me : 'More than in Me they have trusted in thee,
For if they had relied on Me : they had not sought a memorial from thee.'

" Lay me not with the martyrs : for I am a sinner and unworthy.
And because of my un worthiness I fear : to be brought beside their bones ;
For if stubble comes near to fire : it will scorch it, yea, devour it.
It is not that I hate their neigbourhood : because of mine unworthiness. I fear it.

** Whoso carries me on his fingers : may his hands be leprous as Gehazi !


5 St. Matth. xxvii. 46. ^ i.e., as a relic.


12. HIS TESTAMENT. 135


*** On your shoulders carry me : and in haste conduct me [to the grave],
And as a mean man bury me : for I have worn out my days in sadness.
Why glorify ye me, O men : who before our Lord am ashamed ?
And why give ye me [the name of] ' Blessed' : who am disclosed in my works?
Should one show you my transgressions : ye would all of you spit in my face.
For if the stench of the sinner : could strike one that stood by him,
Ye would all of you flee away : from the loathsome stench of Ephraim.

■*' Whoso lays with me a pall : may he go forth into outer darkness !

And whoso has laid with me a shroud : may he be cast into Gehenna of fire !
In my coat and cowl shall ye bury me: for ornament beseems not the hateful,
Nor does praise profit the dead : who is laid and cast into the tomb.

5|I 3|C !fC ^ T^ 2}C ^ ^ ^ 5fC

■*' Arise, my brethren of Edessa : my lords and my sons and my fathers !
Bring whatsoever ye have vowed : to lay along with your brother,
Bring and set it before me : whatsoever ye my brethren have vowed.
While I have yet a little memory : let me set on it a price ;

And let there be bought pure vessels : and let there be hired workmen therewith.
And distribution be made among the poor : the needy and them that are in want.


•'* Blessed is the city wherein ye dwell : Edessa, mother of the wise.

Which from the living mouth of the Son : was blessed by His Disciple. '^
This blessing shall abide in her : until the Holy One shall be revealed.

■*' Whoso withholds from me aught that he has vowed : shall die the death of Ananias,
Who sought to deceive the Apostles : and was stretched [dead] before their feet.

** Whoso carries before me a taper : may his fire be kindled beside him !
For to what end avails fire : for him whose fire is from himself?
For when the visible fire is kindled : in it is consumed the secret fire.
Sufficient for me is the pain without : add ye not to me that which is within.

"" Lay me not with sweet spices : for this honour avails me not ;
Nor yet incense and perfumes : for the honour benefits me not.
Burn sweet spices in the Holy Place : and me, even me, conduct to the grave with

prayer.
Give ye incense to God : and over me send up hymns.
Instead of perfumes of spices : in prayer make remembrance of me.
What can goodly odour profit : to the dead who cannot perceive it ?
Bring them in and burn them in the Holy Place : that they which enter in may smell

the savour.
Wrap thou not the fetid dung : in silk that profits it not.
Cast it down upon the dunghill : for it cannot perceive honour [done to it].


'' The allusion is to the legend that Abgar, King of Edessa, hearing the fame of the Lord Jesus, sent a let-
ter inviting him to his city, and received in reply a letter from Him conveying His blessing, and a promise
to send a disciple to teach him and his people. This promise was afterwards fulfilled by the mission of
Thaddeus (Addae) to Edessa. (Eusebius, Hist. Eccles. I. 13.)


136 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


'' Lay me not in your sepulchres : for your magnificence profits me not ;
For I have a covenant with God : that I shall be buried with strangers.
I am a stranger, as they were : with them, O my brethren, lay me !
For every bird loves its kind : and man loves him that is like himself.
In the cemetery lay me : where are the broken of heart,
That when the Son of God comes : He may embrace me ® and raise me among them. "

SU ^ ^^ ^k ^^ ^ «1^ «!#' "ti^ >1^

'T' *!* '7* 1^ 1^ ^T^ '^ ^* ^^ 'T^

[After blessing by name the five faithful disciples above mentioned (page 126), he
leaves an anathema on the two, Paulinus and Urit, who had erred from the faith ; and
against]

" Arians and Anomoeans : Cathari and those of the Serpent,^
Marcionites and Manichoeans : Bardesanites and Kukites,
Paulites and Vitalianites : Sabbatarians and Borborites,
With all the other doctrines : of superstitions that are unseemly."

^ 4k ^k -i^ -^ ■^ ^ ^41. .A^

•yT "TT "TT "vr "7? "Tv ^ "Tr TT TT

[The dying Saint recalls in the following lines the vision of his childhood, and praises-
God for its fulfilment.]

" I swear by your lives I lie not : in this thing that I tell.

For when I was a little child : and lay in my mother's bosom,

I saw (I was as in a dream) : a thing which has come to pass in truth.

There grew a vine-shoot on my tongue : and increased and reached unto heaven.

And it yielded fruit without measure : leaves likewise without number.

It spread, it stretched wide, it bore fruit : all creation drew near,

And the more they were that gathered : the more its clusters abounded.

These clusters were the Homilies ; and these leaves the Hymns.

God was the giver of them : glory to Him for His grace !

For He gave to me of His good pleasure : from the storehouse of His treasures."

This farewell strain has no doubt suffered interpolation, but the main part of what
is above translated is confirmed as genuine by the references to it of Gregory, who had
undoubtedly read it in a Greek version.^ As it has reached us, it ends with a narrative,
which at most can only claim to be an appendix added by a disciple, of the lamenta-
tions uttered at his deathbed by a maiden named Lamprotate, daughter of a man of
rank in Edessa, who entreated permission to make a tomb for him and another at his
feet for herself. The narrative concludes with his consent to this petition, his parting
commands to her, and her promise of obedience.

His body was followed to the grave by all the people of the city and neighborhood,
and by the Bishops, priests, and deacons of the provmce, with the monks, whether
"anchorites, stylites, or coenobites " — solitary, or living in communities. It was laid
(as he had desired) in the strangers' burial-ground ; but not long after, the citizens re-
moved it thence, and made a grave for him, deacon as he was, among those of their
Bishops, — probably in the monastery (now belonging to the Armenians) of St. Sergius


^ The Greek version has " may heal," The Syriac may be brought to agree with this, by changing t into-
r in the verb used.

^Thesect of Ophites.

^ The Greek version that has reached us is paraphrastic, and interpolated ; but on the whole represents
the original with no great divergence. See Opera Gnvca, Tom. II., p. 230 ; Ephraim Syr. Greece, p. 365 (Oxford
edition).


V. HISTORICAL CRITICISM OF MEDIEVAL AMPLIFICATIONS. 137


on the Mount of Edessa, where his tomb is shown to this day, as we learn from the
Reise in Syr. u Mesopot. of Dr. Sachau (p. 202).

13. Death and Burial. — His death occurred in Haziran (June), on the 15th according
to our History (Vat.), but other authorities differ, assigning it to the 9th, i8th, or 19th.
The shorter Syriac Life gives the year as i']2, — thus contradicting the History which
represents him as living in the year of Basil's death (378).

Even in the time of Gregory of Nyssa, an annual commemoration of Ephraim had
become customary in the Church, which gave occasion for the Encomium above re-
ferred to. In the East, it was held on the 28th of January ; but in the Roman Martyr-
ology his name is recorded on the ist of February.

IV. — Recapitulation of Authentic Facts of Life.

The Life, whence the above narrative is mainly derived, though evidently put into
its present form by compilers many generations later than the time of Ephraim, is in
its leading outlines to be accepted as historically trustworthy, though it has no doubt
been largely amplified by the incorporation of exaggerated or fictitious details. Of its
essential points, not a few are confirmed by his own writings ; and many more (as has
been said above, p. 121), by evidence of hardly later date, — especially by the Encomium
of Gregory of Nyssa (d. 395), who assures us that he derives his account from Ephraim's
written statements and from no other source.^ This Father, as being brother of Basil
with whom Ephraim was so closely associated in his later life, may well have known
personally the man of whom he wrote, and was at least in a position to collect and
verify with discrimination the facts of his life. Further, the general historical frame-
work of the biography is sufficiently attested as correct by the contemporary secular
historians, non-Christian as well as Christian — notably (as will appear farther on), as
regards the siege of Nisibis, by one whom Ephraim most abhorred, the Emperor
Julian.

It may be briefly affirmed that the external independent evidence covers all the facts
included in the summary given above (pp. 120, 121), at the opening of this Section. It
extends farther to rnany incidents related in the Life, — such as the attempt of Sapor to
take Nisibis by turning the river against its walls, Ephraim's encounter with the woman
who met him as he entered Edessa and her retort to his rebuke, his borrowing the
music of the heretic in order to popularize the orthodox teaching of his own hymns, the
call to the Episcopate and his evasion of it, the constancy of the faith of the Edessenes
when threatened by the persecutor Valens, the famine and the work of relief organized
by Ephraim in the last year of his life ; also to a few of the details which belong to or
verge on the supernatural, — the dream of the vine-shoot which foreshadowed his literary
fertility, the vision of the Angel with the book who appeared to his brother-anchorite,
and that of the dove, which he himself seemed to see, inspiring the discourses of Basil.
In these facts, greater and smaller taken together, we have sufficient data for the de-
rivation of the main outlines of his life and the leading features of his character.

V. — Historical Criticism of Medleval Amplifications.

But along with the genuine and trustworthy matter, the compiler has embodied much
that is unattested and in many cases inherently improbable, and even some things that
are demonstrably untrue.


- There is no ground for supposing that Gregory could read Syriac. It follows therefore that some of
Ephraim's writings must have been at a very early date translated into Greek ; and that one of these was
the Testament which Gregory refers to no lessthan five limes in the Encomium.


138 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


i. Tlte Miraculous Details. — To the category of the improbable — the fiction of
hagiology or the growth of myth — belong the miracles so freely ascribed to Eph-
raim and the miraculous events represented as attending on his career. It is note-
worthy that Ephraim himself, though no doubt he believed that he was the recipient
of Divine intimations in dream or vision, never lays claim to supernatural powers.
Nor does Gregory in the Eiicomium attribute to him any such — except in the case of
the rich friend who for his mistaken zeal was given over to an evil spirit ; and on his
repentance relieved through Ephraim's intercession.^ The voice that issued from
his father's idol foretelling his future war against idolatry — the answer of the new-born
babe that cleared him from calumny — the crowned phantom on the walls of Nisibis
that scared the besiegers — the plague of insects that drove them into disastrous flight —
the Angel sent to call him back to Edessa when he had fled thence — the storm hushed
and the sea-monster slain by his word on the voyage to Egypt — the monk whom he
delivered at once from demoniacal possession and from heresy — the sudden gift of
tongues which enabled him to speak Coptic with Bishoi and Greek with Basil — the
restoration to life of the youth who had died of a viper's bite at Samosata — the para-
lytic healed at the church door in Edessa — the disappearance of the record of guilt from
the scroll on which the penitent of Caesarea had written her confession — all these belong
to the later growth of legend that springs up naturally over the tomb of a saint. Some
of them may be safely set aside as purely fictitious ; others are probably due to meta-
phoric expressions mistaken for literal assertions, or to rhetorical amplification throwing
a false coloring of the supernatural over ordinary events. Most of them, moreover, bear
evident signs of having been dressed by the compiler into spurious resemblance to the
miraculous narrations in the Old and New Testaments, of the Divine dealings with
Prophets and Apostles, — Elisha, Jonah, St. Peter, St. Paul, or even of the works of
power which attested the mission of our Lord Himself on earth. In reading these, one
cannot fail to feel painfully — though the narrator seems quite unconscious of — the
irreverence of the travesty. It is noteworthy that some, even of the non-miraculous
incidents of the Life appear to have been similarly handled. Thus the account of the
stoning of Ephraim outside of Edessa seems modelled after that of St. Paul at Lystra,
(Acts. xiv. 19, 20) : and the simulated madness by which he evaded the call of the
Episcopate is apparently borrowed from the history of David's behavior before Achish
and his servants at Gath (i Sam. xxi. 13-15).

ii. The Demonstrably Incorrect or Cojitradictory Statemeiits. — Farther, even when
we have laid aside all that is seemingly exaggerated, invented or mythical in the Life,
there remains much in it that, when critically examined, proves to need correction or
to deserve rejection. We proceed to deal with some questions which arise affecting
the historical credibility of its narrative.

I. Ephrairns Alleged Heathen Parentage. — The heathen parentage assigned to
Ephraim, and consequently the whole narrative of his conversion to Christianity and
his consequent troubles, may be without hesitation discredited. They are irrecon-
cilable with his own words" (^Adv. Hcereses, XXVI.), '' I was born in the way of truth :
though my boyhood understood not the greatness of the benefit, I knew it when trial
came." So again more explicitly (if we may trust a Cojifession which is extant only in
Greek), " I had been early taught about Christ by my parents ; they who begat me

3 This is related also in the Greek version of the Testament, but is an evident interpolation. It is not in
the Syriac.

•* This has been pointed out by Dr. Payne Smith (Did. of Christian Biography, Vol, II., p. 137), who cites
the passages here adduced, from Opp. Syr. II. 499 ; 0pp. Gr. I. 129.


2. THE FIRST AND THIRD SIEGES OF NISIBIS. 139

after the flesh, had trained me in the fear of the Lord. . . . My parents were confessors
before the judge : yea, I am the kindred of martyrs."

2. The First a7id Third Sieges 0/ Nisibis. — In the narrative of the siege of Nisibis,
and especially of the presence and intercession of St. Jacob the Bishop, there is con-
fusion and grave error. It is certain that in the reign of Constantius (337-361), Nisibis
was three times besieged by Sapor. '" The siege in which St. Jacob was within the city
took place in the year 338, and he died the same year. The attempt of Sapor to employ <^
the intercepted waters of the Mygdonius for the destruction of its walls, belongs to a VXtP>^''^ ^'
later siege — the third, of the year 350 — twelve years after the death of Jacob. These j
two sieges are expressly recorded in the '■' Faschal (otherwise Alexa?idrine Chronicle'),'' '
followed by Theophanes in his Chronographia (who also mentions briefly the inter-
A^ening siege of 346) ; and the account given by the former of these chroniclers (who
wrote in the seventh century) rests on the authority of an Epistle written by Valgesh,
Bishop of Nisibis in 350, who is eulogized by Ephraim in five of the Nisihene Hymns
contained in the present volume (XIII. -XVIL). Other contemporary evidence, fuller,
and at first hand, to the same effect, is forthcoming from two widely different sources.
— As already intimated, the Apostate is here alone with the champion of the Faith.

In his second Oration ^ (addressed, probably in the year 358, to Constantius, then
Emperor) Julian describes the siege with even more circumstantial detail than our
biographer, placing it after the death of Constans, which took place in January 350,
and thus confirming the date assigned by the Paschal chronicler and by Theophanes.
According to Julian's account, the embankment formed by Sapor, the work of four
months,^ was so constructed as to encompass the whole circuit of Nisibis, so that the
river intercepted by it ''formed a lake in the middle of which the city stood as an island,"
with "the battlements of its walls barely appearing above the surrounding waters" ;
and on the surface of this encircling lake, he launched armed vessels and floating war-
engines. By these the fortifications were ceaselessly battered for several days, — till of
a sudden the river (then in flood) burst its barrier, and carried away not only the em-
bankment but a hundred cubits of the city wall. Through the breach thus made. Sapor
pushed forward his cavalry to lead the advance upon the city which lay thus seemingly
at his mercy. But they proved unable to overcome the difliculties of the intervening
ground — torn up and flooded as it was by the torrent, and traversed moreover by an
ancient moat — while the Nisibenes in the energy inspired by their deadly peril,
showered missiles upon their assailants as they strove to struggle onward. The Persian
next sent on his elephants ; but their unwieldly bulk served only to enhance the panic
and confusion, and to complete the disaster of his repulse. And when, the next
morning, he prepared to renew the assault, he found himself confronted by a new wall,
hurriedly raised in the night, to fill the gap in the ramparts, reaching already the height
of six feet and manned by fresh and well-armed defenders. Despairing of success
against a resistance so obstinate, he raised the siege on which he had in vain expended
so much time, labour, treasure, and blood, and retired ignominiously.

It is needless to add that of the miraculous incidents of the siesre as related in the
Li/e, no trace appears in Julian's account. The only Providence he discerns in the
successful defence of Nisibis, is that which he attributes to his imperial kinsman to
whom his fulsome oratory is addressed.

5 This^ was first clearly established by-Spanheim (OZjS£^n'rt//o«f5 in Juliauum, pp. iSiJ"., i88 ft'.; 1696)
in part anticipated by Felave (Petavius) and de Valois (Valesius). He has been followed^ in fhis~B'y nearly
all historians, including Gibbon (Decline and Fall, chap, xviii).

^ Juliaiii Oratiojies, ed. Spanheim (1666), Oral. II., pp. 62 fjF. ; see also pp. 26 ff. (Oral. I.).

' The Life gives but seventy days as the whole duration of the siege— a period quite insufficient for the
construction of the embankment.


I40 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


Of the leading facts, as related by Julian, ample corroboration will be found in the
first three of the Nisihene Hymns above referred to. In the first, Ephraim makes
Nisibis herself tell the tale of her peril : she compares herself to the Ark of the Flood,
compassed, not like it by waters merely, but by "mounds and weapons and waves"
(I., 3) ; but {ih., 6, 8) the wall had not yet given way, for he still speaks of it as stand-
ing, and prays that it may continue to stand. This Hymn was therefore written while the
siege was still in progress. In the second Hymn he celebrates her deliverance and the
manner of it, — the very breach of her walls turned into triumph (II. 5, 7) by their recon-
struction and the assault of the besiegers with their elephants {ih., 17, 18, 19), repulsed in
disgrace, ending in immediate retreat.® In the third Hymn, he follows on similar lines ;
and adds a point, significant in his apprehension, that whereas the wall fell on the
Sabbath, it was raised again on the Lord's day, the Day of the Resurrection (III. 6).
In all three Hymns, it is again and again implied or asserted that this was the third
siege of Nisibis (I. 11 ; II. 5, 19; III. 11, 12) — and farther (as it seems) the third time
that a breach had been effected in her walls (I. 11 ; II. 19). In later Hymns also (XI.
14, 15 ; XIII. 17) the embanked river, bursting forth and breaking down the defences of
the city, more than once appears. From one of these we learn incidentally that the
Mygdonius flowed past, not through, Nisibis (XIII. 18, 19) ; ^ from which fact it follows
that the description in the Life, of the manner in which the Persian engineers employed
the river waters against the walls, is to be set aside in so far as it differs from Julian's
account as confirmed by the Hymns.

It is remarkable how closely these two accounts, both contemporary with the facts
they treat of, agree in all essential points, though coming to us from sources not only
independent, but even adverse, inter se, — and in forms so little favourable to exactness
of statement as thanksgiving Hymns and encomiastic Orations. When from Ephraim's
strophes we omit his pious ascriptions of praise to God, and from Julian's periods, the
fulsomeness of his panegyric on the Emperor, the residuum of material fact is in either
case much the same ; the main outlines of narrative (related or implied) are identical
in both writers, each unconsciously attests the truthfulness of the other. Both are-
farther confirmed in great measure by the account of this siege embodied in the Fascha
Chronicle above referred to, which (as already stated) rests on information drawn from
a written record left by Valgesh who was Bishop of Nisibis at the time, and to whose
prayers Ephraim {HymnYAW. 17)' attributed the speedy restoration of the breach in the
city wall.

In confusing this siege (of 350, in the time of Valgesh), with the previous one (of
338, in the time of Jacob), our biographer, with most subsequent writers down to the
eighteenth century, has been misled by following Theodoret's narration in his Eccle-
siastical History (II. 30).^ The account of the siege given in the Life is in fact a mere

« Ephraim seems to convey that Sapor, when repulsed, at once withdrew : Julian represents his with-
drawal as gradual. The former probably has in view the raising of the siege ; the latter, the retreat from
the invaded territory.

9 Compare Sachau's description, Reise, pp. 390, 391.

1 That Valgesh is the "third " Bishop here meant, appears by comparison with Hymn XVII. 2, where
the three are named, Jacob, Babu (not elsewhere mentioned), and Valgesh.

2 So icy.) Baronius, .4/i7m/cs is. g. 338) ; ActaSaudoriuii, Febr. (I. p. 51). A few quite recent writers follow
these. This error of Theodoret thus ascribing to the first siege the events which belong to the history of
the third, is easily accounted for. His narrative of the siege and the breaching of the walls, the apparition,,
and St. Jacob's prayer answered by the plague of mosquitoes, originally appeared in his earlier work, the
Religions History — a collection of lives of miracle-working saints of whom St. Jacob stands first — from which
(as he himself notes) he has transferred it with little change, to his Ecclesiastical History. As the biographer
of this, the greatest Bishop of Nisibis, Theodoret would naturally associate with his name all that history or
tradition reported of Divine protection extended to the city in her perils — especially in those of her last and
most signal siege which ended in her most signal deliverance. He probably knew that a siege of Nisibis
had occurred in St. Jacob's time, and would readily overlook the brief interval of twelve years by which the
saint's death preceded the later siege.


4. THE ALLEGED SOJOURN IN EGYPT. 141


reprodv^ction, somewhat abridged, and slightly varied, of Theodoret's, from which it
derives also its computation of the time occupied by the siege as but twenty days, — a
period obviously inadequate for the vast engineering works for which the four months
assigned by Julian are certainly not too much, — as well as its description of the method
and aim of those works. In Theodoret likewise are found the two supernatural inci-
dents of Sapor's discomfiture, both repeated in the Life, — neither of which is affirmed
•or even hinted at by Ephraim any more than by Julian ; the appearance of the Imperial
Phantom on the wall, and the plague of insects sent in answer to Jacob s, or, as the
Life has it, to Ephraim's prayer. Of these, the former, but not the latter, finds place
in the Paschal Chronicle, and (in exaggerated form) in Theophanes. Whether, in this
instance, the chronicler's statement, which is guardedly expressed,^ or any nucleus of
it, was derived from the Epistle of Valgesh, — or whether he borrowed it from Theodoret
or some one of Theodoret's sources, or some such authority — is matter of conjecture.*

3. Constantius and Constans. — The Life errs grossly (as already noticed) in making
Constans, who died in 350, and never reigned in the East, the successor of his brother
Constantius, who survived till 361.

4. The Alleged Sojourn i?i Egypt. — The sojourn of Ephraim for eight years in Egypt,
after he had taken up his abode in Egypt, and before his visit to Cappadocia, is impossible.
It was in July, 2>^7,, that Nisibis was surrendered to Persia by Jovian, which court was
the cause, as the Life (no doubt rightly) states, of Ephraim's final departure from that
city to Beth-Garbaia, thence to Amid, and finally, '' at the end of the year," to Edessa.
It follows, therefore, that he did not reach Edessa till 364. In Edessa, or in his ceil on
the adjacent "Mount" according to the Life, he lived, worked, wrote commentaries
and polemical discourses, taught, and formed a school of disciples, before his alleged
journey to Egypt. It is therefore implied that he spent years in or near Edessa before
he set out on that journey, which cannot therefore be placed so early as 365. Even if
we assign to it the improbably early date of 366, the eight years in Egypt bring us to

One of the Nisibene Hymns (XIII. i8, 19, 21) suggests a further explanation how this third siege came to
be attached to the legend of St. Jacob. His body was treasured reverently in the city, and to its presence
her deliverance was attributed. Thus he was still (in Ephraim's words) " the fountain within her," " the fruit
in her bosom," " the body laid within her that became for her a wall without." The traditions of that dead
presence in the last siege, and of his living presence in the first, would soon blend together ; and the
expressions of pious gratitude for the protection ascribed by the besieged of 350 to the virtue of his remains,
would be mistaken as evidence that the man himself was among them to help them by his prayers and
■exhortations in the struggle by which the fall of their city was so narrowly averted.

3 In the Chronicle, we read that Sapor saw, in the daytime, "a man running to and fro on the walls," in
the likeness of the Emperor ; but again, we are told of "the angel that appeared." In Theodoret's narra-
tives the apparition wears the royal "purple and diadem," and is described as " divine " {Hist Relig.), and
"incorporeal" {Hist. Eccles.). In the ChronograpJiy, " ^n angel stands on the tower, in shining raiment,
holding by the hand the Emperor Constantius" ; a duplication of the vision which seemingly arose from a
misunderstanding of the Chronicle.

That Constantius was not in Nisibis during this siege, is a point on which all authorities are agreed.
Julian, while lavishing on the Emperor unmeasured praises for the repulse of Sapor, attributes it not to his
personal presence, but to his foresight in previous preparations made a year before. He is known, how-
ever, to have sojourned in the city in May, 345, — see Cod Theodosianus (XI. 7, 5) for a law issued thence by
him on the 12th of that month (Lex. 5 de exaction i bus).

^ The Nisibene Hymns, only recovered some fifty years ago from the Nitrian Monastery of the Theotokos,
and first printed in 1866, yielding as they do authoritative and contemporary confirmation of the accounts of
the siege given by Julian and by Valgesh, come in as decisive evidence to prove that the Chronicler of the
seventh century and the Chronographer of the ninth had better fortune or better judgment in their
choice of authorities than Theodoret in the fifth. It is, moreover, a signal instance of the true historical
instinct that guided Gibbon in his great work, that in relating this history (ch. xviii. ), he followed Julian and
the Chronicle, and refused to be misled (as our biographer was) by Theodoret — except as regards St. Jacob,
whom he supposed to have been still Bishop in 350.

The first to point out this error as to St. Jacob, was Valesius in his note on the passage in Theodoret {H.
E. II. 30), as above. He remarked that "the Alexandrine (Paschal) Chronicle makes Vologeses (Valgesh), not
Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis in 350." It was replied (and with justice) that the Chronicle, though it records the
siege, and cites the Epistle of Valgesh, Bishop of the city, does not say that he was Bishop at the time of the
siege. Another Chronicle, the Edessene (a relic of the sixth century), first printed by Assemani in 1719
(Biblioth. Orient. I., pp. 388 ^.J determines 338 as the date of Jacob's death, and 361 as that of Valgesh. Our
Nisibene Hymns (see above, "note ■*) make it plain that Valgesh was bishop in 350, as Valesius rightly (though
on insufficient grounds) laid down.


142 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


374, or at earliest 'i^']^, for his visit to the Csesarean Cappadocia. Now there is a pre-
vailing weight of testimony to the effect that Ephraim died in 373, which date, if
accepted, leaves no time for the incidents of his life after his return to Edessa. This,
however, cannot be urged against our biographer, who (as will be shown) assumes
that he lived till 379. But the Life represents him as resident in or near Edessa during
the persecution which that city suffered from the Emperor Valens, which (as stated
above, p. 132) took place probably in 371 ; certainly not later than 372, at which date
(according to the biographer) he was still in Egypt. In fact, even without going into par-
ticulars, it is evident that between Ephraim's arrival in Edessa in 364 and the persecution
of Valens in 370-2, the eight years' sojourn in Egypt and the visit to Cappadocia would
so fill the interval as to leave no time for the prolonged Edessa residence, before and
after that sojourn, which the Life, in common with all other authorities, attributes to
Ephraim, and in virtue of which his name is inseparably associated with the history of
Edessa.

If, with the Vatican recension of the Life^ we read " Julian " for Valens, as the name
of the persecutor of Edessa, the impossibility becomes yet more absurdly glaring. For
Julian died in 363, and before that year Ephraim had not migrated from Nisibis to
Edessa.

It is no doubt possible that Ephraim may have visited Egypt, ^ as the Life affirm.s,
before proceeding to Csesarea : as an anchorite he would naturally be drawn to the
land where the anchorite life had its origin and its greatest development. Yet it is.
hardly probable that, eager as he was to see Basil at Caesarea, he w^ould, w^hen setting
out on his travels, have directed his course to Egypt first, — a country so distant, and
lying in a direction so different, from Cappadocia. This improbability would naturally
fail to strike our biographer, who appears to have supposed Basil's Csesarea (if indeed
he had any definite idea of its situation) to have been the maritime city of that name in
Palestine. One can hardly avoid suspecting that this whole narrative of the visit to
Egypt — unknown as it is to all authorities save our Life (in its twofold recension), and
the shorter form of the same — may have been invented by some compiler or reviser,
writing in, or for, one of the Egyptian monasteries of the Nitrian Desert, and seeking to
gratify the Syrian ascetics who were numerous in that region, by making it the scene of an
episode in the life of the most famous of Syrian ascetics. It certainly has the air of an
interpolation, coming as it does between the description of Ephraim's longing desire to
see Basil, and the narrative of the fulfilment of that desire by his visit to Csesarea.
More particularly, as regards the story of the visit of Ephraim to the Nitrian Saint
Pesoes (or Bishoi), it is to be noted that it is mentioned, not in the Parisian recension
of the Life, but only in that of the Vatican MS. It is a significant fact that this MS.,
which is thus our only written authority for the alleged visit, was written (probably)
about the year iioo, in the Nitrian monastery of "Amba Bishoi" (St. Pesoes).^ On
the other hand, it is to be added that a tradition of Ephraim's sojourn in Egypt, con-
necting him with Pesoes, lingered in quite recent times, and may probably still linger,
among the monks, Syrian and Coptic, of the Nitrian region. Travellers of the seven-
teenth, and even eighteenth, century, tell of a tamarind tree which was shown to them
within the precincts of the Syrian monastery of the Theotokos in that region, reputed
to have grown from Ephraim's staff which he set in the ground on his arrival there, as


5 The shorter Syriac Life agrees in aftirming the fact of his visit to Egypt, but says nothing of its dura-
tion. No other authority, earher or contemporary, hints at it.
^ Assemani, Biblioth Oiicnt., I., p. 46, note i.


6. DEATH OF BASIL BEFORE THAT OF EPHRAIM. 143


he was about to enter the cell of Pesoes."^ It is probable that this legend of the
staff (which reminds one of that of the staff of St. Joseph of Arimathea and the Glaston-
bury thorn tree) may have grown out of the belief that Ephraim once visited the
monastery, — which belief again may have been originated by the pious fiction of the
compiler or interpolator of the Life in its Vatican form. It is easy to imagine how
gladly a community of Syrian monks in this Egyptian solitude would listen to what
professed to be a record of the greatest of Syrian monks, a recluse like themselves, the
author of the Sermons to Ascetics which they had read or listened to, and of the many
hymns which enriched their offices and quickened their devotions ; — and how ready
they would be to welcome as fact the story of his sojourn in their valley, and to
imagine that a memorial of it survived among the trees of their garden.

5. Interval between Visit to Basil and Persecution by Valens. — The interval of four years
or more, which the Life seems to place between Ephraim's return from Csesarea to
Edessa, and the persecution of the Edessenes by Valens, is likewise impossible. For at
Caesarea all agree that Ephraim found Basil Archbishop. But Basil was consecrated late
in 370, and therefore Ephraim's first meeting with him, which was on the Feast of the
Epiphany, cannot be placed earlier than January, 371. But the persecution took place
probably in 371, or at latest in '^']^ — thus reducing the possible length of interval to two
years at most — probably to a few months. It may be said, however, that the biographer,
though he relates the persecution after mentioning the four years' interval, does not
mean to imply that it was subsequent in time to that interval. But it will be shown
farther on (under next head) that the four years' interval is inadmissible, independently
of the date of that persecution ; inasmuch as Ephraim survived only three years after
his visit to Basil.

6. Death of Basil before that of Ephraim. — The story of the lady who was sent by
Basil to Ephraim, and by Ephraim back to Basil, only in time to see his corpse, — and
of Ephraim's grief for Basil's death, cannot be accepted unless we set aside the consent of
the chronologers, who agree that Ephraim died in '^Tl,^ — whereas Basil survived to ist
January, 379. It is true that there is extant among the Greek works ascribed to Ephraim,
an encomium on Basil, ^ which seems to be genuine. This, however, is not to be regarded
as an eulogium pronounced after Basil's death ; but rather as a paneg)^ric in which the
living man is apostrophized.^ We may safely conclude that the story, which rests on a
basis of erroneous chronology, is itself a fiction.

But the story of Ephraim's helpful intervention and activity in a time of famine,
w^hich is undated, having early attestation, may well be accepted as true, and assigned
to the winter of 372-3. The authorities who attest the date of his death as ^']'^, place
it in the month of Haziran (June) ; '^ and we may reasonably conjecture that the exer-

"^ It is mentioned by Huntington (afterwards Provost of Trinity College, Dublin, and finally Bishop of
Raphoe) who visited the place, \b']^-<) (see his Epislola\ XXXIX., p. 6q) : again by J. S. Assemani in 1715 (see
reference in note % More recent visitors (Lord de la Zouche in 1837, and Archdeacon Tattam in 1839) do
not speak of it.

Of the Nitrian monasteries (reputed to have once numbered fifty, or even more), the principal one, that
of the Theotokos, whence the libraries of the Vatican and of the British museum have derived their most
precious acquisitions of Syriac MSS., belongs to the Syrian Jacobites, whose Church has always been in
full communion with that of the Copts. A second belongs to the Copts ; a third to the Greeks. The fourth
(that of St. Pesoes) does not appear to be specially appropriated, but to be mainly Coptic, though (as appears
above ) not to the exclusion of Syrians.

* See Professor Lamy's edition of Ephraim, II., coll. 94 #, for the authorities on this point, — of which
the chief are : — The Edesscne Chronicle (sixth century) and Jacob of Edessa (seventh century — cited by
Elias of Nisibis), both of whom give 373 as the date, as does also the early Chronicle contained in the ''Book
of the Caliphs." Jerome {De Viris. Ilhistr. cxv.) merely says that Ephraim died in the reign of Valens, — /. e.
not later than 378, and therefore before Basil. . 9 Opf>. Gra'e., II., 289^

^ See Lamy as above, coll. ^4 ff.

2 On the 9th, according to Chroii. Edcs. and the shorter Life ; the Vatican Life says the 15th ; the Book of
the Calif hs (see Land's Aiiccdota, Tom. I., p. 15 fSyr. text] ), aiid most other authorities, the i8th ; Dionysius,
in his Chronicle, the 19th (ap. Assemani, B. O. II., p. 54).


J44 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


dons and anxieties of the season of famine had told too heavily on a frame already
wasted by years and by excessive austerities, and had thus hastened his end.

VI. — Rectification of the Vatican Text of the Life.

If the Life had reached us in its Vatican form only, it v^ould have been necessary
to correct one or two farther errors :

1. Date of his Baptism Mistaken. — According to the Vatican Life, Ephraim was bap-
tized at the age of 28, after the surrender of Nisibis by Jovian. The surrender was in
363, and the age assigned to him would therefore make 334 the earliest admissible date
for his birth — ten years after the Council of Nicaea, at which the Life records that he
was present ! The Parisian Life corrects this absurdity and shows how the mistake
arose. The statement, in this version of the story, is that after quitting Nisibis, '' he
Tetired to Beth-Garbaia, where he had received baptism at the age of 18." By omitting
the auxiliary ^'had" (which in Syriac, as in English, expresses the pluperfect) the
Vatican scribe or editor introduces this blunder about the date of the baptism. It is
probable that, without having any distinct knowledge of the date of the departure from
Nisibis, he felt that Ephraim must have been more than 18 at this stage of the narrative,
and strove to make the age cohere better with the time required for the events related,
by changing 18 into 28.

2. Julian substituted for Valens. — The substit;^ition of the name of Julian for that of
Valens as the persecutor of Edessa, has been already noticed. That the story (with the
incident of the martyr-mother with her two sons) belongs to the time of Valens, is
established by the united testimony of Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret. The whole
history is clear, and coherent with itself and with chronology, in the Parisian Life ;
whereas the Vatican version of it, by bringing Ephraim to Edessa in the reign of Julian,
makes hopeless confusion.^ It is to be noted that the names fulia?ius and Vale?is, so
•distinct as written in Latin, differ but little when transliterated (without vowel-points)
into Syriac.

VII. — Chronology of the Life of Ephraim.

Thus the fixed points for determining the chronology of Ephraim's life are :

1. The death of his patron, St. Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis, in 338, after the first siege
of that city.

2. The third siege, in which he was among the defenders of the city, in 350.

3. The surrender of Nisibis by Jovian, and its abandonment by its Christian inhabi-
tants, 363 ; followed by Ephraim's removal to Edessa.

4. The consecration of Basil to the see of Caesarea, late in 370, followed by
Ephraim's visit to him there.

5. The deliverance of the Edessenes from the persecution of Valens (370-372),
celebrated by Ephraim in a hymn.

6. Ephraim's death, ^J2>-

To this list it would be right to prefix the meeting of the Council of Nicsea in 325,
if the evidence of Ephraim's presence at it, along with St. Jacob, were sufficient. But
it has no early attestation ; and no writer prior to Theodoret {Hist. Eccles. II. 30) asso-
ciates the name of Jacob with any incident in Ephraim's life.

3 It is to be regretted that neither the Parisian Life, nor the A/'/5/6<:';7C Hvmns, was before the writer of
the article Ephraim in Smith and Wace's Dictionary of Christian Biography. The former would have
warned him from being misled by the Vatican Life fnto the error of ascribing to Julian the persecution
under Valens ; the latter would have shown him that both versions of the Life confuse the first siege of
Nisibis with the third.


VII. CHRONOLOGY OF THE LIFE OF EPHRAIM. 145


The date of Ephraim's birth is n.owhere directly stated, but it is usually assumed to
have been early in the reign of Constantine (306-337), on the authority of the Vatican
Life, which says, "In the days of the victorious Constantine, true believer, was horn
the holy man Ephraim." But the statement of the Parisian Life is less explicit, and is
capable of a different meaning : — ''He ivas in the days of the victorious Constantine."
This merely implies that Ephraim (if the pronoun represent him) lived in the reign of
that emperor. But it rather appears that Ephraim's father is meant, inasmuch as he is
the subject of the immediately preceding sentence which describes him as a heathen
priest ; and the purport of the passage is, that the saint was the son of a man who not
merely had been one of an idolatrous priesthood, but continued to be so after Constan-
tine had acknowledged the Christian religion. "*

The earlier authorities give no express statement on this point ; but a late tenth-
century Greek menologiiim, that of the Emperor Basil (Porphyrogenitus), says that he
" continued from the reign of Constantine to that of Valens," ^ — implying as it seems
that he was born, as the Vatican Life represents, after Constantine's accession in 306.

Considering, however, that the Life in both its forms affirms that Ephraim was
brought by St. Jacob to the Council of Nicsea in 325 — in which it is borne out by
Gregory Barhebrseus in his Ecclesiastical Chronicle ^ (who though a very late writer
(1226-1286) had access to early authorities and judgment in using them) — it is hard to
reconcile the chronology, for the improbability of the admission of a lad of nineteen,
in any capacity, to that venerable assembly, is very great. If we accept it as a fact
that he was chosen by Jacob to accompany him, and was permitted to be present
among the Fathers at Nicaea, it seems almost necessary to place his birth before Con-
stantine became emperor. "^

Farther : the nienologiuni above cited adds that he died '' in extreine old age ; " and
the tone and tenor of his testament go far to confirm the truth of these words. But as
he died in '^']'^, he cannot have been more than d'] years old in that year if he was born
in 306. No doubt ()"] is a ripe age, but hardly sufficient to warrant the strong expres-
sion of the menologium. Without pressing its language unduly, we may surely take it
as implying that he had passed the '' threescore years and ten" of the Psalmist at the
time of his death — in other words that he was born not later than the first or second
year of the fourth century.

Thus by rectifying the text and rendering of the opening sentences of the Life, we re-
lieve ourselves of the supposed necessity of placing his birth in or after 306. And his
presence in the Council of 325, and his extreme old age in ^J2>^ concur in pointing to the
beginning of the fourth century — if not to the later years of the third — as the probable
time of that event.

However this may be, whether he was born in 306 or earlier, it is certain that by
far the greater part of the long life of the "Deacon of Edessa " — all of it save its last


•1 The passage is as follows : " Ephraim was a Syrian by birth. His father was of Nisibis, and his mother
of Amid. And his father was priest in Nisibis of an idol named Abizal, which afterwards the victorious
Emperor Jovian broke. He [or if, scil., the idol] was in the days of the victorious Emperor Constantine,
true believer. But his father had this famous son, of whom is our narrative." The meaning may be that
the idol w^as suffered to exist during Constantine's reign and after, till Jovian destroyed it : but it is now
natural to understand it, as above, of Ephraim's father. The Vatican editor seems to have misunderstood
his original, which the Parisian transcriber has preserved faithfully, — and to have altered it into accordance
with his misunderstanding, by recasting the passage and substituthig " ivas born " for " was."

^ In Migre's Patrologia Graxa, CXVII., p. 254.

^ I., 23 ( Abbeloos and Lamy's edition).

^ Gregory Barhebr. (Chron." Ecdcs., H., 10) mentions, but doubtfully, a tradition that Ephraim wTote a letter
circ. 334 m which he took the part of Papas, the Catholicus, against '"' the Bishops of the East " who accused
hnn of neglect and misconduct. If this be accepted, it is additional evidence for the early date of Ephraim's
birth.

VOL. XIII. — 10.


146 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


ten or eleven years (36^-^73) was passed in his native Nisibis ; and that he did not
even attain the diaconate till he was considerably over sixty years of age, and within
three years of his end.

VIII. — His Writings : Their Characteristics.

Of the innumerable writings — controversial, expository, hortatory, devotional — which
were for Ephraim the fulfilment of his dream in childhood, the fruit of the many years
of literary activity that exercised his full heart and busy brain, enough remains to give
an adequate idea of his powers and to amaze us by its variety and abundance. The ex-
aggeration of Sozomen who reckons the number of lines written by him at "three hun-
dred myriads " (three millions) is not to be taken as more than a rough guess at the
probable total ; but it is evidence of the impression made on the men of the generations
to whom his works w^ere transmitted by his fertility. That he himself was conscious
of this gift appears in the fact that he records the dream and claims for his hymns and
sermons that in them is to be found its interpretation. His faculty of speech, as Gregory
informs us in a remarkable passage, though adequate to utter the thoughts of any other
mind, was sometimes overborne by the rapid rush and abounding thrpng of the ideas
with which his inspiration filled him, in such measure that he was forced to pray for the
intermission of its flow, ' ' Restrain, O Lord, the tide of Thy grace ! " ^ Copiousness is the
characteristic, and its excess is the chief fault, of Ephraim as an author. The Syriac lan-
guage has great capacity for condensation ; and the parallelism of balanced clauses which
Syriac literature affects, conduces to brevity. But on the other hand, the Syrian mind
has a tendency to amplify ; amplification is the besetting sin of Syriac writers, — of
Ephraim not least. And thus, while each sentence has the severe precision of an
epigram, the manifold reiteration of epigrammatic clauses amounts to verbosity : one
and the same thought or fact is presented in a long-drawn series of slightly varied aspects,
with change of expression or at most of illustration, till the recurrence becomes tedious.
This criticism is meant primarily for his hymns ; but it applies also to too many of his
metrical homilies (to be described presently). In all his writings, metrical or otherwise,
this habit of amplification leads him, in handling the narrations of Scripture, to fill out
their simple outline with elaborate detail that wrongs their beauty and dignity. Of such
treatment, examples will be found in this volume, in some of the hymns (such as the
XlVth and XVth On the Epiphany, and in the Discourse on the Woman who was a Sin-
7ier.

His extant works (some of which are known to usoiily in a Greek version), and those
of his lost works of which the titles are recorded, divide themselves into three classes ;
— Commentaries on Scripture, Homilies {j?iimre), and Hymns {inadrashe).

I. Commentaries. — His Com7?ientaries belonged (if we may trust the Li/e) to his later
years, after his migration to Edessa, w^hen he was past middle life. There he is related
to have begun his exposition (still extant) of Genesis, in the preface to which he refers
to the homilies and hymns which he had previously produced {0pp. Syr. Tom. I., p. i).
He seems to have commented on almost all the canonical books of the Old Testament.
His expositions of the Pentateuch, the chief historical books, ^ the Prophets (including
Lamentations), and Job, survive, and have been printed (in the Roman edition of 1 732-43,

^ This passage is mistranslated in the Latin version of the Eucomiiun, by P. F. Linus of Verona (in his
Divina S. Ephracm Opera, Dillingen, 1562), from whom it has been borrowed by Gerard Voss for liis Latin
version of Ephraim (Cologne, i(x)3), and by the editors of Gregory's Works.

^ Not including Ruth, Ezra, Nehemiah,"Esther. It is not known whether he commented on Ecclesiastes
and Canticles, or on the deutero-canonical books (commonly called " Apocrypha ").


3. HYMNS. 147

supplemented by that of Professor Lamy, of Louvain, Tom. II., 1886) ; ^ but those
which he is recorded to have written on the Psalms and Proverbs, the books which may
be presumed to have most influenced the religious spirit and literary form of his works,
have not been preserved. None of the above, however, have reached us in a complete
form, but rather as a series of extracts, apparently abridged, from the Commentaries as
originally issued by their author. In commenting on the New Testament, he treated of
the Gospels, not in their separate form, but in the continuous narrative known as the
" Diatessaron " compiled from them by Tatian in the second century. This work,
long lost, has been lately recovered in an Armenian version. His Commentary on the
Epistles of St. Faul\\3.s likewise been preserved for us in Armenian. Both have been
published by the Mechetarist Fathers of St. Lazaro ; first in Armenian, afterwards in a
Latin version.^ In the present volume it has been judged best to include none of the
Commentaries, inasmuch as the method and spirit of Ephraim "s treatment of Scripture
are shown adequately, and in a more interesting form, in his Homilies and Hymns.

2. Homilies. — The Homilies are very varied in character. Many are controversial, —
directed against the Jev/s, against heathenism in the person of the Emperor Julian,
against the heresies of Manes, of Marcion, of Bardesan, of the Anomoean followers of
Arius. Others set forth articles of the Faith — the Creation, the Fall, Redemption by
the Passion and Crucifixion of Our Lord, His Descent into Hades, His Resurrection,
the Mission of the Holy Spirit, the Rest of Paradise, the Second Coming, the End of
the World. Others are expository, treating of narratives from the Old and the New
Testaments, such as the life of Joseph, the Repentance of Nineveh, or the story of "the
woman who was a sinner ''of St. Luke vii. — Others again are hortatory — calling to
repentance, w^arning against sin, threatening future retribution, extolling virginity. Of
the Homilies two — one doctrinal, 0/ Our Lord ; one expository, of the sinful woman, are
given in this selection. It is to be noted that the Homilies are usually metrical in form,
being written in regular stichoi (lines of uniform length). And some of them — for
example, a series of nine for the "Rogation Days," ^ and another of eight for the
"Passion Week" (week before Easter), and the vigil of "New Sunday" (first after
Easter) — were and still are regularly read as lessons, as part of the offices of the
Church ; * a singular mark of reverence — extended, it seems, to the sermons of no other
divine.

3. Hymns. — But it is in his Hymns that Ephraim lives, — for the Syrian Churches,
and indirectly for the Christian world, of the East if not of the West. ^ Throughout
Syrian Christendom, divided as it has been for ages — in the Malkite, Nestorian, Jacob-
ite, and Maronite communities, from the Mediterranean to the Tigris, and beyond, even
to the Malabar remnant of the Syro-Indian Church, all of which retain Syriac as the
language of their ritual, — the whole body of public worship is shaped by his hymnody
and animated with his spirit. It is literally the fact that the Hymns of Ephraim go with
every member of every one of these Churches from the first to the last of his Christian

' Lamy has supplied the Commentaries on Jonah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai, with
part of Isaiah and Lamentation — which was wanting from the Roman edition.

'^ Both in the Armenian edition of Ephraim (Vol. II., Diatcssaron ; Vol. III., St. Paul), Venice, 1836 : also
in Latin, — the Diatcssaron, in 1876 ; St. Paul. 1893.

3 Of these the most complete copy is in MS. B. 5.18, Trinity College, Dublin (formerly the property of
Archbishop Ussher), which has been used by Professor Lamy in his edition of three homilies (Tom. III. of
his Ephraim, 1889).

^ This remarkable distinction dates from the fourth century ; it is noticed by St. Jerome [De Viris III.,
CXV.), writing within twenty years after Ephraim's death.

5 St. Hilary of Poitiers {d'. 368) is reputed (see Isidore of Seville, De Off. Eccl.) the earliest writer of Latin
Hymns, and some extant Hvmns are ascribed to him. But St. Augustine tells us (Confess. IX. 7) that at Milan
hymns were first used, " after the manner oftlie Eastern Church," in the time when the Empress Justina was
persecuting St. Ambrose (386).


148 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


life, from the font to the grave. The Epiphany Hymns (included in the present selec-
tion) are interwoven into the Baptismal Office ; among the Funeral Hymns (which Dr.
Burgess has made accessible to English readers) ' are to be found dirges proper for the
obsequies of each and all, lay and cleric, young and old, male and female. Nor is it
to be doubted that it was from these Syriac offices that those of the Greek-speaking
Churches derived this characteristic, common to both, by which both are differentiated
from those of the West, — "hymns occupying in the Eastern Church" (as Dr. Neale
observes) ^ "a space beyond all comparison greater than they do in the Latin," so that
"the body of the Eastern breviary is ecclesiastical poetry." That the Syrian Church,
and not the Greek, took the initiative in the development of ritual, appears from the facts
that, though there is evidence of the use of Psalms and Canticles from Scripture through-
out Christendom from the first, it is only with Ephraim's contemporary, Gregory
Nazianzen, that Greek sacred poetry can be said to have taken shape, — and that his
verses failed to gain a place in public worship. He wrote in the metres of the heathen
classics ; and it was not until a later day, and from the hands of other writers, working
on other lines, that the hymns appeared which won their way into the Greek ritual, —
hymns written in rhythmic prose, in what seems to be conscious imitation of the
Syriac model.®

The imitation, however, is by no means complete ; it is apparent in the general tone
and manner, but does not extend to the form : just as the Greek version of Ephraim's
Hymns, though faithfully reproducing his thoughts and literary method, makes no
attempt to retain his metrical system ; but is a rendering into what in form is prose of
an original which is in verse. That this should be so is unavoidable, for Syriac metres
are incapable of adaptation to the Greek language. Syriac literature, in all else imita-
tive, here and here only has found out for itself an independent course. Elsewhere it
leans on one side to the Hebrew model to which it was drawn by affinity of language
and by the influence of the Old Testament ; on the other to the Greek, as found in the
New Testament and in the writings of the great Divines of the Alexandrian and
Antiochian patriarchates, who were the leaders of religious thought for Eastern Chris-
tendom. In hymnody alone it struck out a line of its own ; it set an example for the
Greek-speaking Churches to follow, so far as was possible for them under the conditions
above indicated. The Syriac Hymnody is constructed on the Hebrew principle of
parallelism, in which thought answers to thought in clauses of repetitive or antithetical
balance : but, unlike the Hebrew, its clauses are further regulated by strict equivalence
of syllabic measure. But though in this latter respect it seems to approach to the forms
of Western verse, ancient or modern, yet the resemblance is but superficial : Syriac
verse is not measured by feet — whether determined by syllabic quantity, as in Greek
and Latin, or by accent, as in English and other modern languages. Thus the metre
of Syriac poetry is substantially the "thought-metre" (as it has been well called) of
Hebrew, reduced to regularity of form by the rule that each of the lines into which the
balanced clauses fall, shall consist of a fixed number of syllables. There is no sys-
tematic rhyme ; but the nature of the language which by reason of its uniformity of
etymological structure abounds in words of like terminations, often causes correspond-

6 Metrical Hymns of E^hraim, 1853.

'' Hymns of the Holy Eastern Church, pp. 34, 35, 49 (1870). Note the contrast between the wide acceptance
of Ephraim's Hymns, through the East, and the scanty survival of those of his contemporary, in the West.

8 A few exceptional Greek hymns may be pointed out of earlier date {e.g., that mentioned by St. Basil, De
Sfiritu S., XXIX ; but the statement above made is in the main accurate. Anatolius, Patriarch of Constanti-
nonle (449-458) seems to have been the first to devote himself to the composition of hymns of the type above
described. See Neale (as above).


3- HYMNS. 149

ences of sound amounting- to rhyme, or at least to assonance. The Hnes are very short;
not exceeding twelve syllables, sometimes confined to four. Ephraim, though not the
actual inventor, was the first master of this metrical system, the first to develop it into
system and variety.'' His favorite metres are the five-syllabled and the seven-syllabled.
In his more elaborate poems, such as the Nisibene series, which are rather Odes than
Hymns, the strophes or stanzas into which the lines are arranged are often long and of
complicated structure, each strophe consisting of many lines (ranging from four up
to fourteen or more) of various lengths according to a fixed scheme rigidly adhered to
throughout the poem — sometimes throughout a group of cognate poems. In other
poems, especially in Hymns intended for popular or ecclesiastical use, where simplicity
of structure is suitable, the lines which compose each strophe, whatever their number,
are of uniform length. So easily do the Syriac tongue, and the genius of Syriac litera-
ture, lend themselves to this scheme of short, syllabically equal clauses, that (as has
been already stated) many even of the Homilies are metrical; arranged not indeed in
strophes, but in continuous succession of brief s/ichoi, all of one and the same length —
usually of seven syllables ; a sort of blank verse, but a blank verse with no animating
accents, no varying pauses. A Homily so constructed would fatigue the ear of a modern
audience by its monotony : but inasmuch as some portions of Ephraim's Homilies were
used in certain ecclesiastical Offices, probably recited in a sort of chant, it may be that
in such use we have the explanation of their quasi-versified structure.

In point of literary value as poems, a high place cannot be claimed for these Hymns.
Some of them indeed have much of the devotional fervor, and not a little of the human
pathos, of the Psalms of David : others show something of the antithetic point and
epigrammatic terseness of the Proverbs of Solomon. Yet the devout aspirations and
confessions of the poet are too often forced and artificial in their utterance ; in his fu-
neral dirges we seem here and there to detect the false note of the professional mourner in
the effort to exhaust all possible topics of grief; in all his poems he tends to prolong the
series of his parallelisms to a wearisome length and with an iteration that, though labo-
riously varied, is tedious, — an iteration that has no precedent in the poetry of the Old
Testament, save in one or two of the latest Psalms, such as the CXXXVIith with its
recurring burden " For His mercy endureth for ever," or the CXIXth with its artificial
arrangement (often emulated in Syriac Hymnody) by which each of the twenty-two
letters of the alphabet in turn is made to head each one of eight consecutive verses in
praise of the Law of the Lord. On the whole, it must be admitted that the greater
qualities of poetry , such as abound everywhere in nearly every writer of the Hebrew
Scriptures, — of truth in rendering the inmost feelings of man's heart in words of abso-
lute simplicity, of aspiration that rises without effort to the highest things of God — to
these Ephraim's Hymns have no claim.

For these shortcomings in his poetry, two main causes may be assigned.

One is in the man himself, — or rather, in his mode of life. Naturally, he was prone
to feel for and with his fellow-men ; for the sorrows of the bereaved, the cares of the
toiling poor whose lot (as he proved in the last and best episode of his history) moved
him to sympathy and active succour. He can be simple accordingly when he deals with
the homely facts of life. But the main tenor of his course was ascetic ; he looked on
this life and the life beyond — on man and to God — with a vision clouded by the gloom


'•' Probably the earliest extant Syriac poem is the Hymn of the Soul (printed by Dr. Wright in Afocrvfhal
Acts, p. 174 ; also bv Mr. Bevan in 7V.v/.s- and Studies, \C3). Its metre, though less regular, is substanlially the
seven-syllabled of Ephraim. Whether Bardesan (or Harmonius) wrote in metres like those of Enhraim has
been questioned ; but if it is true that Ephraim's hvmns were adapted by him to the tunes of Harmonius, il
seems to follow that his metres were those of the hymns to which those tunes belonged.


I50


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


of unnatural solitude and self-mortification. An assiduous student of Scripture, he had
an ear for its threatenings rather than its promises and consolations ; dread and dismay en-
tered into his heart more deeply than hope ; the " Stand in awe and sin not " of the Psalmist
was more familiar to his spirit than the ''Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous." The per-
petual proneness to tears on w^hich his biographers dwell with admiration, and which
he seems to have thought it right to foster, has its reflex in his writings, in the hyster-
ical overflow of his fears, his lamentations and his self-reproach. He had lived as an
anchorite till his nature became morbid, and its moral fibre was weakened. But to
reach the highest levels in religious literature, whether in prose or in poetry, a man
must be sane, his mind healthy and strong, — with a health and strength sustained and
exercised by wholesome daily contact with the lives of other men.

The second cause is to be found in the method, above described as his — developed
though not actually invented by him, and made his own — which he chose as the vehicle
of his thoughts and emotions. The "thought-metre" of the Hebrew poets was regu-
lated (as we have seen) by balance of sense, not of sound — member answering to
member, verse by verse, in equivalence or contrast of substance merely, not of verbal
form : and in this metre, which has been happily likened to the alternating beat of a
bird's wings as it mounts aloft, they had shown it to be possible to attain the highest
reach of sublime expression of the utmost that man's spirit can conceive of God and
Heaven. The Syriac Hymnists had the unhappy idea of effecting a compromise be-
tween their two contrasted models, the Hebrew and the Greek ; and to this end they
compelled their verses into conformity by syllabic measure, of sound, as well as of
sense. This artificial structure has an effectiveness of its own, and is suited to the
popular ear ; but it is incapable of the elevation which the earlier and simpler method
attained without effort. As its Semitic parallelism of substance excluded Syriac poetry
from the variety in topic and largeness in conception of the Greek, so this grecized
regularity of form hampered its efforts to rise to the upper regions where the Hebrew
is at home. The wings are free and ample by whose regulated stroke Hebrew poetry
is borne, and they carry it to the supreme height : in Syriac poetry the flight is too
commonly low and feeble, because its wings are clipped. In the former we are conscious
of a uniformity as of the unconstrained waves of the sea, following in a succession of
endless change — a uniformity that is majestic : in the latter we detect the uniformity of
the water-wheel, that with artificial movement draws up and dispenses the waters of
the well in vessels of fixed measure — a uniformity that is mechanical and monotonous.

IX. — The Selections Included in the Present Collection,

The specimens of Ephraim's compositions offered in these selections are : —
(i) The Nisihejie Hymns, (2) The Hymns of the Nativity, (3) The Hymns for the
Epiphany, (4) Three Homilies (i., On our Lord; ii. , On Reproof aiid Repentance ; iii. , On
the Sinful Woman).

Of (2) the Nativity Hymns, the first thirteen are reprinted from the version by the
Rev. J. B. Morris (Oxford, 1847), made from the Roman Edition of the Syriac Works of
Ephraim. The rest of the series as translated (six ^ in number, making nineteen in all)
were unknown when that edition was completed in 1743. These latter, and also (3)
the Epiphany Hymns (with one exception)^ have since come to light in the Nitrian col-
lection of the British Museum, and were printed by Professor Lamy in his St. Ephraim


1 From the Nitrian MS., 14506.

'•2 Hymns 1-14 from MSS., 14506, 14572 ; No. 15 from the Maronite Breviary.


X. PROBABLE DATES OF HIS WORKS. 151

(Tom. I., cc. 1-144 ; Tom. II., cc. 427-504), 1882-1889. In the same edition (Tom. I.,
cc. 145-274; 311-338) were tirst printed (4) the three Homilies.^ Our transhitions of
these follow Lamy's text, with here and there a slight variation where errors seem to
exist. These two series of Hymns belong- to the ecclesiastical class : their titles appro-
priate them to two great Festivals of the Church, and portions of these are embodied in
Syriac Rituals still in use. Of the two Homilies, the former was written for the Feast
of the Epiphany, like the Hymns which precede it.

The Nisihene Hymns (i) are translated from the text as first printed by Dr. Bickell
(1866), whose edition, like that of Dr. Lamy, rests upon MSS. of the Nitrian col-
lection.* They also were unknown to the Roman editors of the last century, and to
the English translator of 1847 ; and they have not till now appeared in English. The
series when complete consisted of 77 Hymns. Of these the first division (I.-XXXIV. )
treat of the fortunes of the Church in Nisibis, Carrhena [Haran], and an unnamed city
(probably Edessa). ^ The remainder (XXXV. to end) deal with the topics of Death and
the Resurrection. The present selection comprises 46 of these, namely : — of \\vq first
division, the first 21, those which relate to Nisibis and which are the Nisihene Hymns
proper ; of \\\q, second division, two series — one' of 8 hymns (XXXV.-XLII.) in which
Death and Satan hold monologue or dialogue, — the other of 17 (LH.-LXVHI.), similar
in character, but with Man as a third interlocutor.

X. — Probable Dates of His Works.

Of the compositions contained in this volume, none yields internal evidence of its
date, except the Nisibene Hymns of the first division. Hymns XXXV.-XLII. (not in-
cluded here), apparently belong to the later (or Edessene) period of Ephraim s life,
and to the reign of Valens, — i.e., they are later than the year 363. The 21 Hymns
which stand first in our collection may confidently be assigned to the year of the third
siege (350) and the thirteen following years. Hymn I. was indubitably composed
while the siege was still urgent ; Hymns 1. and III. immediately after the deliverance ;
Hymns IV. -XII. deal with the fortunes of the city and country in a troubled time of
invasion that succeeded ; the rest (XIII. -XXI.) treat of the four successive Bishops of
Nisibis under whom Ephraim lived — Jacob, Babu, Valgesh, and Abraham. The last-
named is not elsewhere recorded except by Elias of Nisibis, but the death of Valgesh is
known to have occurred in 361.* The Hymns therefore which celebrate the accession
of Abraham to the See (XVII. -XXI.) must be placed in the interval, 361-363, the latter
being the year when Ephraim with all the Christian population of the city was driven
out by Sapor. Hymns XIII. -XVI., being written while Valgesh was Bishop — for they
compare him with his two predecessors — fall into the interval between the year of the
siege (350), which they speak of as past, — and the year of the death of Valgesh (361).
Bickell assigns IV.-XII. to the months of Sapor's invasion in 359; XIII. -XVI. to 358
and 359 ; XVII. -XXI. to 363, in the short space between Julian's death and the surrender
of Nisibis.

It is probable that most of his Hymns that are definitely controversial belong, like
niDst of his controversial writings, to the years of his later life, at Edessa. And as we
have seen, the earliest of them that can be confidently dated, is not earlier than 350.
But it would be hasty to conclude that he had composed no Hymns before that date,


^ From MSS. 14570, 14651, 17266 ; and a fragment from 14654 (printed in Tom. II., pp. xx-xxiii.).
■* MvSS. 14572, 17141 chiefly ; with a few others of secondary value. Five Hymns are lost (viii. and xxii.-
XXV.), and part of two others (ix, and xxvi.).

=* Note the mention of Edessa in Hymn xlii. r.
^ Chron. Edcss., as above ; Chronol. of Elias Nisib.


152 APHRAHAT.


and that in the Nisibene Hymns of the siege we have the first fruits of the vine of his
vision. In 350 he must have been over forty — perhaps over fifty years of age ; and it
is highly improbable that a fertility which proved to be so abundant, did not begin to
manifest itself at a much earlier age ; or that a literary offspring of such bulk and im-
portance was all produced in the last five and twenty years of a long life. The earlier
authorities concerning his life give no definite information on this head ; and the Syriac
Life is vague in its statements and untrustworthy in its chronology. The account
given of Barhebraeus, a well-informed but very late writer (thirteenth century), can
hardly be accepted as embodying any genuine tradition, but has probability in its
favor: — "From the time of the Nicene Council (he writes ^), Ephraim began to write
canticles and hymns against the heresies of his time," — for few of his hymns are with-
out a polemic spirit, though (as has been said) those that are purely controversial seem
to be of a later period. A much later author indeed, Georgius " Bishop of the Arabians ''
(writing in 714) warns us that there is no evidence to assign any of Ephraim's writings
to the twenty years' interval between the Nicene Council and the year 345 — "especially
(he adds) to the years before 337." ^ This writer, however, is here arguing in support of
the claim of Aphrahat to be an independent author, against those who regarded him
as a disciple of Ephraim ; and he rests his case on the ground that whereas the Demon-
strations of Aphrahat are (as we shall see presently) dated from 337 to 345, no compo-
sition of Ephraim's can be shown to have been written so early. And it must be
admitted that the earliest date (as above noted) that can be fixed with certainty for any
of Ephraim's innumerable productions in 350, — thirteen years later than Aphrahat's
earlier DeTuonstrations. Against this is to be set the tradition of Ephraim's presence at
Nicsea, implying as it does that even in 325 he had made himself a notable person, —
and the probability that one who has left such ample proof of the copiousness of his
literary gift, must have begun to exercise it before a date at which he would have
passed his thirtieth year (supposing his birth to have been in 306), or even have entered
middle life (if we place it at the beginning of the century). The two writers were
unquestionably contemporary, and as yet no sufficient data have been discovered to
determine to which of them seniority belongs.

SECOND PART.

APHRAHAT THE PERSIAN SAGE.

I. Name of Author of Demonstrations long Unknown. — The author of the Demonstra-
tio7ts, eight of which appear (for the first time in an English version) in the present
volume, has a singular literary history. By nationality a Persian, in an age when
Zoroastrianism was the religion of Persia, he wrote in Syriac as a Christian theologian.
His writings, now known to us as the works of Aphrahat, were remembered, cited,
translated, and transcribed for at least two centuries after his death ; but his proper
name seems to have been for a time forgotten, so that in the MSS. of the fifth and
sixth centuries the Demonstrations are described as composed by "the Persian Sage,'^
or "Mar Jacob the Persian Sage ; " and a writer of the eighth century, who had made
a minute study of these writings and ascertained their date, admits that he has been
unable to find out " who or what he was, his rank in the Church, his name or abode."
Not only so, but the name Jacob assigned (rightly or wrongly) to him has led to a

' Ap. Assemani, B. 0. I. ti6.

2 Ap. Forget, De Vita ApJiraatis, Introduction p. 22 ; see also pp. 121-126 of Forget's Dissertation which
follows ; also p. 5 of Introd.


4. EXTENT AND LIMITS OF THEIR CIRCULATION. 153

confusion of identity. His works have been ascribed for many hundred years — from a
date not long- after their composition down to quite recent times, to an earlier Jacob, the
famous and saintly Bishop of Nisibis in the days of Constantine the Great. It is not
until the tenth century that the true name of "the Persian Sage" emerges to light as
Aphrahat, by which he is unhesitatingly designated by several well informed and
accurate authorities of that and the three succeeding centuries, and under which he is
known to modern scholars.

2. Their Subjects, and Arrangement. — The Demonstrations are twenty-two in number,
after the number of the letters of the Syriac alphabet, each of them beginning with the
letter to which it corresponds in order. The first ten form a group by themselves, and
are somewhat earlier in date than those which follow : they deal with Christian graces,
hopes, and duties, as appears from their titles : — " Concerning Faith, Charity, Fasting,
Prayer, Wars, Monks, Penitents, the Resurrection, Humility, Pastors.'' Of those that
compose the later group, three relate to the Jews (" Concerning Circumcision, the Pass-
over, the Sabbath") ] followed by one described as ''Hortatory," w^hich seems to be a
letter of rebuke addressed by Aphrahat, on behalf of a Synod of Bishops, to the clergy
and people of Seleucia and Ctesiphon ; after which the Jewish series is resumed in five
discourses, " Co?icerni?ig Divers Meats, The Call of the Gentiles, Jesus the Messiah, Virgin-
ity, the Dispersion of Israel." The three last are of the same general character as the
first ten, — " Concerning Almsgiving, Persecution, Death, and the Latter Times." To this
collection is subjoined a twenty-third Demonstration, supplementary to the rest,
'' Conceriiing the Grape," under which title is signified the blessing transmitted from the
beginning through Christ, in allusion to the words of Isaiah, "As the grape ^ is found
in the cluster and one saith, Destroy it not" (Ixv. 8). This treatise embodies a chrono-
logical disquisition of some importance.

3. Dates of Composition. — Of the dates at which they were written, these discourses
supply conclusive evidence. At the end of section 5 of Demonstr. V. (Coiicerning

IVars), the author reckons the years from the era of Alexander (b. c. 311) to the time
of his writing as 648. He wrote therefore in a.d. 337 — the year of the death of
Constantine the Great. Demo?ist. XIV. is formally dated in its last section, "in the
month Shebat, in the year 655 (that is, a. d. 344). More fully, in closing the alpha-
betic series (XXII. 25) he informs us that the above dates apply to the two groups — the
first ten being written in ^^y ; the twelve that follow, in 344. Finally, the supplement-
ary discourse "Concerning the Grape" was written (as stated, XXIII. 69) in July, 345.
Thus the entire work was completed within nine years, — five years before the middle
of the fourth century, — before the composition of the earliest work of Ephraim of which
the date can be determined with certainty.

4. Extent and Limits of their Circulation. — These Demonstrations, though they fell
far short of attaining the unbounded popularity which was the lot of the countless
Hymns and Homilies of Ephraim, appear to have won for themselves a recognized
place in Syriac literature. It is true that, in striking contrast with the overwhelming
numbers of MSS. containing portions, great or small, of Ephraim's works, which are
to be met with in nearly every collection of Syriac written remains, one complete and
two incomplete copies are all that have reached us of this series of twenty-three treatises ;
and extracts or quotations from them very rarely occur.* Yet it is clear that com-


3 So in Peshitto ; " nuripc grape,'' in LXX. ; " uciv uiiic,'' in A.V. and R.V., with the Hebrew ; but the
Latin Vulgate agrees with Peshitto.

4 In Rosen-Forshah's and Wright's Catalogues of Svriac MSS., British Museum, while but few MSS.
(Add. 14619. Add. 17182, Orient. 1017. Rich. 7197) contain any portion of Aphrahat, the list of MSS. of
Ephraim's works and fragments nearly fills three columns.


154 APHRAHAT.


positions which were thought worthy at an early date of translation into at least one
foreign tongue, must have had some considerable reputation in the country of their
origin ; and it may be presumed that these two or three MSS. (of the fifth and sixth
centuries), are the survivors of a fairly large number of which the majority have
perished.

The Armenian translation is probably the earliest evidence now extant of the circu-
lation (though under a wrong ascription of authorship) of the Demonstrations, of which it
comprises nineteen. Armenian scholars seem to agree in the belief that it was made
in the fifth century, before its original was more than a hundred years in being. An
Ethiopic translation of the discourse " On Wars '' is extant, but there is no evidence
that it formed part of a version extending to all or any of the remaining twenty-two, nor
is its date even approximately determinable.

The manuscript evidence hardly reaches so far back as that of the Armenian version.
The oldest extant MS. of these discourses (Add. 171 82 of the British Museum) contains
the first ten, and is dated 474. With it is bound up (under the same number) a second,
dated 512, containing the remaining thirteen. A third (Add. 14619) of the sixth century
likewise, exhibits the whole series. A fourth (Orient, 1017), more recent by eight cen-
turies, will be mentioned farther on. Of the three early MSS., the first designates
the author as ''the Persian Sage" merely, as does also the third: the second prefixes
his name as "Mar Jacob the Persian Sage."

Among Syriac authors, the first to show an acquaintance with these treatises, at a
date prior to that of the earliest of these MSS., is Isaac of Antioch, known as "the
Great," whose literary activity belongs to the first half of the fifth century. In his
works passages have been pointed out ^ which are evidently borrowed with slight
change from the Demonstrations , — especially from that Conceriiing Fasting, and (though
less distinctly) from that Concerning Faith. The imitation, however, is tacit, and Isaac
nowhere names the work (or its author) whence he derived the illustrations and even the
expressions he uses in treating of these topics.

Before the close of the same century, we find evidence that they were known — by
repute, though apparently no farther — to a Latin writer of Western Europe, Gennadius
of Marseilles, the continuator of St. Jerome's work De Viris Illustrihtis , who wrote
about the year 495. Though mistaken (as will presently be shown) about their parentage,
and incorrectly informed as to their number (which he supposes to be twenty-six),
Gennadius states their titles with such an approach to accuracy, as to leave no room for
doubt that the discourses he describes are those of which we now treat. He shows
himself aware that they are in Syriac, but gives no hint that he has ever seen them, or
that he is able to read them/

In the seventh century, or (however) early in the eighth, tokens appear of a revival of
interest in them. Georgius, "Bishop of the Arabs, "'' a Jacobite prelate, having been
applied to by one Joshua an anchorite for information concerning the " Epistles " (as
he styles them) of "the Persian Sage " and their authorship, wrote (in Syriac) in the
year 714 a very full and elaborate reply, in which he cites at length passages from
several of them, including those (above referred to) in which the dates of writing are
stated with precision, — and he infers from these dates, that the author, of whose name
he professes himself to be ignorant, wrote too early to be a disciple of Ephraim. To

5 Forget, De Vita c Scriptis Aphraatis (1882), pp. 139-148; also (cited by him S. Isaaci AntiocJieni 0pp.
(ed. Hickell, 1873).

^ The titles given by Gennadius do not number 26 ; some titles he omits ; others he divides, treating as
two what is really one, in several instances.

■^ See the text in Wright's Aphraatis, pp. 2gf. ; in Lagarde's AnalcctaSyr., pp. 108^. ; or Forget (as above)
pp. «#


APHRAHAT. 155


this inference we may safely assent, even though we hold that Ephraim wrote and
taught earlier in the century than Georgius endeavours to place him. The point
to be noted is, that this learned and acute writer, though he had by careful study made
himself familiar with the Demo7istrations , neither knows, nor can guess at, the name of
their author, nor can he record any tradition concerning his identity. He can only tell
what he has learned from their contents, that they were written from 337 to 345, by one
who was a monk, and a cleric, and that they were characterized by certain peculiarities
of doctrine.

5. Ascribed to Jacob of Nisihis. — Thus it appears that the series of discourses now
known as the Demonstrations 0/ Aphrahat, were imitated, and transcribed, and trans-
lated, into Armenian, and their titles cited by a Latin biographer, and their contents
minutely investigated by an able critic, within the four centuries that followed the time
of their composition ; while through all that long period the name of Aphrahat had
passed out of memory, and the "Persian Sage" simply, or else with the addition of
an ambiguous and misleading name, "Jacob, the Persian Sage," was the designation
by which their author was usually known. As we have seen, the scribes of two MSS.,
of the fifth and sixth centuries, and Georgius in the early eighth, confine themselves to
the former ; and the scribe of the sixth, thirty-eight years later than the earlier of the
other two, uses the latter. Misled by it, the Armenian translator, and Gennadius in
his biographical work, fell into the error of identifying the Jacob who wrote the Demon-
stratio?is with a namesake, the earlier and more conspicuous Jacob of Nisibis, of whom
we have had occasion to speak in treating of the life of Ephraim. But of this celebrated
personage no writings are recorded, nor was he a Persian,® but a native of Nisibis (in
his time a city of the Roman Empire), in 338, seven years before the completion of the
treatises in question. As Jacob of Nisibis is thus too early to be the author of them,
so, on the other hand, Jacob of Sarug, whom Assemani suggested in correcting the
mistake of Gennadius,^ is too late ; for he was not born till more than a century after
the date of the last Demonstration.

6. Reappeara?ice 0/ the Name 0/ Aphrahat. — It is not until some years after the mid-
dle of the tenth century, that the " Persian Sage " first appears under his proper name,
— of which, though as it appears generally forgotten in the Syriac world of letters, a
tradition had survived. — The Nestorian Bar-Bahlul (circ. 963) in his Syro- Arabic Z<?ji7'c6>;^,
writes thus : — "Aphrahat [mentioned] in the Book of Paradise, is the Persian Sage, as
they record." — So too, in the eleventh century, Elias of Nisibis (Barsinseus, d. 1049),
embodies in his CJironography, a table, compiled from Demonstr. XXIIL, of the chron-
ography from the Creation to the "Era of Alexander " (b.c. 311), which he describes
as " The years of the House of Adam, according to the opinion of Aphrahat, the Per-
sian Sage." ^ — To the like effect, but with fuller information, the great light of the me-
diaeval Jacobite Church, Gregory Barhebrseus (d. 1286), in Part I. of h.\s Ecclesiastical
Chronicle, in enumerating the orthodox contemporaries of Athanasius, mentions, after
Ephraim, " the Persian Sage who wrote the Book of Demonstrations ;'' '^ and again in

s The Armenian Menologium, subjoined by Antonelli to the Armenian version, as printed by hmi, makes
Jacob to have been sister's son to Gregory the Illuminator, the Apostle of Armenia, to whom that version
(impossibly) ascribes the letter pretixed to Demonstr. I. But this statement is probably an invention, devised
in order to connect Jacob with the Armenian Church.

9 Biblioth. Orient. I., p. 5. A note in MS. Orient. 1017, suggests Jacob of Tagrit,— ignorantly, for he was of
the 13th century.

^ For this extract, see Wright's Aphraates, pp. 38, 39.

2 xhe MS. of Harhebrasus w^hich Wright {Aphraates, pp. 2, 3), follows in treating of this notice, seems to
identify the " Persian Sage," with one " Buzitis," who is mentioned immediately before ; and he conjectured
therefore that " Buzitis " was a scribe's error lov Parhatis (=Aphraates). But other MSS. insert the copu-
lative particle so as to distinguish " the Persian Sage " from the " Buzitis," whose name precedes.


156 APHRAHAT.


Part II., supplies his name under a slightly different form, as one who " was of note
in the time of Papas the Catholicus," " the Persian Sage byname Pharhad, of whom there
are extant a book of admonition [a/., admonitions] in Syriac, and twenty-two Epistles
according to the letters of the alphabet. " ^ Here we have not only the name and descrip-
tion of the personage in question, but a fairly accurate account of his works, under the
titles by which the MSS. describe them, ''Epistles ^iwd Demonstrations ; — and moreover
a sufficient indication of his date, in agreement with that w^hich the Demonstrations
claim : for one who began to write in t^-^"] must have lived in the closing years of the
life of Papas (who died in 334), and in the earlier years of the life of Ephraim. So yet
again, a generation later, the learned Nestorian prelate, Ebedjesu, in his Catalogue of
Syrian ecclesiastical authors,* writes, " Aphrahat, the Persian Sage, composed two
volumes with Homilies that are according to the alphabet." Here once more the name
and designation are given unhesitatingly, and the division of the discourses into
two groups is correctly noted ; but the concluding words appear to distinguish these
groups from the alphabetic Homilies. Either, therefore, we must take the preposition
rendered '■'with'' to mean "containing," — or we must conclude that Ebedjesu's know-
ledge of the work was at second-hand and incorrect. Finally, in a very late MS. ,^ dated
1364, is found the first or chronological part of Demonstration XXIII. , headed as fol-
lows:— "The Demonstration concerning the Grape, of the Sage Aphrahat, who is Jacob,
Bishop of Mar Mathai. '' Here (though the prefix "Persian" is absent) we have the
author's title of "Sage"; and the identification of the "Aphrahat " of the later authori-
ties with the "Jacob "of the earlier is not merely implied but expressly affirmed.
Here, moreover, we have what seems to account for the twofold name. As author, he
is Aphrahat ; as Bishop, he is Jacob — the latter name having been no doubt assumed
on his elcA^'ation to the Episcopate.^ Such changes of name, at consecration, which
in later ages of the Syrian Church became customary, were no doubt exceptional in the
earlier period of which we are treating. But the fact that Aphrahat was a Persian
name, bestowed on him no doubt in childhood — when he was still (as will be shown
presently) outside the Christian fold — a name which is supposed to signify " Chief" or
" Prefect," and which may have seemed unsuited to the humility of the sacred office —
supplies a reason for the substitution in its stead of a name associated with sacred his-
tory, both of the Old and of the New Testament. Here finally we have the direct
statement of what Georgius had justly inferred from the opening of Dem. XIV., that
the writer was himself of the clergy, and in this Epistle writes as a cleric to clerics.

We have now brought together all the known authorities who yield information con-
cerning this collection of treatises, audits author. It remains that we should put into
a connected form the facts to which they testify, and point out the inferences yielded by
their notices, and by the treatises themselves.

7. His Nationality Persian, and Probably Heathen. — That the author was of Persian
nationality, is a point on which all the witnesses agree, except the fourteenth-century
scribe of the MS. Oriefit. 1017, who however is merely silent about it. The name
Aphrahat is, as has been already said, Persian — which fact at once confirms the tradition
that he belonged to Persia, and helps to account for what seems to be the reluctance '

3 Part I., s. 26, c. 83 ; Part II., s. 10, c. 33.

^Ap. B. 0. III. i. (see p. 95).

^ British Museum, OrieuJ. 1017,

« The alternative explanation has been suggested that lacob was the name received by Aphrahat at
baptism. This is refuted by Wright's objection, that, if the name Jacob had been given so early, the name
Aphrahat would have been entirely disused or forgotten.

■'Basil {Homil in. Hcxnciii, II. 6) shows alike avoidance of the name of the foreigner Ephraim, and
designates him as " the Syrian," See above, p. 128.


8. EVIDENCE THAT HE WAS A CLERIC, AND A BISHOP. 157


of early writers to call him by a name that was foreign, unfamiliar, unsuited to his
subsequent station in the Church, and superseded by one that had sacred associations.
As a Persian, he dates his writings by the years of the reign of the Persian King : the twen-
ty-two were completed (he says) in the thirty-fifth, the twenty-third in the thirty-sixth of
the reign of Sapor. "^ — Again : as a Persian of the early fourth century, it is presumable that
he was not originally a Christian. And this is apparently confirmed by the internal
evidence of his own writings ; for he speaks of himself as one of those '*' who have cast
away idols, and call that a lie wdiich our father bequeathed to us ; " and again, " who
ought to worship Jesus, for that He has turned away our froward minds from all
superstitions of vain error, and taught us to worship one God our Father and Maker. "^
— But it is clear that he must have lived in a frontier region where Syriac was spoken
freely ; ^ or else must have removed into a Syriac-speaking country at an early age ;
for the language and style of his writings are completely pure, showing no trace of
foreign idiom, or even of the want of ease that betrays a foreigner writing in what is
not his mother-tongue. It is clear also that, at whatever age or under whatever
circumstances he embraced Christianity, he must have taken the Christian Scriptures
and Christian theology into his inmost heart and understanding as every page of his
writings attests.

8. Evidence that he was a Cleric, and a Bishop. — We have already seen that Georgius
in his study of the Demonstrations perceived the indications which prove the writer to
be of the Clergy. He goes farther, and notes that the sixth {Concernimf Monks) is
evidently written by a monk. He might have added, what is yet more important, that
the fourteenth (which he rightly fixes on as evidently written by a cleric) can hardly
have been written by one of lower rank than that of Bishop. The translation of the
opening sentence of this discourse (which is an Epistle to the Bishops, Clergy and people
of the Church of Seleucia and Ctesiphon) is disputed ; for '' we being gathered together
have taken counsel to write this Epistle to our brethren . . . the Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, and the whole Church" (XIV. i) may be read so as to make the '' Bishops,
Priests, etc. ," either, the ''z£^e"who write, — or, the '' brethren" who are written to.^
Whichever construction is adopted, the fact remains that Aphrahat here writes on
behalf of a body of men assembled in council, who through him admonished their
'* dear and beloved brethren " whom they designate (farther on) as '* the Bishops, Priests
and Deacons . . . and all the people of God who are in Seleucia and Ctesiphon." It is
not conceivable that any body of men but a synod of Bishops (with their clergy and
people present and assenting) would, in that age of the Church, have taken upon itself
to meet and consult and address such an epistle of admonition and implied rebuke to
that great see, the seat of the " Catholicus of the East," ^ the prelate who in the oriental
hierarchy was inferior in dignity to the Antiochian Patriarch alone, and in authority
almost coequal with him. And it may be safely assumed that the writer of the Epistle
was one — probably the chief — of the Bishops in whose name it is written. If we
accept the late, but internally probable, statement of the Scribe of MS. Orient. 1017

8 Dcmonstr. XIV. so ; XXII. 25 ; XXIII. 69.

9 lb. XVI. 7 ; XVIl. 8.

^ Philoxenus of Mabug, likewise a Persian, and a writer of pure Syriac, came from the border-region of
Beth-garme {B. O. II. p., 10).

'■^ Some prefer the latter construction; but Wright {Aphr., pp, 8, 9), Forget (pp. 82 j^), and Parisot

''■"''" ' ■ " ' " ' Dew.

on of
receive."

— ^....^. ^.^ -■&■-, -•- v....^. speaks as a tsisnop ; but Forget's seems the true rendering.

■^This ancient title is still borne by the Head of the Nestorian Church : the Jacobites from the sixth century
downwards have substituted that of " Maphrian " {Mafhrino-friictificator), i.e. propagator of the Episcopal
succession ; which continues in use to the present day.


158 APHRAHAT.


(above mentioned), that '^ the Persian Sage " was "Bishop of the monastery of Mar
Mathai, " we arrive at a complete explanation of the circumstances under which this
Epistle was composed. For the Bishop of Mar Mathai w^as Metropolitan of Nineveh,
and ranked among the Bishops of " the East" only second to the Catholicus ; ai;»d his
province bordered on that which the Catholicus (as Metropolitan of Seleucia) held in
his immediate jurisdiction. The Bishop of Mar Mathai therefore w^ould properly
preside in a Synod of the Eastern Bishops, met to consider the disorders and discussions
existing in Seleucia and its suffragan sees. It thus becomes intelligible how an Epistle
of such official character has found a place in a series of discourses of which the rest
are written as from man to man merely. The writer addresses the Bishops, Clergy, and
people of Seleucia and Ctesiphon in the name of a Synod over which he was President,
a Synod probably of Bishops suffragan to Nineveh, and perhaps of those of some
adjacent sees. Thus the admonition comes officially from "Mar Jacob Bishop of Mar
Mathai ; " but the thoughts, and language, and literary form are the production of
Aphrahat personally, and he accordingly embodies it as fourteenth in his alphabetic
series of twenty-two treatises, in which it is duly distinguished by its initial letter nun,
the fourteenth of the Semitic alphabet. It certainly breaks the sequence of subjects,
coming after and before treatises relating to Judaism : but for the alphabetic sequence
it is essential. — This alphabetic arrangement was overlooked or ignored (as it seems)
by the Armenian translator, who has omitted four of the twenty-two and transposed
others, placing the fourteenth apart from the rest, — although \\\ Demonstr. XXII. (which
however is not included in the Armenian version) the author recites all their titles,
arranging them in their order, and noting that it is the order of the alphabet.* In the
Syriac original the fact is beyond question that Demonstr. XIV. is an integral part of
the series ; and we may rely with confidence on the internal evidence it yields of the
high ecclesiastical rank of the writer ^ — evidence confirmed by, and in its turn confirming,
the statement of the fourteenth-century scribe who makes him Bishop of the second see
of the East."

Reverting to the subject of the Persian nationality of Aphrahat, we note that this
monastery of Mar Mathai was on the eastern, that is, the Persian, side of the Tigris,
not far from what once was Nineveh and is now Mosul, on the precipitous mountain
Elpheph (now Maklob) where it still stands, though ruinous, and is known by the name
of Sheikh Malta, and is occupied by the Metram (or Metropolitan) and a few monks.

9. His Writings little Concerned with Current Controversies. — To the remoteness of his

4 The Roman editor (Antonelli) of the Armenian text (1756) was misled bj' the displacement of Demonstr.
XIV., and its omission from the list of Gennadius, as well as by its synodical character, to reject it as spurious.
Had he known Demonstr. XXII., or had he been aware of the alphabetical arrangement of the series, he would
have been guarded against this error. The Synod however in whose name Demonstr. XIV. is written cannot
have been (as Wright supposed) that of 334 ; for it was written in 344.

^ See also Demonstr. X. (below) ; especially s. b., where he exhorts " pastors " (evidently Bishops) as one
set over them, in other words, their Metropolitan.

** An examination of this MS. leads to the conclusion that its scribe was probably well informed in this
matter. Its principal contents are, the " Book of Rays " of Gregory Barhebraeus and three of his minor works.
Between the first named and that which follows is inserted the extract from Demonstr. XXIII., above specified
(p. 156), headed as we have seen with the author's names and additions, — "Aphrahat, the Sage, who is Jacob
Bishop of Mar Mathai." Now Gregory himself, as Maphrian, was Bishop of Mar Mathai, and died and was
buried in that monastery in 1286. It may be conjectured that this MS., wa-itten in 1364 (not 80 years after his
death), may have obtained this passage of Aphrahat, and the heading which assigns his see, from some
collection made by Gregory, among whose writings it here finds place. If so, the statement that he was
Bishop of Mar Mathai rests on the authority of Gregory, who would no doubt have within his reach authen-
tic lists of the names of his predecessors in that see.

For the monastery of Mar Mathai. see Rich, Koordistan,Vo\. II., ch. xv., pp. 73.^.; Badger, Nestorians^
Vol. I., ch. ix„ pp. 95 .^ The former visited it in 1820 ; the latter in 1843 and iS5o ; and his account is
illustrated with an engraving of the monastery, and a plan of the Church. He found the Metran residing
there, with two monks ; and five villages, with some 350 families, formed his diocese. In 1880 Sachau
visited Mosul, and records (Reise, ch. iv., p. 352) that a Bishop still resided in this monastery.


lo. POSSIBLY SUSPECTED OF A NESTORIAN TINGE. 159


see, and probably of the place of his obvious origin and abode, from the centres of reli-
gious thought and controversy, is probably due the notable absence from these discourses
of all reference to the great theological questions that had employed, and in his time were
engrossing, the leading minds of Christendom. He began to write within ten years after
the Nicene Council and the Arian controversy, and the disputations that grew out of it
were still ripe, and continued to abound long after. The writings of Ephraim show how
vehemently in Aphrahat's lifetime, or possibly a few years later, the theologians of Nisibis
and of Edessa deemed themselves bound to strive for the Faith against Arians, Ano-
maeans, Apollinarians, — and not less against the surviving or revived heresy of home-
grown production — that of Bardesan."' But in Seleucia and Ctesiphon it is not heresy,
but strife, self-seeking, and neglect of duty, that are censured by the Synod through the
letter which we know as Demonstr. XIV., and the errors which the Bishop of Mar
Mathai combats for the benefit of those whom he addresses are the errors of the Jews
who refused and resisted the creed and the customs of the Church. There is in one
place {Demonstr. III. 9) a passing reference to the heresiarchs of the second and third
centuries, Valentinus, Manes, and Marcion ; but it merely amounts to a brief statement
in which the false teaching of each is summed up in a sentence, each followed by the
question, Can one who holds such doctrine find acceptance before God by his fasting.?
No later heresy is even mentioned.

These facts not only confirm the tradition which places him at Nineveh, but they go
far to account for the obscurity in which his name and his writings lay so long. In an
age of excited controversy, these quiet hortatory discourses, marked by no striking elo-
quence of style or subtlety of reasoning, dealing with no burning question of the time,
nor with any disputes more recent than those of the two previous centuries, or those
between Jew and Christian, would hardly attain to more than a local circulation ; and
when they penetrated to Edessa or other such centres of Syriac theological life, would
awaken but a languid interest. That they did so penetrate is certain ; for of the exist-
ing MSS. whence we derive their text, one (the oldest) was written in Edessa in 474,
and Isaac of Antioch, who knew and imitated them, before that time, was a disciple of
Zenobius of Edessa. But the paucity of such MSS., and still more the oblivion which
so long covered the name of Aphrahat, prove, either, that the work failed to attain
popularity — or, that it provoked some prejudice which led to its practical suppression.
It would be difficult, however, to point out anything in it to which exception could be
so seriously taken as to be a bar to its acceptance. None of the errors which so keen
a critic as Georgius detected in its theology — even if we admit the justice of his censure
— is such as to shock the orthodoxy of the fourth or fifth century.

10. Possibly Suspected of a Nestorian Tinge. — Yet it is possible that theological prepos-
session may indirectly have brought about the disfavour or at least disuse into which
the Demo7istratio7is fell. In Edessa there was an institution known as the " School of
the Persians," to which as it seems disciples from Persia resorted for theological instruc-
tion. From Ibas, Bishop of Edessa (435-457), who was infected with Nestorianism,
the Nestorian taint passed to Maris, a Persian (and through him to Persia generally),
and likewise to Maro, a teacher in the school. After the death of Ibas, the Persian
and others who had followed him were expelled from Edessa, by Nonnus his orthodox
opponent and successor ; and the school was finally closed by the next Bishop, Cyrus,
in the reign of Zeno ^ (who died 491). These facts may well be supposed to have raised
a prejudice against all writings coming from a Persian source ; and the works of "the

' See Ephraim's words, cited above, pp. r29, 136.

^ Simeon of Beth-Arsam, ap., Assem , U. 0. I. 346, is our authority for this narrative.


i6o APHRAHAT.


Persian Sage," absolutely free though they are from any thought or phrase which could
be construed as favouring or tending in the direction that led to the errors of Nestorius,
may have come undeservedly under the ban issued against the School of the Persians
and all that was connected with it, by the orthodox zeal of Cyrus. It is probable that
his writings were read in that school, and that he himself may have studied them in
early life. Prescribed in Edessa, the centre of Syriac theology, these discourses would
be effectually checked in their circulation in all churches of Syriac-speaking Christen-
dom that were anti-Nestorian/

II. Tlieir Popularity iii the Armenian Church. — How the book made good and held
its footing in the Armenian Church is perhaps more difficult to explain. It is not indeed
the only instance in which an author, of whom no works are extant in their original
tongue, has survived and been widely known in a translation. A notable example is
that of Irenaeus, of whose great work on Heresies, so well known in its early Latin
dress, but a few fragments have reached us, through citations, in Greek. There is no
obvious ecclesiastical channel through which the knowledge of the writings of Aphrahat
can be supposed to have reached Armenia, unless by way of Edessa, before they fell
(as above suggested) into discredit in that city. But it is to be borne in mind that from
and after the close of the fourth century "greater {i.e. Eastern) Armenia was ruled as
a dependency of Persia, by Persian Kings." ^ Of these the earlier at least were Christians,
and their policy led them to promote the Syriac language and literature, as against the
Greek, among their people ; until, under the Catholicus Isaac (d. 441), the Armenian
tongue was reduced to writing (in the characters then invested by Mesrob), and a
beginning made of an Armenian sacred literature by the translation of the Scriptures
into Armenian from the Syriac. Versions of the works of Syriac divines would naturally
follow before long. That among these Ephrairns Commentaries were conspicuous we
have already mentioned (p. 147) : that those of a Syriac Divine of Persian nationality
should be passed over is unlikely — a Divine too of such repute as to have won the
honourable title of ''the Persian Sage, '' and who as occupant of a great Persian see was
also known as Jacob of Mar Mathai, metropolitan of Nineveh, How readily his as-
sumed name would lead to his being confused with his far more widely known name-
sake of Nisibis, we have already pointed out; and it is obvious that the name, once
attributed and accepted, would lend fictitious vogue to the book.

12. First Printed in an Armenian Version. — The mistake of the Armenian translator
became, in later times, the means of first making the work — though not the name — of
Aphrahat known to European scholars. The Arm.enian version, containing nineteen of
the Demonstrations (XX. being omitted), was printed at Rome in 1756, edited, with a

9 Note that the authorities who know the author as Aphrahat are of " the East " (in the ecclesiastical sense
—namely, the regions beyond the Tigris). Bar-Bahlul and Ebedjesu are Eastern, as being Nestorians. Of
the Jacobites, Elias Barsinneus was of Mosul originally, and Gregory Barhebraeus as Maphrian had his see in
Mosul and the whole East under his rule. The scribe of the MS. Orient. 1017 wrote indeed in the Jacobite con-
vent of Kartamin, but he was merely the copyist of a MS. of the works of Barhebra^us, obtained no doubt
from Mosul. On the other hand, of the three scribes of the earlier MSS., who knew him only as " the
Persian Sage," or as " Mar Jacob," one was of Edessa, and all were presumably Jacobites of the same
regions ; as likewise Georgius (also connected wdth Edessa), and his correspondent "(Joshua, of Anab). Isaac
of Nineveh was Eastern, and Nestorian ; but as he nowhere mentions the author of the works with which
he was evidently acquainted, he does not come here into consideration. Nor does Ennadius ; inasmuch as
we have no means of discovering how he came to hear of their existence, or to attribute them to Jacob of
Nisibis : w^e can only conjecture that his informant may have been an Armenian.

As to Barhebraeus, the significant fact is farther to be noted that in Part I., where he treats of the Pa-
triarchs and the western provinces, presumably drawing from Western documents, he only speaks of " the
Persian Sage : " and the name Aphrahat first appears in Part II., where the writer records, as Maphrian,
no doubt, from the tradition of his own church at Mosul, the names of the notable persons of the time of
his predecessor, Papas the Catholicus of the East.

' See Gibbon, Decline and Fall, ch. xxxii. (p. 392, Vol. III. of Prof. Bury's edition ; also his Appendix 25,
P- 504)-


\


14. WAS APHRAHAT PRIOR TO EPHRAIM? 161

Latin version, by Antonelli. Its text is derived from a transcript made in 1719, after
an ancient copy in tl^ie Armenian Monastery at Venice, by order of the Abbot Peter
jMechitar, and presented by him to Pope Clement XI. for the Vatican Library. In this
edition, entitled 6^. Patris Jacohi Episcopi Nisiheni Seritiones, the discourses are not
merely ascribed to Jacob of Nisibis, but the theory is advanced by the editor, that the
Armenian text is the original. It is hardly necessary to point out that the alphabetic
arrangement of the twenty-two discourses — which is not and could not be reproduced in
Armenian,"'^ a language with an alphabet of thirty-eight letters — is alone sufficient to
expose the impossibility of this idea.

13. Recovery 0/ the Post-Syriac Original. — The Syriactext, so long forgotten, was first
discovered among the MSS. of the great Nitrian collection in the British Museum, by
Dr. Cureton, whose name is so honourably known as a great Syriac scholar, and editor
of Syriac documents. He did not live, however, to accomplish his desire of publishing
it, but bequeathed that task to his still more eminent successor, in the leadership of
Syriac studies in England, the late Dr. William Wright, then assistant keeper of MSS.
in the British Museum, and afterwards Professor of Arabic in tlie University of Cam-
bridge. To him is due the admirable editio princeps of the Syriac text of all the twenty-
three Demonstrations (from the MSS. i46i7and 17182), issued in London, 1869. He did
not, however, carry out his intention of adding to this work a second volume, con-
taining an English translation ot the whole.

Since then, another edition of the scries of twenty-two has been published in Paris
(Firmin-Didot, 1894), as the first volume of a Patrologia Syriaca, under the general edi-
torship of Dr. R. Graffin, lecturer in Syriac in the Theological Faculty of the Catholic
Institute of Paris. This excellent work includes a Latin Version, and is preceded by a
learned and copious Introduction, in which all questions relating to Aphrahat and his
writings are fully treated, — both of which are the work of Dom Parisot, Benedictine
Priest and Monk.

14. Was Aphrahat Prior to Ephraim P — In thus placing Aphrahat first as their projected
series of Syriac Divines, the learned editors follow the opinion which, ever since Wright
published his edition, has, been adopted by Syriac scholars — that Aphrahat is prior in
time to Ephraim. This is undoubtedly true (as pointed out above) in the only limited
sense, that the Demonstrations are earlier by some years (the first ten by thirteen years,
the remainder by five or six) than the earliest of Ephraim's writings which can be dated
with certainty (namely, the first Nisibene Hymn, which belongs to 350). It is then
assumed that Ephraim was born in the reign of Constantine, therefore not earlier than
306, and that Aphrahat was a man of advanced age when he wrote (of which there is
uo proof whatever), and must therefore have been born before the end of the third cen-
tury— perhaps as early as 280. It has been shown above (p. 145) that even if we admit
the authority of the Syriac Life of Ephraim, we must regard the supposed statement of
his birth in Constantine's time as a mistranslation or rather perversion of the text.
Thus the argument for placing Ephraim's birth so late as 306 disappears, while for plac-
ing Aphrahat's birth no argument has been advanced, but merely conjecture ; and the
result is, that the two may, so far as evidence goes, be regarded as contemporary. It
is true that Barhebraeus, in his Ecclesiastical History^ reckons Aphrahat as belonging
to the time of Papas, who died 335 ; but it is to be noted that in the very same context
he mentions that letters were extant purporting to be addressed by Jacob of Nisibis and
Ephraim to the same Papas, — and though he admits that some discredited the genuine-

2 In the Armenian alphabet the number of letters is 38.
VOL. XIII. — II


i62 APHRAHAT.


ness of these letters, he gives no hint that Ephraim was too young- to have written them.
In fact he could not do so, for in the earlier part of this History he had already named
Ephraim as present at the Nicene Council in 325, and had placed his name before that
of Aphrahat in including both among the contemporaries of the Great Athanasius. ^

15. His Use of Holy Scripture. — Concerning the canon and text of the Books of the
Bible as used by Aphrahat, — a subject hardly within the scope of this Introduction — a
few words must suffice.

In citing the Old Testament, he shows himself acquainted with nearly all the Books of
the Jewish Canon, and with some, but not all, of the deutero-canonical books commonly
called Apocrypha — with Tobit, Ecclesiasticus (and perhaps Wisdom), and Maccabees,
but not Judith, Susanna, Bel and the Dragon, or Baruch. He follows the Peshitto
rather than the Greek, but not seldom departs from both ; and he shows a knowledge
of the Chaldee. Paraphrase.

His New Testament Canon is apparently that of the Peshitto; — that is to say, he
shows no signs of acquaintance with the four shorter Catholic Epistles, and in the one
citation which seems to be from the Apocalypse, it has been shown to be probable
that he is really referring to the Targum of Onkelos on Deut. xxxiii. 6.'' But he omits
all reference also to the longer Catholic Epistles, except i John. He also passes over
(of St. Paul's Epistles) 2 Thessalonians, Titus, and Philemon. But as regards the last, its
shortness accounts for the omission ; and as to the former two, he can hardly have
been unacquainted with them, inasmuch as he knew i Thessalonians and i and 2 Tim-
othy. He designates the writer of Hebrews as "the Apostle, " probably meaning to
ascribe it to St. Paul.

In citing the Gospels, he seems sometimes to follow the Diatessaron, which, as we
have said, was in the hands of his contemporary Ephraim, and which is known to have
circulated largely in the East until far on in the following century. Sometimes, however,
his references seem to be to the separate Gospels as commonly read. It cannot be
claimed for the Peshitto that he always or even usually follows its text ; nor yet does he
uniformly agree with the Curetonian, or with the probably earlier form of the Syriac
Gospel recently discovered by Mr. Lewis. With each of these last, however, his text
has many points of coincidence. In the rest of the New Testament, we can only
say that he must have had before him a text which diverged not seldom from the
Peshitto.'

16. Literary and Theological Value of his Writings. — Erom the Demonstrations, eight
have been selected for the present volume, viz. : I. Of Faith (with Letter of a?i Inquirer
prefixed); V. Of Wars ; VI. Of Monks ; VIII. Of the Resurrection of tlie Dead ; X. Of
Pastors; XVII. Of Christ the Son of God ; XXI. Of Persecution ; XXII. Of Death and the
Latter Times. Of these, one only (XVII.) is controversial, — directed against the Jews : it
is painfully inadequate in the treatment of its great theme, — so inadequate as to suggest
the surmise that doubts may have arisen about the orthodoxy of the writer, such as
to discredit his works, and to account for tlie neglect in which they lay (as we have
seen) for centuries. But in all his writings his mastery of the Scriptures, of the Old
Testament especially, is conspicuous; and in many of them, especially in those of a
hortatory character, there is much force of earnest persuasiveness, rising at times into
eloquence.

3 Cp. Eccles. Hist. II. 10, cc. 31, 33, with I. 26, cc. 83, 85.

'^ See Demonslr. VIII, 19 (also VII. 25), and cp. Apoc. II. 11. (Parisot, Introduction, p. xiiii.)
^ It is important to note that he quotes in full three (16, 17, 18) of the disputed '* Last Twelve Verses " of
St Mark's Gospel. {Dcmonst. I. 17.)


EPHRAIM.


HYMNS.

A. The Nisibene Hymns.

I., II., III. The Siege of Nisibis (a.d. 350).

IV. — XII. The Persian Invasion of Mesopotamia (a.d. 359).

. XIII.— XVI. The Bishops of Nisibis : Jacob, Babu, Valgesh.

XVII. — XXI. Abraham, their Successor (a.d. 363).

XXXV.— XLII. Death and Satan.

LIL— LXVIII. Death, Satan, and Man.

B. The Hymns On the N'ativity.

C. The Hymns For the Epiphany.

D. The Hymns On the Faith (The Pearl).


HOMILIES.

I. On Onr Lord.
II. On Admo7iition and Repentance.
III. On the Sinful Woman.


\


THE NISIBENE HYMNS.


(Translated by Rev. J. T. Sarsfield Stopford, B.A.).


1. THE SIEGE OF NISIBIS (I.-III.).

2. THE PERSIAN INVASION (IV.-XII.).

3. THE BISHOPS OF NISIBIS (XIII.-XVL).

4. ABRAHAM THEIR SUCCESSOR (XVII.-XXI.).

5. CONCERNING SATAN AND DEATH (XXXV.-XLIL, LXII.-LXVIIL


NISIBENE HYMNS.


I.


I. O God of mercies Who didst refresh
Noah, he too refreshed Thy mercies. He
offered sacrifice and stayed the flood ; he
presented gifts and received the promise.
With prayer and incense he propitiated Thee :
with an oath and with the bow Thou wast
gracious to him ; so that if the flood should
essay to hurt the earth, the bow should
stretch itself over against it, to banish it
away and hearten the earth. As Thou hast
sworn peace so do Thou maintain it, and
let Thy bow strive against Thy wrath !

R. Stretch forth Thy bow against the
flood, for lo ! it has lifted up its waves
asrainst our walls !

2- In revelation, Lord ! it has been pro-
claimed, that that lowly blood which Noah
sprinkled, wholly restrained Thy wrath for
all generations ; how much mightier then
shall be the blood of Thy Only Begotten,
that the sprinkling of it should restrain our
flood ! For lo ! it was but as mysteries of
Him that those lowly sacrifices gained vir-
tue, which Noah offered, and stayed by
them Thy wrath. Be propitiated by the
gift upon my altar, and stay from me the
deadly flood. So shall both Thy signs bring
deliverance, to me Thy cross and to Noah
Thy bow ! Thy cross shall cleave the sea
of waters ; Thy bow shall stay the flood of
rain.

3. Lo ! all the billows trouble me ; and
Thou hast given more favour to the ark : for
waves alone encompassed it, mounds and
weapons and waves encircle me. It was
unto Thee a storehouse of treasures, but I
have been a storehouse of debts : it in Thy
love subdued the waves ; I in Thy wrath,
am left desolate among the weapons ; the


flood bore it, the river threatens me. O
Helmsman of that ark, be my pilot on the
dry land ! To it Thou gavest rest in the
haven of a mountain ; to me give Thou rest
also in the haven of my walls !

4. The Just One has chastened me abun-
dantly, but it He loved even among the
waves. For Noah overcame the waves of
lust, which had drowned in his generation
the sons of Seth. Because his flesh revolted
against the daughters of Cain, his chariot
rode on the surface of the waves. Because
women defiled him not, he coupled the
beasts, whereof in the ark he joined together,
all pairs in the yoke of wedlock. The olive
which with its oil gladdens the face, with
its leaf gladdened their countenances : for
me the river whereof to drink is wont to
make joyful, lo ! O Lord, by its flood it
makes me mournful.

5. The foulness of my guilt Thy righteous-
ness has seen, and Thy pure eyes abhor me.
Thou hast gathered the waters by the hand
of the unclean, that Thou mightest make for
me purification of my guilt ; not that in
them Thou mightest baptize and purify me,
but that in them Thou mightest chasten me
with fear. For the waves will stir up to
prayer, which shall wash away my guilt.
The sight of them which is full of repent-
ance, has been to me a baptism. The sea,
O Lord, which should have drowned me, in
it let Thy mercies drown my guilt. In the
Red Sea Thou didst drown bodies ; in this
sea drown Thou my guilt instead of bodies !

6. An ark in Thy mercy Thou didst pre-
pare, that Thou mightest preserve in it all
the remnants. That Thou shouldest not
desolate the earth in Thy wrath, Thy com-
passion made an earth of wood. Thou didst

empty them one into the other; Thou didst

167


1 68


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


render them back one unto the other. Bid
my lands have thrice been filled and emptied
again ; and now against me the waves rebel,
to overwhelm the remnant that has escaped
in me. In the ark Thou didst save a rem-
nant ; save in me, O Lord, yea in me a
leaven. The ark upon the mountain brought
forth ; let me in my lands bring forth my
imprisoned ones !

7. O Lord, gladden Thou in me the im-
prisoned ones of my fortresses, Thou Who
didst gladden those prisoners with the olive
leaf ! Thou sentest healing by means of the
dove to the sick ones that were drowning in
every wave ; it entered in and drove out all
their pains. For the joy of it swallowed up
their sorrow, and mourning vanished away
in its consolation. And as the chief of a
host gives heartening to the fugitives, so
the dove disseminated courage among the for-
saken. Their eyes tasted the sight of peace,
and their mouth hasted to open in Thy
praise. As the olive leaf in the waves, save
Thou me, that Thou mayest gladden in me
the prisoners of my fortresses !

8. The flood assails, and dashes against
our walls : may the all-sustaining might
uphold them ! It falls not as the building
of the sand, for I have not built my doctrine
upon the sand : a rock shall be for me the
foundation, for on Thy rock have I built
my faith ; the secret foundation of my trust,
shall support my walls. For the walls of
Jericho fell, because on the sand she had
built her trust. Moses built a wall in the
sea, for on a rock his understanding built
it. The foundation of Noah was on a rock ;
the dwelling place of wood it bore up in the
sea.

9. Compare the souls which are in me,
with the living things that were in the ark ;
and instead of Noah who mourned in it, lo !
Thy altar mourning and humbled. Instead
of the wedded wives that were in it, lo ! my
virgins that are unmarried. Instead of Ham
who went iox\\\ from it and uncovered his
father's nakedness, lo ! workers of righteous-
ness, who have nourished and clothed
apostles. In my pains, O my Lord, I rave


in my speech ; blame me not if my words
provoke Thee ! Thou puttest to silence the
prosperous when they murmured : have
mercy on me as on them that were silenced
aforetime !

10. Before Thy wrath Thou madest a
house of refuge, and all the nations re-
belled against it. Noah was refreshed in
rest, that his dwelling-place should give
rest according to his name. Thou didst
close the doors to save the righteous one ;
Thou didst open the floods to destroy the
unclean. Noah stood between the terrible
waves that were without, and the destroy-
ing mouths that were within : the waves
tossed him and the mouths dismayed him.
Thou madest peace for him with them that
were within ; Thou broughtest down before
him them that were without : Thou didst
speedily change his troubles, for light to
Thee, O Lord, are hard things.

11. Hear and weigh the comparison of
me with Noah, and though my suffering be
light beside his, let Thy mercy make our
deliverance alike ; for lo ! my children stand
like him, between the wrathful and the
destroyer. Give peace, O Lord, among them
that are within, and humble before me them
that are without; and give me twofold vic-
tory ! And whereas the slayer has made
his rage threefold, may He of the three days
show me threefold mercy ! Let not the Evil
One overcome Thy lovingkindness : seeing
he has assailed me twice and thrice over-
come Thou him ! Let my victory fly
abroad through the world, that it may earn
Thee praise in the world ! O Thou whO'
didst rise on the third day, give us not over
to death in our third peril !


II.

I. This day are opened, our mouths
to give thanks. They who opened the
breaches, have opened my sons' mouths.
Thank the Merciful, who has delivered the
men of our city, nor thought at that time of
exacting the debts that were due by us.
When they rose up they that took us cap-


NISIBENE HYMNS.


169


live, the worlds in our deliverance, tasted of
Thy graciousness.

R. From all that have mouths, glory be
to Thy grace !

2. He has saved us w^ithout wall, and
taught us that He is our wall : He has saved
us without king and made us know that
is our king : He has saved us, in each
and all, and showed us that He is All: He
has saved us in His grace and again reveals,
that freely He has mercy and quickens.
From every boaster, He takes away his
boasting, and gives it to His own grace.

3. The sound of all mouths, is too little
for Thy praise : for lo ! in the hour w^hen our
light was smoking, and was at the point to
be quenched (seeing that all is easy to
Thee) of a sudden it awoke and shone !
Who has seen these two marvels, that for
him whose hope was cut off, hope has
sprung up and increased ; the hour of
mourning has been turned into good tidings ?

4. This is a festival day, whereon hang
the feasts : for if wrath had taken us cap-
tive, lo ! our feasts too had ceased. Where-
as our peace has conquered and triumphed,
lo ! our festivals resound. This blessed day
supports all : upon it depends the city, on
the city depends the people, on the people
depends peace, on peace depends all.

5. Out of these breaches, Thou hast mul-
tiplied triumphs. Praise unto the Triune
God goes up from the three breaches ; for
that He descended and repaired them, in
His mercy which restrains wrath. He smote
Ihe enemy who understood not that He was
teaching us. He taught those within, for
in His justice He made the breaches; He
taught those without, for in His goodness
He repaired them.

6. Speak and give glory, my delivered
ones on this day ; old men and boys, young
men and maidens, children and innocents,
and thou, O Church, mother of the city !
For the old men have been rescued from
captivity, the youths from torture, the suck-
lings from being dashed in pieces, the
women from dishonour, and the Church
from mockery.


7. He came to us with hardness ; we
were afraid for a moment : He came in gen-
tleness, and we rejoiced for an hour. He
turned and left us for a little, we wandered
without end ; like a beast of prey which is
trained by blandishments and by fear, but
if so be that men turn from it, rebels and
strays and becomes savage in the midst of
peace.

8. He punished us and we feared not ; He
rescued us, and we were not shamed : He
straitened us and our vows were mul-
tiplied ; He enlarged us and our crimes
were multiplied. When He constrained
there was a covenant, when He gave
breathing-space there was straying. Though
He knew us He lowered Himself to estab-
lish us. In the evening we exalted Him ;
in the morning we rejected Him. When
necessity left us, faithfulness left us.

9. He afflicted us by the breaches, that
He might punish our crimes : He raised the
mounds that thereby. He might humble our
boasting. He made a breach for the seas
that thereby. He might wash away our
pollution. He shut us in that we might
gather together in His Temple. He shut us
in and we were quenched ; He set us free
and we went astray. We are like unto
wool, which passes into every colour.

10. We know that when the blessed sons
of Nineveh repented, it was not because of
mounds they repented, nor yet by means of
waters, nor was it by reason of a breach, nor
yet by reason of bows; it was not at the sound
of the bowstring they feared and repented.
They barkened to a feeble voice ; they
caused their little ones to fast ; they made
their youths chaste, they made their kings
humble.

11. Thou smotest us and we justified Thee,
for it befel not by chance ; Thou deliveredst
us and we gave thanks, for it was not that
we were worthy. Thou hadst mercy on us
not because Thou erredst, in hoping that we
should repent. It was manifest to Thee
that when Thou hadst mercy on us we
strayed. Thou knewest that we had sinned ;
Thouknewest that we are sinners : with our


170


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


iniquity that has been and is, Thou wast
acquainted when Thou hadst mercy on us.

12. Weigh our repentance, that it may
outbalance our crimes ! But not in even
balance, ascends either weight ; for our
crimes are heavy and manifold, and our re-
pentance is light. He had commanded that
we should be sold for our debt : His mercy
became our advocate; principal and in-
crease, we repaid with the farthing, which
our repentance proffered.

13. Ten thousand talents for that little
payme7it, our debt He forgave us. He was
bound to exact it, that He might appease His
justice : He was constrained again to for-
give, that He might make His grace to re-
joice. Our tears for the twinkling of an eye
we gave Him ; He satisfied His justice, in
exacting and taking a little ; He made His
grace to rejoice, when for a little He forgave
much.

14. Ten thousand are the crimes that He
has pardoned ; ten thousand tongues, are
unable to suffice, in presence of His good-
ness. He has pardoned us and we have not
pardoned ; we have requited to Him con-
trariwise ; the guilt committed we write up
afresh. "Pardon, O Lord, " we cry ; ''Re-
quite, O Lord," we pray : "pardon" verily
when we have done wrong; " requite " verily
when wrong is done us.

15. Yea not as those without, have we
laboured for our lives. They have raised
their mounds, but we not even our voices :
they have broken through the wall, but we
— not even the chains, the frail chains on
our heart within have we broken. God has
rejected the diligent, for the sake of the sloth-
ful ; He has rejected the labour done with-
out, though He was rejected from within.

i6. He has set free them that talked, and
smitten the silent ; the wall was beaten,
and the people were instructed : He spared
them that can suffer, He smote that which
knows no suffering. For instead of souls
that feel, He smote the stones that feel not,
that He might chasten us. In His love He
spared our bodies, and hasted to smite our
wall.


17. Who has ever seen, that a breach be-
came as a mirror.? Two parties looked
thereinto ; it served for those without and
those within. They saw therein as with
eyes, the Power that breaks down and
builds up : they saw Him who m.ade the
breach and again repaired it. Those with-
out saw His might ; they departed and tar-
ried not till evening : those within saw His
help ; they gave thanks yet sufficed not.

18. Let the day of thy deliverance, arouse
thee from sloth ! When the wall was broken
through, when the elephants pressed in,
when the javelins showered, when men did
valiantly, then was there a sight for the
heavenly ones. Iniquity fought there ;
mercy triumphed there ; lovingkindness
prevailed below ; the watchers shouted on
high.

19. And thine enemy wearied himself,
striving to smite by his wiles, the wall that
encompassed thee, a bulwark to thine in-
habitants. He wearied himself and availed
not ; and in order that he might not hope,
that if He broke through He should also
enter and take us captive, he broke it through
and not once only ; and was put to shame,
nor was that enough, even unto three times,
that he might be shamed thrice in the three.

20. Let my happiness by God's grace, be
also multiplied in thy midst ! Whereas in
thee my crimes have been many, many be in
thee my fruits ! Whereas in thee I have
sinned in my youth, in thee let there be
mercy for my old age ! By the mouth of
thy sons pray for thy son, for I have sinned
beyond my ability, and have repented below
my ability ; I have scattered above measure,
and have gathered below measure.

IIL

I. Fix thou our hearing, that it be not
loosed and wander ! For it is a-wandering
if one enquire, who He is and what He is
like. For how can we avail, to paint in us
the likeness, of that Being which is like to
the mind .? Naught is there in it that is lim-
ited, in all of it He sees and hears ; all of


NISIBENE HYMNS.


171


it as it were speaks ; all of it is in all
senses.

R. , Praise to the One Being, that is to us
unsearchable I

2. His aspect cannot be discerned, that it
should be portrayed by our understanding- :
He hears without ears ; He speaks without
mouth ; He works without hands, and He
sees without eyes. Because our soul ceases
not nor desists, in presence of Him Who is
such ; in His graciousness He put on the
fashion of humankind and gathered us into
His likeness.

3. Let us learn in what way that Being is
spiritual and appeared as corporeal ; and how
it also is tranquil and appears as wrathful.
These things were for our profit ; that Being
in our likeness was made like to us,
that we may be made like Him. One there
is that is like Him, the Son Who proceeded
from Him, Who is stamped with His like-
ness.

4. O Nisibis, hear these things, for, for thy
sake these things were written and spoken.
Both to thyself and to others, thou hast
been in the world a cause of strife and of
disputations. Mouths over thee, O thou that
wast shut up, even over thee mouths sang ;
when thou didst triumph and wast enlarged,
in thee mouths were opened, for lamenta-
tion and for thanksgiving.

5. The prayer of thy inhabitants, sufficed
for thy deliverance ; it was not that they
were righteous, but that they were penitent :
according as they were disgraced, so did
they haste to submit to the rod. In trans-
gressions and in triumphs they had like
part. They whose crimes were great, so be
their fruit great ; they who triumphed in
their sackcloth, have triumphed also in their
crowns.

6. The day of thy deliverance, is king of
all days. The Sabbath overthrew thy walls,
it overthrew the ungrateful ; the day of the
Resurrection of the Son, raised agaiii thy
ruins ; the day of Resurrection raised thee
according to its name, it glorified its title.
The Sabbath relaxed its watch ; for the mak-
ing of the breaches, it took blame to itself.


7. In Samaria hunger prevailed, but in
thee fulness prevailed. In Samaria there
broke in and came on her, abundance of a
sudden ; but in thee there roared and came
in on thee a sea of a sudden. In her was
eaten a child, and it saved her alive ; in thee
was eaten the body, living and all life-giv-
ing ; of a sudden He delivered them, the
Eaten delivered the eaters.

8. We know that the Blessed wills not the
afflictions, that have been in all ages; though
He has wrought them, it is our offences that
are the cause of our troubles. No man can
complain against our Creator ; it is for Him
to complain against us, who have sinned
and constrained Him, to be wrathful though
He wills it not, and to smite though He de-
sires it not.

9. The Earth, the vine, and the olive, are
in need of chastisement. When the olive is
bruised, then its fruit smells sweet ; when
the vine is pruned, then its grapes are
goodly ; when the soil is ploughed its yield
is goodly. When water is confined in chan-
nels, desert places drink of it ; brass, silver
and gold, when they are burnished shine.

10. If then it be that man, by chastening
makes all things goodly ; and if he who
despises and rejects chastening, is hated and
all rebels against him ; then by that which
he chastens, let him learn Him that chas-
tens him ; since whoso chastens does so
that he may profit thereby. For whoso
chastens his servants, does so that he may
possess them ; the good God chastens His
servants that they may possess themselves.

1 1. Let thy afflictions be, books to admon-
ish thee, for the thrice-besieged, suffice to
become for thee, books to meditate therein,
every hour on their histories. Because thou
despisedst the two Testaments, wherein
thou mightest read thy life, therefore He
wrote for thee, three hard books wherein
thou shouldst read thy chastisements.

12. Let us avert by that which has been,
the thing that is yet to be ; let us be taught
by that which has come, to escape that
which is comin?:: let us remember that
which is past, to avoid that which is future.


1/2


EPHRAIM SYRUS'.


Because we had forgotten the first stroke,
the second fell on us ; because we forgot
the second, the third bore heavy on us.
Who will yet again forget !

IV.

1. My God, without ceasing, I will tread
the threshold of Thy house ; I who have re-
jected all grace, I will ask with boldness,
that I may receive with confidence. R.,
Our hope, be thou our Wall !

2. For if, O Lord, the earth, enriches mani-
fold, a single grain of wheat, how then shall
my prayers, be enriched by Thy grace !

3. Because of the voices of my children,
their sighs and their groans, open to me the
door of Thy mercy ! Make glad for their
voices, the mourning of their sackcloth !

4. O firstborn that wast a weaned cA//g?, and
wast familiar with the children, the accurst
sons of Nazareth, hearken to my lambs that
have seen the wolves, for lo ! they cry.

5. For a flock, O my Lord, in the field, if so
be it has seen the wolves, flees to the shep-
herd, and takes refuge under his staff, and he
drives away them that would devour it.

6. Thy flock has seen the wolves, and lo !
it cries loudly. Behold how terrified it is !
Let thy Cross be a staff, to drive out them
that would swallow it up !

7. Accept the cry of my little ones, that
are altogether pure. It was He, the Infant
of days, that could appease, O Lord, the An-
cient of days.

8. The day when the Babe came down,
in the midst of the stall, the Watchers de-
scended and proclaimed, peace — may that
peace be, in all my streets for all my off-
spring.

9. Seventy and two old men, the elders
of that people, sufficed not for its breaches.
The Babe it was, the Son of Mary, that gave
peace on every side.

10. Have mercy, O Lord, on my children !
In my children call to mind Thy childhood,
Thou Who wast a child I Let them that are
like Thy childhood, be saved by Thy grace !

11. Mingled in the midst of the flock, are


the cry of the innocents, and the voice of the
sheep, that call on the Shepherd of all, to
deliver them from all.


13. There is a joy that is affliction, misery
is hidden in it ; there is a misery that is profit,
it is a fountain of joys, in that new world.

14. The happiness that my persecutor has
gained, woes are hidden in it ; therefore
I rejoice. The wretchedness that I have
gained from him, happiness is concealed for
me in it.

15. Who will not give praise, to Him that
has begotten us, and can beget again, from
the midst of evil rumours, the voices of glad
tidings !

16. Thou Healer of all, hast visited me in
my sicknesses ! Payment for Thy medi-
cines, I cannot give Thee, for they are price-
less.

17. Thy mercies in richness, surpass Thy
medicines : they cannot be bought, they are
given freely, it is for tears they are bartered.

18. How, O my Master, can a desolate
city, whose king is far off, and her enemy
nigh, stand firm without aid of mercy }

19. A harbour and refuge, art Thou at all
times. When the seas covered me, Thy
mercy descended and drew me out. Again
let Thy help lay hold on me !

20. Apply to my afflictions, the medicine
of Thy salvation, and the passion of Thy
help ! Thy sign can become, a medicine to
heal all.

21. I am greatly oppressed, and I hasten
to complain, against him that troubles me.
Let Thy mercy, my Lord, take the bitterness
from the cup, that my sins have mixed.

22. I look on all sides, and weep that I
am desolate. Very many though be my
chiefs and my deliverers, one is He that has
delivered me.

23. My young men have fled, O Lord,
and gone forth, and are like chickens, which
an eagle pursues ; lo ! they hide in a secret
place : may Thy peace bring them back !

24. The sound of my grape-gatherers, lo !
my ears miss it, for their voices fail. Let it


NISIBENE HYMNS.


173


I


resound with the glad tidings, O Blessed
One of Thy salvation !

25. A voice of terror, I have heard on my
towers ; as my defenders cry, while they
guard my walls. Still Thou it with the voice
of peace !

26. The noise of my husbandmen, shall
speak peace without my walls : the shout-
ing of my dwellers shall speak peace within
my walls, that I may give peace without
and within.

27. Make an end, O Lord, of the mourning,
of this Thy pure altar, and of Thy chaste
priest, who stands clothed in mourning,
covered over with sackcloth !

28. The Church and her ministers shall
give praise for Thy salvation ; the city and
its dwellers. Be the voice of peace, O Lord,
the reward of their voices !


V.

T. Cause to be heard in Thy grace, the
tidings of Thy salvation: for an hearing has
been made, a path of passage; our minds
have been downtrodden, by messages of
terror. R. , Praises to Thy victory ! Glory

to Thy Dominion /

2. Comfort Thoii with profits, though
small and scanty, those that have had har-
vest, of hurt by their labour : at a time of
profit, they have gained but loss.

3. It is manifest that He has stood, por-
tioning wrath upon earth: loss and profit in
anger He divided. There are whom He has
cast down of a sudden, and there are whom
He has puffed up of a sudden.

4. To teach us that He can, chastise in
all ways; when He saw the persecutors,
were terrible before mine eyes, He laid me
out before my children, and they my be-
loved chastised me.

5. Lo ! He taught me to fear. Himself
and not man: for when there was none to
smite us. His wrath gave command of a
sudden, and every man stretched himself
out, and chastised himself.

6. In like manner that Babylonian, who
struck down all kings when he was confi-


dent and hoped that there was none to smite
him, God caused that by his own hands, he
should strike himself down.

7. His majesty and his mind, of a sudden
became mad together: he rent and cast off
his garments ; he went forth and wandered
in the desert ; he drove himself out first, and
then his servants drove him out.

8. He showed to all kings, whom he had
led captive and brought down, that not by
his own power, could he have overcome :
the power that struck him down, was that
which punished them.

9. I have stood and borne, O my Lord ;
the blows of my deliverers. Thou art able
in Thy grace, to make me profit by the
smiters: Thou art able in Thy justice to
punish me by ?ny helpers.

10. The day when the host was bold, to
come up against Samaria; their plenty and
their pleasure, their treasures and their
possessions, they cast away and forsook
and fied. He crowned her by her perse-
cutors.

11. My beloved ones crowned me, and
my deliverers healed me. Through the
guilt of my dwellers, my helpers chastised
me, give me drink from Thy vines, of the
cup of consolation !

12. The corn and the vine, preserve, O
my Lord, by Thy grace! Be the husbandman
cheered, by the vine of the grape-gatherer ;
be the vinedresser glad, in the corn of the
husbandman !

13. They are joined each to each, the
corn and the grape. In the field the reap-
ers, wine can make cheerful, in the vine-
yard the dressers, bread strengthens in
turn.

14. These two things have power, to com-
fort my troubles : the Trinity has power, to
comfort more exceedingly; whom I will
praise because of a sudden, I was delivered
through grace.

15. But the man whose life, is preserved
through grace, if he goes away to murmur,
at the loss of his goods, he is thankless for
the grace, of Him who had pity on him.

16. Of His own will He destroys, one


174


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


thing instead of another. He destroys
possession, and spares the possessor :
He destroys our plants, instead of our
lives.

17 Let us fear to murmur, lest His own
wrath be roused, and He spare the posses-
sions, and smite the possessor; that we may
learn in the end, His mercy in the begin-
ning.

18. Let us learn against w^hom, it is meet
for us to murmur. Learn thou to murmur,
not against the Chastener, but against thine
own will, that made thee sin and thou wast
punished.

19. Let us put away murmuring, and
turn unto prayer : for it the possessor dies,
his possessions also cease for him ; but
while he survives, he seeks to recover his
losses.

20. Let consolations be multiplied, in
mercy to my dwellers : let the remainder and
residue, console us in the midst of wrath;
and cause Thou us to forget in the residue,
the mourning of our devastation !

21. Heal and increase O my Lord, the
fruits Thy wrath has left ! They seem to
me like sick ones, that have escaped in
pestilence. Make me to forget in these weak
ones, the suffering of the many !

22. While I speak, O my Lord, I call to
mind that this too is the month, when the
blossom pined, and dropped off in blight,
may it return to soundness, to be a conso-
lation !

23. For these escaped the pestilence, that
carried off their brethren. The vines though
voiceless, wept when before them, a multi-
tude was cut down and felled, of trees that
they loved.

24. The company of plants, lo ! the earth
misses ! The roots for the husbandmen,
weep and cause them to weep. Their
beauty had spread and gave shade, and it
was torn away in one hour.

25. The axe came nigh and struck ; and
struck the husbandman; the blow was on the
trees, and it caused the husbandman to
suffer; every axe that smote, he bore the
pain of it.


VL


1. I will run in my affections, to Him who
heals freely. He who healed my sorrows,
the first and the second, He who cured the
third. He will heal the fourth. R., Heal
me. Thou So?i the First Born !

2. My sons, O my Lord, drank and were
drunken, of the tidings which wrath had
mixed ; and they rushed on my adorn-
ments, and spoiled and cast away my orna-
ments ; they rent and spared not, my
garments and my crowns.

3. They uncovered me and I was made
bare. Because I was shamed a little, by
means of that stripping, the first and the
second, because I was shamed a third time,
lo ! they have stripped me a fourth time.

4. For they have seized and taken away
my garments, my ornaments and my gar-
dens. On the sackcloth that girds my altar,
look Thou, O my Lord, and have pity on
me ! Let the sackcloth be to me, O my
Lord, the breastplate of salvation !

5. Lo ! it is not by the hand of the chaste,
that Thou hast chastised me, O my Master !
For lo ! his shame is before him, and behind
him his disgrace ; for as to his marriage,
adultery is better than it.

6. Lo ! his daughter is his wife, and his
sister his consort; and his mother whence
he came forth, he turns again and takes her
to wife ! The heavens are astonished that
thus, he provokes Thee, and lo ! he pros-
pers.

7. And though, O my Lord, my crimes
are many, are my offences so heavy, that
Thou shouldst make over a chaste ivoman,
mother of chaste daughters, to foul Assyria,
mother of defiled daughters P

8. Restrain him that he come- not, and
wag at me his head, and stamp on me his
heel, and rejoice that the voice of his fame,
thus troubles the world; and be uplifted yet
a little!

9. My sons, O my Lord, have seen my
nakedness, yea have uncovered me and
wept. Uncover Thou me before my chil-
dren, who are pained by my pain, and let


NISIBENE HYMNS.


175


not those mock at me, the accursed that
have no pity !

10. My lands had brought forth fruits and
pleasant things ; good things in the vine-
yard, abundance in the fields. But as I
rested secure, of a sudden wrath overtook
7?ie.

11. The husbandmen were plundered, the
spoilers heaped Ihe grain ; what thou had
borrowed and sown these destroyed. With
one's debt his hunger, haply will also remain
unsatisfied, for his bread is snatched from
him.

12. The husbandman, O my Lord, is
plundered, for he lent to the earth ; she has
received the deposit, and given it to a
stranger ; she has borrowed it of the hus-
bandman ; and paid it to the spoiler.

13. Be jealous over me who am Thine,
and to Thee, O my Lord: am I betrothed !
The Apostle who betrothed me to Thee,
told me that Thou art jealous. For as a
wall to chaste wives is the jealousy of their
husbands.

14. Samson stirred up seas, because he
was mightily jealous over his wife, though
she was greatly defiled, and was divided
against him. Keep Thy Church, for no
other, has she beside Thee !

15. Whoso is not jealous, over his spouse
despises her. Jealousy it is that can make
known, the love that is within. Thou art
called jealous, that thou mayest show me
Thy love.

16. The nature of woman is this ; it is
weak and rash : it is jealousy keeps it, under
fear every hour. Thou hast been named
among the jealous, that Thou mightest
make known Thy solicitude.

17. Every man has been master, of some-
thing that was not his own ; every man
has gone forth gathering, something that
he scattered not. The day of confu-
sion, I have prepared for myself by my
crimes.

18. How shall they bear the suffering,
the labourers and tillers? In the face of
the vinedresser, they have cut down the
vines and driven away the flocks of the hus-


bandman ; his sowing they have reaped and
carried off.

19. They had yoked cattle sown and
harrowed, they had ploughed, planted, nur-
tured. They stood afar and wept ; and they
went away bereft of all. The labour was
for the toilers, the increase for the spoilers.

20. The rulers, O my Lord, maintained
not, order in the midst of Thy wrath. If
they had willed it they might have kept
order, but our iniquity suffered it not.
Though wrath had greatly abated, wrath
compelled fhem to spoil.

21. To whom on any side, shall I look for
comfort, for my plantations that are laid low,
and my possessions that are laid waste }
Let the message of the voice of peace, drive
away my sadness from me !

22. Give me not over; lest it be thought
that Thou, hast given me a writing of
divorce, and sent me away and driven me
out ! Let them not call me, O my Lord,
the forsaken and the disgraced !

23. I have not anything, to call to mind
before Thine eyes, for I am wholly despised.
Call Thou to mind for me, O my God, this
only that none other, have I set before me
beside Thee !

24. Who would not weep for me, with
voice and wailing.? for before the days of
full 7710011 I was chaste and crowned ; and
after the days of full moon, I was uncovered
and made bare.

25. My chaste daughters of the chambers,
wander in the fields ; for the wrath that
makes all drunken, has caused my honour-
able women to be despised. Let Thy mercy
which gives peace to all, restore these be-
loved ones to honour !

26. My elder daughters and my younger,
lo ! they cry before Thee ; the damsels with
their voices, they that are aged with their
tears ; my virgins with their fasts, my chaste
ones with their sackcloth !

27. Mine eyes to all the streets, I lift up
and lo ! they are deserted. There are left
of a hundred ten, and a thousand of ten
thousand. Give Thou peace and fill my
streets, with the tumult of my dwellers !


176


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


28. Brine back them that are without,
and make them glad that are within !
Mighty is Thy grace, that Thou extendest
it within and without. Let the wings of
Thy grace gather my chickens together !

29. Let the prayer of my just men, save
my fugitives ! The unbelievers have plun-
dered me, and the believers have sustained
me. In them that believe put Thou to
shame them that believe not !

30. There came together on one day,
two festivals as one : the Feast of Thine
Ascension, and the Feast of Thy Cham-
pions ; the feast that wove Thy Crown, and
the memorial of the crowning of Thy ser-
vants.

31. Have thou mercy because there were
doubled for us, /hese feasts on one day ; and
there were doubled for us instead of them,
€Z'e7i the two feasts in one, suffering from
the voice of/// tidings, and mourning from
desolation !

32. GiA^e peace to my festivals ! for both
my feasts have ceased ; and instead of re-
joicing, oy my remnants in festivals, trem-
blings and desolations meet me in every
place.

$^. Bring home mine that are far off,
make glad mine that are nigh; and in the
midst of our land shall be preached, good
tidings of joy ; and I shall render in return
for peace, praise from every mouth !


VIL

1. Wrath came to rebuke, the greedy
who in the midst of peace, bargained,
defrauded and plundered. In calamity
the greedy have waxed rich : lo ! what was
theirs they have scattered, what was not
theirs they have gathered. i?. , Give peace,
O So7i, to our land I

2. Twenty years my troubles, have been
like branches, O my Saviour ! which are
kept back throughout winter, but when it is
time to shoot forth, my troubles shoot forth :
with our fruit our heart ripens.

3. Nisan is the time of buds : in it the ///


tidings budded. When our delights crowded
on us, then crowded on us our ills. At the
time of winnowing of wheat, came the win-
nowing of cities.

4. For the three brethren in Babylon fled
not from the fire that men kindled, because
they were steadfast : from lust they fled,
because they were perfect.

5. The fire of them that have triumphed,
is able to turn the black kids into white :
the fire of vain men is able to make the
lambs into spotted leopards.

6. How great will be my cries, to be cried
at any alarm ! How great my indignation
to ripen at every ill tidings ! How great
my harvests, to perish every month !

7. For the crimes of my sons He has
chastened me, in their struggling for my de-
liverance. The people who deliver miC,
bring chastisement upon me. Restrain ye
your sins, and lo ! my chastisements are
restrained !

8. In ill tidings they are afflicted ; in time
of wrath they are tortured ; in time of peace
they are distressed ; for when every man
breathes freely, and all are unthankful for
grace, they render /A«?2>^s on behalf of every
man.

9. Their sackcloth is humble for my sake ;
their ashes are sprinkled in my affliction ;
their prayer is for my victory ; their fast for
my deliverance. Lo ! the debt is on my
ascetics, the guilt with my nobles.

10. Great is in every age, the folly of the
wise ; the scribes and elders envied and
killed the teacher, who taught all people
the Law of Moses.

11. Wisdom in this age is a possession
that brings loss : he who has a little folly,
very small is his guilt ; but he who has a
little prudence, his iniquity passes measure.

12. They build with their words, and
overthrow in their deeds ; for the teachers
were many and foolish, but the mouth of
the judge is both of these things, the judge
and the accuser.

[Hymn VIII. is wanting, as also the earlier
part of IX. ]


NISIBENE HYMNS. 1/7


IX.

. . . My afflictions are as Job's. Thy justice delivered him ; let Thy grace have
mercy on me !

2. In these two things is profit ; that neither should the just, be weary in supplica-
tion, nor should the rebellious, multiply transgression.

3. With the sons Thou labourest, to chastise and help ihem ; and that the fathers
should not be grieved, by the sound of the scourge, they left me in peace.

4. Look, O my Lord, on my woods without, how they have been cut down ! be-
hold, O my Lord, my breasts within, that they are loo weak, for me to bear my beloved
ones !

5. With swords they have cut off, my wings that are without ; again the fire kin-
dles, in my bosom within, the incense of burnt offering.

6. The sun-worshippers have killed, my sons in the plain : and they that offer to
Baal, have sacrificed my bulls in the city, my sheep with my babes.

7. In my fields is lamentation; in my halls wailing; in my vineyards terror; in
my streets confusion. Who can suffice forme.'* -

8. The Evil One who dealt treacherously, and disturbed me with his words, stirred
lip trouble within, so that my inward part, is wholly as my outward part.

9. With what face, O my Lord, shall I call on Thee to send, a camp of holy ones, to
guard my bosom, which is full of uncleanness 1

10. With Thy new leaven, Thou hast chastened creation. Make Thou the old lea-
ven, which ensnares and humbles, to be like the new leaven !

11. By the manifest striving, of Thy power let us conquer; lest error should crown,
those that strive for Thee, cleaving io them with blandishment !

12. If we look into our time, it is like our deceit ; ' — for in the years of truthfulness,
we practised divinations, — and secretly used enchantments.

13. If I look into the time, it provokes and into light, — brings secret things, that our
deceit may be shamed, — which wore the raiment of Truth.

14. Verily it is truth, that overcomes all ; '^ — and the sea with its bitterness, cannot
trouble it, — for it is pure in its nature.

15. In wisdom Thou hast made it, O my Lord, that it has laid bare our lust. — That
the foolish should come to nought, and should not be encouraged, — Truth has withheld
the crown.

16. On the tottering walls, whereon Thou hast given me victory, — the unthankful
repay Thee, with sacrifice and libation, which provoke Thee openly.

17. If it were at that time, sacrifices had been offered ; — there had been room even,
for delusion to suppose, — that in these I was delivered.

18. Through the multitude of deliverances. Thou hast rebuked two things : — the de-
lusion of graven images, and the teaching of magicians ; — for in Thee, O my Lord, have
I been delivered !

^ An attempt is here made to represent by means of dashes the metrical versification of the Syriac hymns.
See above, pp. 147 sq.
2 I Esdr.

VOL. XIII. — 12


178 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


X.

1. My children have been slain ; and my daughters that are without me, — their walls
are overthrown, their children scattered, — and their holy places trodden down. R.,
Blessed is TTty chastisement I

2. The fowlers have taken, my doves out of my strongholds, — which quitted their
nests, and fled to the caves ;— in the net have they taken them,

3. After the manner of wax, that melts before the fire, — thus melted and dissolved,
the bodies, of my sons before the heat — and the drought of my strongholds.

4. And instead of streams, of milk that used to flow, — for my sons and my little
ones, milk fails the sucklings, and water the weaned children.

5. The suckling falls, from its mother and gasps, — because it cannot suck, nor can
she give suck : — they breathe out their spirit and die.

6. How is it possible, that Thy grace can refrain — the welling of its stream, when
it is not possible to restrain — the abundance of its flow.?

7. And why has Thy grace, shut up its mercies, — and withheld its streams, from
the people that cry, — for one to moisten their tongue.?

8. And there was a pit, between them and their brethren ; — like the rich man who
cried, and there was none to answer, — to moisten his tongue.

9. And as into the midst of fire, the wretched ones were cast ; — and heat in the
midst of thirst, the fire was blowing, — and kindling upon them.

10. Their carcases were melted, and dissolved by the heat; — they that had thirsted
gave in turn the earth to drink, — of the reek of their bodies.

11. And the fort that with thirst, had killed, its dwellers, — it drank in its turn of the
flux from the corpses, — that were melted by thirst.

12. Who has seen a people — that were burning with thirst, — while there surrounded
them a wall of water and they could not — moisten their tongue I

13. Surely with the judgment of Sodom, were my beloved judged, — and my children
smitten, with the torment of Sodom ; — though that was but/br one day.

14. The torment of fire, though it be/c>r one hour, O my Lord, — in lingering thirst, is
a lingering death, and a subtle punishment.

15. After my sorrows, O my Lord, and my bitter sufferings, — this is the best comfort^
wherewith Thou hast comforted me, — that Thou hast multiplied my afflictions.

16. The medicine that I hoped, it is sorrow decreed; — the binding up that I looked
for, it is bitter calamity, — that it seeks to work for me.

17. And whereas I hoped to escape, from the midst of the storm ; — worse for me is
the storm in it, even in the harbour, — than that in the sea.

18. Whereas I thought in my folly, that I should anchor and escape — from the midst
of the Gulf; my sins have cast me back — again into the midst of it.

19. Look, O my Lord, on my limbs, how the swords are thick in me, — and have left
their niark on my arms ; and the scars of the spears, — are planted in my sides !

20. Tears in mine eyes, and in my ears /// rumours, — wailing in my mouth, and
mourning in my heart ! — Add no more, O my Lord, to me !


NISIBENE HYMNS. 179

XI.

1. Thy chastening- is, as a mother of our infancy : — her rebuke is merciful, in that
Thou hast restrained, — the children from folly, and they have been made wise ! R.,
Glory be /(? thy justice /

2. Let us search out Thy justice ; for who is sufficient — to measure its help ? since
by it the wanton — are oftentimes made chaste. —

3. Oftentimes Thy hand, O my Lord, has made the sick whole, — for it is the healer
in secret of their diseases, — and the fount of their life.

4. Exceeding gently, the finger of Thy justice, — in love and compassion, touches
the wounds — of him that is to be healed.

5. Exceeding mild and merciful, is her cutting to him that is wise : — her sharp
remedy, in its mighty love, — consumes the corrupt /)ar/.

6. Exceeding welcome her wrath, to him that is discerning; — but her remedies are
hated, of the fool who has delight — in the trouble of his limbs.

7. Exceeding eager is she, to bind the cut she has made ; — when she has smitten
she pities, that from between these two — she may breed healing.

8. Exceeding welcome her wrath, and her anger pleasant, — and sweet her bitterness,
sweetening bitter things — that they may be made pleasant.

9. A cause of negligence is Thy indulgence to the careless ; — a cause of profit, is
Thy rod among the slothful — so that they become as traffickers.

10. The cause of our affliction, it is Thy justice; — the cause of our carelessness, it
is Thy graciousness, — for our understanding has turned foolish.

11. Pharaoh hardened himself, because of Thy graciousness ; — for when the plagues
were stayed, his cruelties waxed strong, — and he lied to his promises.

12. Justice requited him, because he lied greatly against her, — even Grace her free-
born sister ; yea she restrained him again — that he should not again provoke.

13. Rebuke, O my Lord, my guide, for it has been false as Egypt ! — my prayers tes-
tify, that I am not as she, — for Thy door have I not forsaken.

14. Let Thy cross, O my Lord, which stands, in my breaches that are open, — repair
again the breaches that are hidden ; for instead of those without, — those within have
cleft me asunder !

15. A sea has broken through, and cast down, the watch tower wherein I had
triumphed. — Iniquity has dared to set up, a temple wherein I am shamed : its drink-
offering chokes me.

16. My prayers on my walls, my persecutors have heard : — the sun and his worship-
pers, are ashamed of their magicians, — for I have triumphed by Thy cross.

17. All creatures cried out, when they saw the struggle, — while Truth with false-
hood, on my battered walls, fought and was crowned conqueror.

18. The force of Truth, chastised falsehood: — in its chastisement it felt Truth ^ and
through its own sins, it earned her victory.

19. I have great alarm ; for since my deliverance, — the honourable and mighty,
who were devoted to my altar, have built in me high places.

20. My seven senses, O my Lord, even though they had been as fountains of tears,
yet my tears were too little — to lament our ruin.

21. The streets that were in sackcloth, and ashes cried out, — disturbed by the play,
akin to that which was, — in the wilderness before the calf.

22. Poison seeks and wears, the beauty of lilies ; — and though their buds may con-
ceal, and hidden disguise it, — it blossoms in their bitter flowers.


i8o EPHRAIM SYRUS.


XII.

1. I will call in my affliction, on the Power that subdues all; — that is able to sub-
due, the Captor in his wrath,— as it overcame Legion. R., Glory to His graced

2. The Evil One has repaid me my brethren, debts that he borrowed not of me : —
the good God likewise has repaid me, mercies that I lent Him not. — Come and marvel
ye at these two things !

3. The good God has divided and given, my misdeeds to His grace, — my offences
to His justice ; His mercy has blotted out my misdeeds — His judgment has requited
my offences.

4. Sin was exceeding wroth, and abode in alarm, — when she saw how grace, put
restraint on freedom, that she might overcome transgressions.

5. Glow Thou, O my Lord, and send down Thy love, break out and pour forth Thy
wrath ! — Thy wrath to destroy, Thy love to rescue — the captives from the captor !

6. The days wherein the Evil One, decreed to cast me forth, — as with a sling into
perdition, in them the good God has bound up and kept — my soul in the bundle of
life.

7. The men of speech who keep not silence, from praising continually, — who
have kept me in the midst of waves, and supported me that I fell not, let them give
praise in my stead, O my Lord !

8. For who has at any time sufficed, in presence of the grace, — of the mercies
which surrounded him, that I should suffice to praise — the mercies that encompass
me }

XHL
Concerning Mar Jacob and his Companions.

1. Three illustrious priests, after the manner of the two great lights, — have carried
on and handed down one to another, the See and the Hand and the Flock. — To us
whose mourning was great for the two, this last is wholly a consolation. R., Glory
to Thee Who didst choose them !

2. He Who created two great lights, chose for Himself //f^5^ three Lights, — and set
them in the three dark seasons of siege that have been. — When that pair of Lights
was quenched, the other shone wholly forth.

3. These three priests were treasures, who held in their faithfulness, — the key of the
Trinity ; three doors they opened for us ; — each one of them with his key, unlocked
and opened his door.

4. In the first was opened the door, for the chastisement that befel us ; — in the
next was opened the door, for the King's power that came down on us, — in the last
was opened the door, for the good tidings that came up for us.

5. \\\ the first was opened the door, for battle between two hosts ; — in the next
were opened doors, for the kings from either wind ; — in the last was opened the door^
for ambassadors from either side.

6. In the first was opened the door, for battle because of misdeeds ; — in the next
was opened the door, — for the kings because of strife ; — in the last was opened the
door, for ambassadors because of mercies.

7. Lo ! in these three successions, as in a mystery and a figure, — wrath is likened
to the sun: it began under the first; — it waxed strong under the next; it sank and
was quenched under the last.


NISIBENE HYMNS. i8i


8. Three figures the Sun also, shows forth in the three quarters : — its rising ts
keen and bright ; its meridian strong and overpowering ; — and like a torch that is
burnt out, its setting is mild and pleasant.

9. Small yet bright ts its rising, when it comes to waken sleepers ; — hot and over-
powering its meridian, when it comes to ripen the fruits ; — tender and pleasant its set-
tine, when it reaches its consummation,

10. Who is this daughter born of vows, enviable above all women, — whose succes-
sions thus proceed, and her ranks are thus manifold, — and her degrees thus ascend, and
her teachers thus excel.

11. Do these similitudes belong, only to the daughter of Abraham, — or to thee too,
O daughter, born of vows, whose adorning is according as thy beauty.? — for as thine
occasion, so was thy help, and as thy help so was its minister.

12. According to the measure of her need, there came to her the supply of her
need. — Her fathers were as was her birth ; her teachers were as was her understandino- •
— her training as was her growth ; her raiment as was her stature.

13. Grace weighed out /o her and gave all these things as in the scales ; — she laid
them in her balance, that therefrom there might be profit ; — she drew them into suc-
cession, that therefrom might be perfection.

14. In the days of him that was first, peace abounded and peace vanished ; — in the
days of him that was next, kings came down and kings went back; — but in the days
of the last, hosts assailed and hosts retreated. —

15. By the first order came in, it came in with him and went out with him ; — by the
next the diadem that gladdened our churches, came nigh and withdrew far away ; —
but by the last there dawned on us, grace that was not thankfully received.

16. Against the wrath that was first, the labour of the first contended ; — against the
heat that was at noon, the shade of the second stood up ; — against peace that was
thankless, the last multiplied warnings.

17. For the first invader of the land was the first and illustrious priest ; — for the sec-
ond invader of the land, was the second and merciful priest : — but the prayers of him
that was last, repaired our breaches secretly.

18. Nisibis is set ^ upon waters, waters secret and open : — living streams are within
her ; a noble river without her. The river without deceived her ; the fountain within
has saved her.

19. The first priest was her vinedresser ; he made her branches to grow even unto
heaven. — Lo ! being dead and buried within her, he has become fruit in the midst of her
bosom : — when therefore the pruners came, the fruit that was in her midst preserved
her.

20. The time of her pruning came ; it entered and took from her her vinedresser, —
that there should not be one to pray for her. She made haste in her subtlety ; — He
laid in her bosom her vinedresser, that she should be delivered through her vine-

o

dresser.

21. Be ye wise like Nisibis, O ye daughters of Nisibis, — for that she laid the body
within her, and it became a wall without her. — Place ye within you the living body,
that it be a wall for your lives !


3 The verb is n'sab, — a play on the name of the city.


i82 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


XIV.

1. Under the three pastors, — there were manifold shepherds ; — the one mother that
was in the city, — had dauijhters in all regions. — Since Wrath has destroyed her dwell-
ings,— Peace shall build up her churches. R. Blessed he He ivho chose out those three !

2. The kindly labour of the first, — bound up the land in her affliction : — the bread and
wine of the next, — healed the city when she was broken : — the sweet speech of the
last, — sweetened our bitterness in affliction.

3. The first tilled the land with his labour, — he rooted out of her the briars and
thorns : — the next fenced her round about, — he made a hedge for her of them that were
saved : — the last opened the garner of his Lord, — and sowed in her the words of her
Lord.

4. The first priest by means of a fast, — closed up the doors of mens mouths : — the
second priest for the captives, — opened the mouths of the purse : — but the last pierced
through the ears, — and fastened in them the ornament of life.

5. Aaron stripped off from the ears, — the earrings and made a calf. — That lifeless
calf in secret, — pierced and slaughtered the camp : — those who had fashioned his horns,
— he ripped them up with his horns.

6. But our priest who was the third, — pierced through the ears of the heart : — and
fastened there the earrings he had fashioned, — of the nails that were fixed in the cross,
—whereon his Lord was crucified, — and gave life to His fellow-men.

7. A son unto death the fire brought forth ; — Death feeds upon all bodies : — the son
of Death who surpassed Death, — upon the souls of men he fed. — The calf forsook his
provender, — for mens minds were the food for him.

8. To the first Tree that which killed, — to it grace brought forth 'a son, — O Cross
offspring of the Tree, — that didst fight against thy sire ! — The Tree was the fount of
death ; — the Cross' was the fount of life.

9. The son that was born to Death, — all mouths were opened to curse him. — He
devoured bodies and souls, — and multiplied the disgrace -of his father. — But the Cross
caused to pass away the rebuke, — of its father that first Tree.

10. The two sons were even as were — the two mothers that bare them. — The calf
which the fire brought forth, — the fire consumed in the midst of the people : — the Cross
the offspring of grace, — divided good gifts to <?// creation.

1 1. O my tongue hold thy peace and be silent of the histories of the Cross that press
to he told ! — for my mind of a sudden has conceived, — and lo ! pangs of travail smite
it: — it has conceived these among the last, — and they strive to become the firstborn.

12. The babes struggled in the womb ; — the elder made haste to come forth : — the
younger desiring the birthright, — laid his hand upon his heel ; — that which he obtained
not by birth, — he obtained by the mess of pottage.

13. After the like sort these later histories, — lo ! they make light of the former ones,
— that themselves may come forth and take the birthright. — Let us bring forth the his-
tory of our fathers, — for lo ! the histories of the Cross — are the firstborn of all crea-
tures.

14. For if that which has no beginning — is the first of all created things, — its his-
tories also are the firstborn, — for they are elder than all creatures. — Let the histories of
Thee, O my Lord, yield place, — that we may tell of Thy ministers !

15. The first in degree of doctrine, — His eloquence was like as ivas his degree ; — the
next who was second in degree, — his interpretation mounted to the height of his
degree ; — the last who was third in degree, — his eloquence was great as he was.


NISIBENE HYMNS. 183


16. The first in his simple words, — gave milk unto his infants ; — the next in his
plain sayings, — gave victual to his children ; — the third in his perfect sayings, — gave
meat to his that were of perfect age.

17. She too the daughter of instruction, — mounted from degree to degree, — along
with her teachers and fathers. — A young child she was with the first ; a simple 77iaid
was she with the next ; — she came to perfect age in the third.

18. The first dealing with her as a child, — loved her and taught her to fear ;— the
next as with a damsel, rebuked her and make her glad; — the third as with one fully in-
structed,— was to her a solace of pleasantness.

19. Even the Most High with the daughter of Jacob,— ^^z'^ blandishment and the
rod to her childhood ; — and m her frowardness and full age, — gave part in the sword
and the Law ; —and according to her discipline and instruction, — He came to her in
mildness and pleasantness.

20. The first that begat the flock, — his bosom bare her infancy ;— the next of glad-
some countenance, — cheered with song and made glad her childhood ; — the last grave
of countenance, — lo ! he guards her chastity in her youth.

21. The first priest who begat her^ — gave milk to her infancy ; — the next priest in-
terpreted,— and gave victual to her childhood; — the third priest nourished her, and
gave meat to her perfect age.

22. The wealthy father who was first, — laid up treasures for her childhood ; — the
next for her maturity — multiplied provision for her journey ; — the third the goodly olive
tree, — multiplied oil in her vessels.

23. When she comes before Him w^ho is rich, — she will show the treasure of the
first ; — when she comes before the Saviour, she will show the saved ones of the
next; — when she goes forth to meet the Bridegroom, — she will show the oil of her
lamps.

24. Before Him who rewards the weary toilworn, — she will offer the labour of the
first ; — before Him who loves cheerful givers, — she will show the almsgiving of the
next ; — before Him who judges doctrines, — she will offer the discourse of the last.

25. And I the sinner who have striven to be — the disciple of these three, — when
they shall see Him of the Third Day, — that he has closed the door of His chamber, —
may these three pray Him for me, that He keep the door open a little while for me !

26. May the sinner press into and enter — rejoicing and fearing to behold ! — INIay
the three masters call in — the one disciple in their grace ! — May he gather up under the
table — the crumbs that are full of life !

XV.

1. If the head had not been right, — haply the members had murmured : — for when
because of a perverse head — the course of the members is put astray, — they are woiU
to lay the blame on the head. R. Blessed he He who chose thee the pride of our
people !

2. If now on one that is all goodly, — on it we lay our hatred ; — how much more if
we were hateful ! — Yea even God though He is kind, — bitter men complain against
Him.

3. Be like the head O ye members ! — Get repose in his purity — and pleasantness in
his tranquillity ; — in his sanctity renown, — and in his wisdom learning !

4. Get discernment in his mildness, — and chastity in his gravity, — and bounty in
his poverty ! — As he is fully and altogether fair, — let us be altogetlicr fair with him !


i84 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


5. See ye how meted and weighed — are his words and his actions ! — Take heed how
even his steps — keep the measure of peace ! — With all his might he holds the bridle of
all himself.

6. He was master over his youth ; — he bound it in the yoke of chastity : — his
members were not enticed by lust ; — for they were kept under the rod : — his will he had
in subjection.

7. For he was ready beforehand for his degree, — as he was ready beforehand in his
conversation, — as he laid his foundations securely. — He became Head in his youth, —
when they made him preacher to the people.

8. Excellent was he among preachers, — learned was he among scholars, — and un-
derstanding was he among the wise : — chaste was he among his brethren, — and grave
among his familiar friends.

9. In two abodes was he — a solitary recluse from his early days ; — for he was holy
within his body, — and solitary within his dwelling; — openly and secretly was he
chaste.

10. But although we my brethren — have put astray those measures, — and we
have lost that savour, — and have become teachers to ourselves, — unto the perfection
that called us.

1 1. Yet that measure of Truth — preserves itself in its vessel : — Trtith chose it because
she saw it chose her; — she has preserved in it her fragrance and savour, — from the
beginning to the end.

12. The Head both chaste and grave, — that was not wrathful nor hard, — nor trans-
gressed even as we did, — set and kept his own measures, — and cast a bridle on his
thoughts.

13. He gave example in his person, — that as he kept the measure of his time, — so
was it meet that we should know our time. — We have become strangers to our time, —
for we have been witless in the time of discernment.

14. In the beginning the blast of the wind — in its might chastens the fruit ; — then
in the meantime the might of the sun : — but when its mightiness is passed, — its end
gathers his sweetness.

15. But we — they that were first chastened us ; — and also they that came next re-
buked us ; — and they that were last added sweetness to us : — then when the time of
tasting us arrives, — great was our savourlessness.

16. For we came to maturity, — that we might wean the children from wantonness,
— and lead them to gravity : — hut our old age stood in need — that we should be re-
buked as youths.

17. Accordingly he in kindness endured, nor did he make use of force, — that he
might increase honour to our old age : — and even if it knew not its degree, — let him be
magnified who knew its time !

18. And if one say that for the multitude, — force and the rod should govern it ; —
even as for the thief fear, — and for the spoiler threatening, — and for fools open shaming.

19. Yet if with the head as first, — the members had hasted to move as second, — they
would have drawn that which was third, — and the whole body from the end — would
have followed after them.

20. They that were second despised those that were first, — and that were third those
that were second : — the degrees were set at naught one by another.— While these within
despised one another, — they were trodden down likewise by those without.


NISIBENE HYMNS. 185


XVI.

1. Herein is a mirror to be blamed, — if its clearness is darkened — because there are
spots on its substance ; — for the foulness that is on it becomes — a covering- before them
that look on it. 7^. Blessed he He Who polished our mirror !

2. For that comeliness is not adorned in it, — and blemishes are not brought to view
in it, — it is altogether a damage to comely things ;— seeing that their comeliness gain
not — adornments as their profit.

3. Blemishes are not rooted out by it, — likewise adornments are not multiplied by
it. — A blemish that remains is as a loss ; — that there is no adornment is a defect : — loss
is met together with defect.

4. If our mirror he darkness, — it is altogether joy to the hateful; — because their
blemishes are not reproved : — but if polished and shining, — it is our freedom that is
adorned.

5. Twofold is the loss in defect, — for the hateful and for the goodly ; — in that the
goodly gain no crown, — and likewise the hateful get no adorning : — the mirror divides
the loss.

6. Never does the mirror drive — by compulsion him that looks therein : — so likewise
grace which followed — upon the righteousness of the Law, — does not possess the com-
pulsion of the Law.

7. Righteousness was unto childhood, — its adorner of compulsion; — for when
mankind was in childhood, — she adorned it by compulsion, — while she robbed it not
of its freedom.

8. Righteousness used blandishment, — and the rod to deal with childhood ; — when
she smote it she roused it ; her rod restrained frowardness, her blandishment softened
the minds.

* H: * * * * ^

9. [If one turn from the Gospel,] wherewith we are adorned to-day, my brethren,
— to another gospel he is a child : — in a time of greatness of understanding, — he is
become without understanding.

10. For in the degree of full age, — he has gone down to childhood ; — and he loves
the law of bondmen, — which when he is confident smites him, — and when he rejoices
buffets him.

11. Whatsoever ornament zs compulsion, — is not true but is borrowed. — This is a
great thing in God's eyes, — that a man should be adorned by himself: — therefore took
He away compulsion.

12. For even as of ^/s prudence — in its own time He employed compulsion, — so
likewise of His prudence, — He took it away at a time — when gentleness was desired in
its stead.

13. For as it is befitting to Youth, — that it should be made to haste under the rod ; —
so is it very hateful that under the rod — Wisdom should be brought to serve, — that
compulsion should be lord over her.

14. Behold therefore how likewise — God has ordered my successions — in the pastors
I have had, — and in the teachers He has given me, — and in the fathers He has reckoned
unto me !

15. For weighed out according to their times — were the helps of their qualities ; —
namely in him in whom it was needful, fear ; and in whom it was profitable, heartening ;
and in wliom it was becoming, meekness.


1 86


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


i6. By measure He made my steps advance : — to my childhood He assigned terror ;
likewise to my youth, fear; — to my age of wisdom and prudence, — He assigned and
gave meekness.

17. In the frowardness of the degree of childhood, — my instructor was a fear to me :
— his rod restrained me from wantonness, — and from mischief the terror of him, — and
from indulgence the fear of him.

18. Another father He gave to my youth : — what there was in me of childishness,
— that was there in him of hardness ; v^^hat there was in me of maturity, — that was in
him as meekness.

19. When I rose from the degrees — of childhood and of youth, — there passed away
the terror that was first, — there passed away the fear that was second ; — He gave me a
kind pastor.

20. Lo ! for my full age his food ; — and for my wisdom his interpretations ; — and
for my peace his meekness ; — and for my repose his kindness ; — and for my chastity
his gravity !

21. Blessed is He who as in a balance — weighed out and gave me fathers: — for
according to my times were my helps ; — and according to my sicknesses my medicines ;
— and according to my comelinesses my adornments !

22. We then are they that have disturbed — the succession and fair order ; — for in a
time of mildness — lo ! we crave for hardness, — that Thou should rebuke us as though
we were children !


XVH.
Concerning Abraham, Bishop of Nisibis.


1. Suffer, O Lord, that even my lowliness,
should cast into Thy treasury its farthing,
even as the merchant of our flock, who
made increase of his talent of Thy doctrine,
and has departed and entered Thy haven.
I will speak of the shepherd, under him
who has become head of the flock ; who
was disciple of the Three, and has become
our fourth master. R. , Blessed he He Who
has made him our comfort !

2. In one love will I cause them to shine,
and as a crown will I weave them, the
splendid blossoms, and the fragrant flowers
of the teacher and of his disciple, who re-
mained after him as Elisha ; for the horn of
his election and he was consecrated and be-
came head, and he was exalted and became
master. R., Blessed be He Who made him
chief !

3. And they in heaven rejoiced for the
flock, that by the pastor whom they fed,
they feed it ; the abode of the shepherds
under him rejoiced, because they saw the
succession of their degrees. He took and


set him as a mind in the midst of the great
body of the church, and his members came
round him to buy of him life, doctrine, new
bread. R. , Blessed be He Who made hi??i

their treasury !

4. He chose him from the multitude of
shepherds, because he had given trial of his
stedfastness ; the time tested him in the
midst of the flock, and length of days proved
him as a crucible ; for that he gave proof in
his person, He made him a wall for many.
Let thy fasting be armour to our country,
thy prayer a shield to our city, let thy censer
purchase reconcilement. R., Blessed be
He Who has hallowed thy sacrifices !

5. The Pastor who has been parted from
his flock, fed them on spiritual pastures, and
by his exalted staff, he defended them from
secret wolves. Fill thou up the room of thy
master, which thirsts for the sound of his
melody ; set up thyself as a pillar, in the
city of the trembling people ; support her
with thy prayers. R., Blessed be He Who
has made thee our pillar !


NISIBENE HYMNS.


187


6. He has committed the Hand to his dis-
ciple, the Throne to one that is worthy of
it, the Key to one that is proved faithful, the
Flock to one that has excelled. To thy
hand belongs the laying-on, to thy offering
propitiation, and to thy tongue consolation.
May peace adorn thy Dominion ; be the
watchmen within and the congregations
without. R., Blessed be He Who has
chosen thee for rejoicings •'

7. May thy doctrine abound, in deeds
more than words ! In saying few words,
till Thou our land with labour, that by much
tillage the scanty seed may become rich,
the increase of the old seed, may come
among us thirtyfold, and thy new seed
sixtyfold. R., Blessed he He Who multi-
plies an hu7idredfold !

8. The wrath that was against thee
ceases, because peace flows over thee
altogether ; the jealousy against thee is
quenched, for thy love hourly flames forth :
thou hast broken the string of envy, that it
should smite none in secret ; slander that
confounds, to it thy ear turns not, for open
truth is pleasing to thee. R., Blessed he
He Who adorned thy niernhers I

9. Thou shalt give counsel in the midst
of thy people, like Jethro among the
Hebrews ; thou shalt altogether go with
him, who for thy profit counsels thee, thou
shalt altogether flee from him, who other-
wise counsels thee : Rehoboam shall be a
sign to thee ; thou shalt choose counsels of
profit, thou shalt refuse counsels of envy.
R., Blessed he He Who has counselled com-
fort !

10. The gift that has been given thee,
from on high it flew and came down : thou
shalt call it by a name of man, thou shalt
not bear it in another power, lest haply to
its place there should come, Satan in his
guile, supposing, that the sons of men have
given it to thee, so that this freeborn gift
should serve in bondage to man. R.,
Blessed he He Who has handed down his

11. Thy master is painted in thy person ;
lo ! his likeness is on thee altogether ;


parted from us one with us is he. In thee
we shall see those three, the excellent ones
who are parted from us. Thou shalt be
unto us a wall as Jacob, and full of tender-
ness as Babu, and a treasury of speech as
Valgesh. R., Blessed he He Who in one

has painted them !

1 2. I, too, the offscouring of the flock, have
not withholden aught that was meet : I have
painted the similitude of these two, in the
colours of these two ; that the sheep may see
their adornment, and the flock their beauties.
And I who have become a lamb endowed
with speech, unto Thee, O God of Abraham,
in the posture of Abram will give Thee
praise. R. , Blessed he He Who has made
me His harp !

XVIII.

1. O thou who art made priest after thy
master, the illustrious after the excellent,
the chaste after the grave, the watchful after
the abstinent, thy master from thee has not
departed ; in the living we see the deceased :
for lo ! in thee is his likeness painted ; and
impressed upon thee are his footprints, and
all of him shines from all of thee. R.,
Blessed he He Who in His stead has given us
thee !

2. The fruit wherein its tree is painted,
bears witness concerning the root. Hitherto
there has not failed us, the savour of his
sweetness. His words thou showest forth
in bodily act, for thou hast fulfilled them in
deed. In thy conversation is painted his
doctrine, in thy conduct his exposition, in
thy fulfilment his interpretation. R. , Blessed
he He Who has ?nade thy lustre to excel !

3. The last pastor who was exalted, and
became head unto the members, the younger
who obtained the birthright, not for price
like Jacob, not in jealousy like Aaron, whose
brethren the Levites envied him, hut hy love
obtained he it like Moses, though he was
older than Aaron. In thee thy brethren re-
joiced as in him. R., Blessed he He Who
chose thee in unanimity !

4. There is no envy or jealousy, among
the members of the body ; for in love they


1 88


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


give ear unto him, with tenderness they are
visited by him. A watch tower is the head
unto the members, for on every side he
looks forth. Exalted is he yet meek in his
graciousness, even to the feet he humbleth
himself, that he may turn away harm from
them. R., Blessed be He Who instilled thy
love into us I

5. A small thing verily had this been, if by
an old man apostasy were overcome. Old
age in its prudence submitted ; youth in its
season conquered ; for a youthful combatant
endured, the hateful conflict waged, by force
that was full of apostacy, which like smoke
waxed and passed : with its beginning was
its end. R., Blessed he He Who blew upon
it that it vanished !

6. The voice of the cornet on a sudden,
amazed and called Thee to battle. Thou
wentest up like a new David, by Thee was
subdued a second Goliath. Thou wast not
untried in combat, for a secret warfare day
by day, Thou art waging against the Evil One.
Exercise in secret is wont to attain the crown
openly. R., Blessed be He Who chose Thee
for our glory I

7 In face of trial Job trained his body
and his mind, and in temptation he was vic-
torious. And Joseph conquered in the cham-
ber ; Ananias and his company in the furnace,
and in the midst of the den Daniel. Satan
did foolishly, when in tempting, he con-
firmed their victory openly. R., Blessed
be He Who has multiplied shame on him !

8. And the husbandman who apostatized
and w^as urgent, to sow thorns with his left
hand ; zealous against him was the righteous
husbandman, stopped and cut off his left
hand. He filled His own right hand and
sowed in the heart the words of life ; and
lo ! our understanding is tilled, by His pro-
phets and His apostles. By Thee may our
souls be tilled ! R., Blessed be He Who
chose Thee for our husbandman /

9. And if so be Thy words are too little,
till Thou our land with deeds, that amid
much tillage, stock and root may be
strengthened. Better is a goodly deed, than
the hearing of ten thousand words. Thy


seed shall yield an hundredfold, and the
after crop sixtyfold, yea that which grows of
itself thirtyfold. i?. , Blessed be He Wlio
multiplied Thy increase /

10. That light should be darkened it is not
meet, that salt should lose its savour it is not
right ; defilement for the head is not seemly,
nor yet foulness for the mirror. Nor if med-
icines have lost their savour, sicknesses also
are not cured; and if so be the torch is
quenched, the stumbling also are many.
Thy light shall chase away our darkness.
B. , Blessed be He Who hath made Thee our
I a 771 p I

11. Appoint for thee scribes and judges,
exactors also and dispensers, overseers also
and officers : to each assign his work, lest
haply by care should be rusted, or by anxi-
ety should be distracted, the mind and the
tongue, wherewith thou offerest supplica-
tion, for the expiation of all the people.
R., Blessed be He Who 7nakes illustrious Thy
minist7y f

12. That he should purge his mind, and
cleanse also his tongue ; that he should pu-
rify his hands, and make his whole body to
shine ; this is too little for the priest and his
title, who offers the Living Body. Let him
cleanse all himself at all hours; for he stands
as mediator, between God and mankind.
R. , Blessed be He Who has clea7ised His mi7i-
isters !

XIX.

1. Thou who answerest to the name of
Abraham, in that Thou art made father of
many ; but because to Thee none is spouse,
as Sarah was to Abraham, — lo ! Thy flock is
Thy spouse ; bring up her sons in Thy truth ;
spiritual children may they be to Thee, and
the sons be sons of promise, that they may
become heirs in Eden. i?. , Blessed be He
Who foreshowed Thee in Abraham !

2. Fair fruit of chastity, in whom the priest-
hood was well pleased, youngest among
Thy brethren as was the son of Jesse ; the
horn overflowed and anointed Thee, the
hand alighted and chose Thee, the Church


NISIBENE HYMNS.


189


desired and loved Thee ; the pure altar is for
Thy ministry, the great throne for Thy
honour, and all as one for Thy crown.
J^., Blessed he He Who multiplied Thy crown-
ing !

3. Lo ! thy flock, O blessed one, arise and
visit it, O diligent one ! Jacob ranged the
flocks in order ; range Thou the sheep that
have speech, and enlighten the virgin-youths
in purity, and the virgin-maids in chastity ;
raise up priests in honour, rulers in meek-
ness, and a people in righteousness. R.,
Blessed he He Who filled Thee with tinderstand-
ing /

4. Guard thou the sheep that are whole,
and visit them that are sick, and bind up
them that are broken, and seek out them
that are lost ; feed them in the pastures of
the Scriptures, and give them drink or the
spring of doctrme : let the truth be a wall
unto thee, let the cross be a staff unto thee,
and truthfulness be peace unto thee. R.,
Blessed he He Who multiplied Thy virtues !

5. Let there be with Thee in Thy flock,
the power that was with David ; for if he
plucked a straying lamb, from the mouth of
the lion, how meet is it for Thee, O exalted
one, to be zealous to snatch from the Evil
One the souls that are precious above all,
for by nothing can they be bought, save by
the blood of Christ ! R., Blessed he He

Who was sold and hought all !

6. Unto Moses Joshua ministered, and for
the reward of his ministry, from him re-
ceived the right hand. Because to an illus-
trious old man thou hast ministered, he too
gave thee the right hand. Moses committed
unto Joshua, a flock of which half were
wolves ; but to thee is delivered a flock,
whereof a fourth yea a third is sanctified.
i?. , Blessed he He who adorned thy flock /

7. Let the love of Moses abide in thee,
for his love was a discerning love, his zeal
a discreet zeal. When Korah and Dathan
sundered themselves, he sundered the earth
from beneath them ; by sundering he made
the sundering to cease. In Eldad and Medad
he made known, that his good will was al-
together this that all the people should pro-


phesy. R. , Blessed he He who in His good

will was reconciled !

8. The poor estate of Elijah, Elisha loved
above wealth ; a poor man gave to a poor
man, a gift that was great above all. Be-
cause thou hast loved the poverty, of thy
master who in secret was rich, the fountain
of his words shall flow from thee, that
thou mayst become a harp for the Spirit,
and mayst sing to thyself inwardly His good
will. R. , Blessed he He who made thee His
treasurer !

9. There is none that envies thy election,
for meek is thy headship ; there is none
angered by the rebuke, for thy word sows
peace ; there is none terrified by thy voice,
for pleasant in thy visitation ; there is none
that groans against thy yoke, for it labors
instead of our neck, and lightens the burden
of our souls. R., Blessed he He who chose
thee for our rest

10. Contend not with the mighty, despair
not of the outcast ; soften and teach the rich,
exhort and win the poor; with the harsh
join the forbearing, and the long suffering
with the wrathful ; catch them that are evil
by them that are good, and them that spoil
by them that give, and the defiled by means
of the sanctified. li.^ Blessed he He who
made thee our hunter !

11. Take to thee ten thousand medi-
caments, and arise and go forth among the
sick ; to the diseased offer medicine, and to
him that is sound a preservative ; not one
medicine only shalt thou ofl'er, for the sick-
ness lest haply it be not meet : offer many
remedies, that the sickness may find healing ;
likewise thou shalt learn experience. R.,
Blessed he He who laboured to heat our
wounds !

12. May the land be according to thy
desire ; may the vineyard be according to
thy husbandry ; may the flock be in the
midst of thy dwelling, and the sheep sound
under thy staff! Mayest thou be a great
Head, and we the jewels of thy crown !
May we be beautiful in thee and thou be
beautiful in us ! for they are goodly each in
the other, people and priest when they are


IQO


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


at one. R., Blessed be He who has sowed
among us unity !

13. Hearken to the Apostle when he saith,
to that virgin whom he had espoused ; I
am jealous over you with jealousy, with a
jealousy verily of God, not of the flesh but
of the spirit. Be jealous therewith thou also
in pureness, that He may know what she is
and whose she is. In thee may she cherish,
and in thee may she love, Jesus the Bride-
groom in truth. R., Blessed is he whose
zeal is holy !

14. As are her masters, so are her man-
ners : for with the teacher that lao^s a lag^-
gard is she, and with him that is noble, ex-
cellent is she. The Church is like unto a
mirror, for according to the face that gazes
into it, thus does it put on the likeness
thereof. For as is the king so also his host,
and as is the priest so also his flock; ac-
cording as these are it is stamped on them.
R. , Blessed be He Who stamped her in His
likeness I

15. Without a testament they departed,
those three illustrious priests ; who in Testa-
ments used to meditate, those two Testa-
ments of God. Great gain have they be-
queathed to us, even this example of poverty.
They who possessed nothing the blessed
ones, made us their possessions ; the Church
was their treasure. R., Blessed is he who
possessed in them his possessions /

16. The priest Jacob the noble, with him
she was ennobled as he was : because he
joined his love to his jealousy, with fear and
love he was clothed. With Babes a lover
of bounty, for money she redeemed the cap-
tives. With Valgesh a scribe of the law,
her heart she opened to the Scriptures.
With thee then may her profit be manifold !
R., Blessed be He Who has magnified her
merchantmen I

XX.

I. O virgin-youth that art become bride-
groom, move to a little jealousy thy mind,
towards her who is the wife of thy youth :
cut off the attachments which she had, in her
girlhood with many others ; rebuke her and


call together her affections, that she may
know what she is and whose she is. In thee
may she desire yea love, Christ the Bride-
groom of truth. R., Blessed be He Who
betrothes her to His Only Begotten I

2. Be jealous O husbandman against the
tares, which have sprung up and entangled
themselves among the wheat. Easy is it
to root up the thicket, rather than the de-
spised : if a slight breeze bears
it, it attacks the sowing and conquers it.
That which three husbandmen have sown,
may it return in threefold measure ! thirty-
fold and sixty and an hundred ! R.,
Blessed be He Who makes rich thine increase f

3. A new shepherd for him it is right,
that he should oversee the flock in new wise,
and should know what is the number of it,
and should see wiiat are its needs. A flock
it is that was purchased with the blood, of
that chief of the shepherds. Call thou and
cause to pass each sheep by its name, for it
is a flock whereof the name is written, and
its reckoning in the Book of life. R.,
Blessed be He Who will require the number
thereof I

4. Lo the spouse of thy Lord is with thee 1
keep her from all harm, and from men that
deal corruptly, and call the congregations
by their own names. The name of her
spouse is set on her ; let her not go a- whor-
ing for another name, for she was not bap-
tized in the name of man ; with Names
wherein she was baptized let her make con-
fession, of the Father and the Son and the
Holy Spirit. R., Blessed be He by Whose
Name she is called!

5. The Apostle her betrother was jealous
over her, that she should not be corrupted
by names, yet not by names that were false,
but not even by names that were true ; not
by Cephas yea not by his name. They who
were true betrothers, set the Name of her
betrothed upon her ; the false betrothers like
whoremongers, set their own names on the
flock. R., Glory be to Thy Name, our
Creator !

6. The stamp on living creatures, O my
brethren, no man destroys openly; and a


NISIBENE HYMNS.


191


name that is signed to a letter, no man adds
to or alters: whoso effaces the stamp is a
thief ; and whoso alters the name is a falsi-
fier. The name of Christ has been altered;
names of falsehood lol have been set, upon
the congregations that have been corrupted.
R. , Blessed he He Who has called His flock by
His Name !

7. Look at the Prophets and Apostles,
how like they are each to the other! By the
Prophets the Name of God, was set on the
flock of God; and by the Apostles the Name
of Christ, was set on the Church of Christ.
The false hetr others also are like one another,
for by their names are called, the congrega-
tions who commit whoredom with them.
R., Blessed he He in Whose Name we were
sanctified I

XXI.

1. John who was a torch, laid bare and
rebuked the wanton ones: they made haste
and quenched the torch, that they might
let loose the desire of their lust. Be thou a
lamp in brightness, and miake the works of
darkness cease, that whensoever thy doc-
trine shines, no man may dare at its rising,
to give ear to the lusts of darkness. R.,
Blessed he He Who made thee our lamp I

2. A great blessing was hidden in it, even
in the reproof of Elijah. Elisha ministered
unto him and sought, a twofold reward of
his ministration. Twofold glory it gave to
him, for in double measure was he clad
with his virtues. Thou who hast loved the
reproof of Valgesh thy master rich in gifts,
mayest thou inherit the treasure of his
wisdom ! 7?., Blessed he He Who makes thy
Doctri7ie rich 1

3. May greediness be overcome by thy
fasting even as by the fasting of Daniel !
May lust be confounded before thy body,
like as it was confounded before Joseph !
May lust of money be overcome by thee!
like as it was overcome before Simeon ,
Mayest thou bind on earth even as he, and
loose on high after his likeness; for thy
faith is even as his! 7?., Blessed is He
Who committed to thee His ministry I


4. Thy chastity be as Elisha's, and thy
celibacy Elijah's, the covenant with thine
eyes as Job's, thy tender mercies as David's;
without envy as Jonathan, thy firmness as
Jeremiah's, thy gentleness the Apostles' !
Thine be the ancient things of the prophets,
thine the new" things of the Apostles,
R., Blessed he He Who filled thee with their
treasures !

5. Be a crown to the priesthood, and in
thee be the ministry made to shine ! Be
a brother to the elders, likewise an overseer
to the deacons; be a master to youth, a
staff and a hand to old age ; be a wall to the
consecrated virgins. In thy conversation
may the covenant prevail, and the Church
in thy- comeliness be adorned. R. , Blessed
he He Who chose thee to he priest I

6. In thy poverty be brought to nought,
the hateful custom of the house of Gehazi ; m
thy sanctity be abolished, the abominable
custom of the house of Eli; in thy unity be
done away, the treacherous greeting of the
lips of Iscariot the deceiver ! Pour forth all
our thought, and form it anew from the
beginning ! R., Blessed he He Who in thy
crucihle refines us I

7. In thy conversation let Mammon be
put to shame, who has been lord over our
freedom ! Let the disease be done away
from us, which is customary with us and
pleasant to us ; abolish the causes that have
maintained, customs that are full of harm !
Evil things have possessed us through cus-
tom: let good things possess us through cus-
tom 1 Be thou, O Lord, the cause of help to
us. R., Blessed he He Who chose Thee in
order to our life!

8. Let evil customs be cut off: let not the
Church possess wealth ; that she be sufficed
let her possess souls, and if thus she be
sufficed let it be in marvellous measure !
And let not her deceased be buried in the
cutting off of hope heathenishly, with vest-
ments and wailing and lamentation ; for the
living is clothed in raiment, but the deceased
his all is a coffin. R., Blessed he He Who
to our dust turns us again I

9. A cause of evil is the lust, also the


192


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


greediness of the house of Eli, and the
thievishness of the house of Gehazi, and the
reviling of Nabal. These hateful well-
springs close thou up, lest there be a great
outpouring, and there come from it defile-
ment, and even thou be reached by its over-
flow. The Lord restrain their outpourings !
R. , Blessed he He Who dried up their over-
flowings !

10. For the old man commit speech to
him ; for the young enjoin silence on him ;
for the stranger who comes in unto thee,
learns of thee from thy discipline, namely
who speaks first, and who second and third:
and if every man keeps his mouth, and
every man knows his degree, they will call
thee happy. R., Our Lord perform thy
desire !

11. Let the voice of thy truth be single
and thy assumed voices without number ;
the image of truthfulness on thy heart, and
on thy face all aspects, sadness, gladness,
and feebleness. To him that errs show that
thou art wrathful, to him that is chaste show
that thou art glad. Be single towards the
Godhead, and to mankind be manifold.
R., Blessed he He Who with all 77ien is all
things !

12. If thou hearest an evil report, from
truthful men that deceive not, pour forth
tears that thou mayst quench the fire that
burns in others ; let them that are wise pray
with thee, and appoint thou a fast for them
that have knowledge, and let thy dwelling
be in mourning, for him who is lost in sin,
that he may turn back in repentance. R. ,
Blessed he He Who found the sheep that was
lost I

13. To every man give not thy ear, lest
liars overwhelm thee ; to every man lend
not thy foot, lest vile ones misguide thee ; to
every man give not thy soul, lest the inso-
lent trample thee. Keep thy hand from the
false man, lest he gather thorns into thy
hand. Be far off and near at hand. 7?.,
Blessed he He Who is near though far !

14. Lo the fame of the new king, resounds
and comes into the world ! To the spoiled
he is a comfort, and to the spoilers a terror.


On the covetous vomiting has come, that
they may render up all that they have swal-
lowed. Let them be put to fear from before
thee also, that between a priest and a right-
eous king, the former customs may be
done away. R., Blessed he He Who was

angry, ajid turns and has mercy I

15. There is that finds opportunity and
ventures, and there is that forces and com-
pels his will. One thinks that judgment is
reserved, and another that it is not to be at all.
There is that steals and quenches his thirst,
and there is that steals and thirsts to steal.
The rich steal and the poor ; but the hungry
steal by measure, and the full steal without
measure. R., Blessed he He Who has
searched out all wills !

16. But now has He given opportunity,
and every man has shown his will, of what
kind it is and to what it is like, and what he
has chosen for himself rather than what.
He has removed temptation from every
man, lest even he who is not hateful should
deny him. He has given us opportunity
that we may understand, that better think
this power is chastisement which profits
much. i?. , Blessed is He Who for our
profit rehukes us I

17. For He wills not by compulsion, to
cast his yoke on our neck ; He gave us op-
portunity and we waxed proud, that so
when we rebelled and were punished, we
might love His light yoke, might choose
His pleasant staff. Our rest is very weari-
some to us, for in His compulsion is rest-
fulness, and in His yoke is lightening. R. ,
Blessed he He Whose lahour is pleasantness !

18. The whole world like a body, had
fallen into a heavy sickness ; for in the fever
of heathenism, it burned and pined and fell.
The right hand of tender mercy touched it,
and dealt with its soul in pity ; and cut off
speedily its heathenism, for that was the
cause of its sickness, and it was purged and
sweated and restored. R., Glory he to the
Hand that has healed it I

19. The land shall have peace in thy
days, for it has seen thee that thou art full
of peace. \\\ thee shall the churches be


NISIBENE HYMNS.


193


built, and shall be clothed with their orna-
ments, and their books shall be opened in
them, and their tables shall be spread, and
their ministers shall be adorned ; from them
shall go up thanksgiving, as first fruits to the
Lord of peace. R., Blessed is He Who
revives our Churches /

20. Let thy prayer go up to heaven, with
it let reconciliation go up ! May the Lord
of Heaven rain down His blessings upon
our [ ], and His consolations upon our
afflictions, and His gathering upon our dis-
persion : may He waken His jealousy with
His love ; may His righteousness avenge
our disgrace, may His grace blot out our
iniquity ! R,, Blessed is He Who blesses
His flock !

21. Theyfrs/ priest and first king, even as
if depicted each in the other, were balanced
as if in scales. So too Valgesh and so too
the son of that king, for they were gentle
and calm. May these latter be like each to
other ; the priests be shining lights, the king
be glowing lights, likewise illustrious judges !
R. , Blessed he He Who has enlightened our
souls !

22. From the king's office laws, and from
the priest's office propitiations. That both
should be mild is hateful ; that both should
be strong is grievous. Let one be strong
and one be tender ; in prudence and in dis-
cretion, let fear with mercy be mingled.
Let our priesthood be tender, likewise our
king strong. R., Blessed he He Who has
mingled our helps !

23. Let the priests pray for the kings,
that they may be a wall to mankind ! From
beside the kings be victory ; and from be-
side the priests faith ! May victory save
our bodies, and faith our souls ! May kings
put an end to war ; priests put an end
to strife ! May disputing and quarrelling
cease! R., Blessed he the Son of Him

Who givespeace to all f Praise to Thee for
Thy gift !

[XXH.-XXV. (wanting); XXVL (only a
fragment remains); XXVH.-XXXIV. (relate
to Edessa and Carrhae),]
VOL. XIII. — 13


XXXV.

Concerning our Lord, and Concerning
Death and Satan.

1. The Voice made proclamation : and
they gathered and came ; the hosts of the
Evil One, together with his ministers. The
army of the tares was gathered altogether,
for they saw that Jesus had triumphed, to
the grief of all them on the left hand, for
there was none of them but had been tor-
mented. They began one by one to relate
all whatsoever they had endured. Sin and
Hell were terrified : Death trembled and
the dead rebelled ; and Satan because sin-
ners rebelled against him. R., To Thee he
glory hecause the Evil One saw Thee and was
troubled !

2. Sin cried aloud ; she gave counsel to
her sons, to the demons and the devils, and
unto them she said, Legion the head of
your ranks is not, the sea has swallowed
him and his company ; and likewise ye my
sons if ye despise, this Jesus will destroy
you. Ye who in a snare took Solomon, it
is therefore a reproach to you, that ye
should be overcome by his disciples, takers
of fish and ignorant men ; for lo I they have
taken the draught of men, which had been
taken by us.

3. This is great, above all evils (saith the
Evil One, concerning our Saviour) ; for this
suffices Him not that He has spoiled us,
but likewise on us He has begun retribu-
tion for Jonah son of Amittai. On Legion
therefore He was avenging him when He
seized and cast him into the sea. Jonah
emerged, after three days and came up ;
but Legion yea not after a long season, for
the depth of the sea closed upon him at the
command.

4. I tempted Him, after his past, with
pleasant bread, but He desired it not. To
my grief I strove to learn a psalm, that by
His psalm I might take Him as a prey : I
paused and learned it a second time, but
He made my second trial to be vain. I
brought Him up to a mountain and showed
Him all possessions ; I gave them to Him


194


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


and He was not moved. Better was it for
me in the days of Adam, who gave me no
great trouble in teaching him.

5. The Evil One ceased, from his activity
and said, A cause of idleness to me, is this
Jesus ; for lo ! the publicans and harlots
take refuge in Him. What work shall I
seek for 'myself ? 1 who was master to all
men, to whom shall I be a disciple.? Sin
again said, It must be, that I forsake, there-
fore, and change from that which I am ; for
this Son of Mary who is come, as a new
creation, has created mankind.

6. Gluttonous Death, lamented and said,
I have learned fasting, which I used not to
know ; lo ! Jesus gathers multitudes, but as
to me, in His feast a fast is proclaimed for
me. One man has closed my mouth, mine
who have closed the mouths of many.
Hell said I will restrain my greed ; hunger,
therefore, is mine : this Man triumphs as at
the marriage, when He changed the water
into wme, so He changes the vesture of the
dead into life.

7. And moreover, God made a flood, and
washed the earth, and purged her crimes ;
fire and brimstone again He sent on her,
that He might make white her stains. By
fire He gave me the Sodomites, and by
flood the Giants. He closed the mouth of
the hosts of Sennacherib, and opened the
mouth of Hell. These things and such as
these, I loved. But now, in place of deadly
visitations of justice, He has wrought in
His Son, the quickening of the dead by


grace.


8. Prophets and righteous men, said the
Evil One, unto his companions, have been
seen by me ; and though their strength was
exceeding mighty, there was in them a
savour of that which is mine ; for the stuff
whereof the sons of man are made, is near
akin to our heaven. This man has clothed
Himself with the body of Adam, and is
troubling us, for our leaven has no power
on Him. He is man, therefore, and God ;
for His manhood in His Godhead is inter-
mingled.

9. Adam was seen by me, that fountain


from whence flowed all races of men ; his
children has been sought out by me, and
proved one by one. Yet have I not seen
from the beginning a man, of whom one
part was of God, and the other half, man.
Moses, who shone in his splendour, I
tempted again, and in his tongue 1 made
him to err ; but this man, yea, not in His
mind, for pure exceedingly is the fountain
of His thoughts.

10. The lust of the body, is in all bodies ;
for even while they sleep, it wakes in them.
Him, who in his waking hours keeps him-
self pure, by means of a dream, I disturb.
The dregs of the body are stirred in him, by
a shaking movement in secret inwardly^
The sleeping and the waking besides, I trou-
ble alike. This is He Who alone keeps Him-
self pure, Whom not even in a dream can I
disturb. Who even in His sleep is pure and
holy.

11. But separate was even His childhood,
from that of the children who have been
seen by me ; for I have not seen in Him
any .part of that which is of me. I was
afraid of His childhood ; therefore, I stirred
up Herod, that among the infants He might
be slain. Because of this also that He es-
caped, I was greatly afraid, for our mystery
how did He find out ! He received the offer-
ings of the Wise Men ; He scorned us and
departed and escaped from our sword.

12. Children have been seen by me, sons
of righteous men ; yea, also youths, sons of
chaste women ; and I have moved them
from the womb, one by one, and I have
seen in them our leaven. For they were
wrathful men and revilers, yea, also furious
and gluttonous ; fruits were they that by in-
struction were to be ripened and sweetened.
But this man from His y^rs/ planting, was a
good fruit that possessed sv/eetness, where-
with sinners were made sweet.

13. Even while He was an infant, He was-
a teacher of the sons of men, by the splen-
dour that was upon Him. Even the priest
as he carried Him was amazed at Him. In
the prudence of old men was He clad.
Joseph stood aloof from Him : His mother


NISIBENE HYMNS.


195


gloried in His presence. He was a help in
His childhood, to every one that saw Him ;
He was a profit to them that knew Him,
from the day when He entered into the
world, He was a helper of mankind by His
excellencies.

14. From whence has it sprung- up before
me, this fruit of Mary, the grape whereof
the wine is not according to nature ? For
lo ! I stand between doubts. To turn away
and leave Him, I am afraid, lest by His
teaching, they should be sweetened, they,
who have acquired by bitterness. But again
to tread on Him and crush Him, is a terror
to me, lest haply He turn and become,
new wine unto sinners, and when they are
drunken therewith, lo ! they forget their
idols.

15. Lo ! I am afraid of both things, as well
His death, as also His life. Then unto the
Evil One His ministers made answer and
counselled Him. Though both these things
be grievous, somewhat lighter to us is the
trouble, that we should choose His death
rather than his life. Let Death tell us
whether any one from among the righteous,
has ever from the first been aroused again.
The sons of the Giants and the renowned
ones, there is none that has issued forth from
her, even Hell, the Devourer.

16. The blowing of the wind, a man may
feel after ; but the Son of Mary, who shall
search him out ? for when He wept, by His
tears He robbed me ; and again when I bid
Him cast Himself, from the holy Temple, I
thought, that it was through fear He cast
Himself not : yet when they threw Him
from the hill-top. He flew through the air.
On the well again when He was weary He
sat. His variableness I understand not, for
on the dry land alike and on the water He
walks.

17. I have seen Him that He hungered,
as a Son of man ; yet this was done away
by the bread which He multiplied. From
the beginning I proved Him and I came
/o Him; He questioned me as though He
knew m,e not ; but this, too, was done away,
when He showed that He knew our secrets.


Again He chose Iscariot, as though He
knew him not ; then He turned and showed
that He knew him, though he was binding
and loosing. I was mistaken in Him, for
He was baptized and emerged and over-
whelmed me.

18. But one token there is which I have
seen in Him that heartens me exceedingly
above all. For while He was praying I saw
Him and was glad, because He changed
colour and was afraid : His sweat was as
drops of blood, because He felt that His
day was come. This is pleasant to me, ex-
ceedingly above all, if it be not that deceiv-
ing He has deeived me therein. But if
beguiling He has beguiled me, this is both
for me and for you alike, my ministers.

19. Then shouted the host of devils and
said. Hateful is the sign that we see in thee,
for never from the beginning has it thus
happened to thee. In prompt counsels thou
wast excellent : the Son of Mary captures
our cities, while thou art prolonging thy dis-
course. Arise, go forth, let us fight with
Him, for this were to us a reproach, that we
being many should be overcome by one.
And if thou art in pain or fear, give us coun-
sel for the battle and stay thou behi?id.

20. This Jesus out of His own words it is,
that I shall teach Him, and war with Him ;
for He said that he, even Satan, is divided,
himself against himself, and that he cannot
stand. Though He desires to fight with us,
He has given us arms which are against
Himself, gage and divide for me His dis-
ciples, for if ye divide them, with these you
will conquer them, even with Eve and the
serpent, the weak powers, whereby I con-
quered the first Adam.

21. Death unto the Evil One, made an-
swer and said to him, Wherefore tarriest
thou not according to thy wont .? for lo ! it
is those that are despised and least, that
thou ensnarest after thy custom : Jesus Who
is great above all, wherewith hast thou
sought to ensnare Him .? The experience
of His weapons moves thee to fear, which
He hurled against thee when he was tempted
of thee. Thou and I with thy followers,


196


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


the host of us is too little for the battle with
Him, the Son of Mary.

22. I counsel, then, if this our strife per-
mits us to do anything : go thou into that
disciple, let thyself loose, that head may
speak with heads ; and let loose all thy host,
let it go and stir up the Pharisees. And be-
ware, lest thou speak contentiously as thou
art wont. If thou be a god, descend from
hence, with fondness kiss them and betray
Him ; and, lo ! we will bring on Him the
envy and the sword of the Levites.

XXXVI.

1. Our Lord subdued His might and con-
strained it, that His living death might give
life to Adam. His hands He gave to the
piercing of the nails, instead of the hand that
plucked the fruit : He was smitten on the
cheek in the judgment hall, instead of the
mouth that ate it in Eden. And because his
foot bore Adam ihe?ice, His feet were pierced.
Our Lord was stripped, that He might make
us modest : with the gall and vinegar He
made sweet the bitterness of the serpent,
which he had poured forth into mankind.
R. Blessed is He Who gave 7ne the victory
and quickened the dead to His glory I

2. (Death.) — If Thou be God show Thy
power; and if Thou be man, feel our
power. And if it be Adam that Thou seek-
est, get Thee hence ! because of his trans-
gressions he is shut up here ; Cherubim and
Seraphim await not, in his stead to pay his
debt. There is none among them mortal, so
as to give his life in his stead. Who can
open the mouth of hell, and plunge and bring
him up from her, who has swallowed him
and keeps a hold on him, and that forever !

3. I am He who has conquered all the
wise men ; and lo ! in the corners they are
heaped for me in hell. Come, enter, son of
Joseph, and see terrible things ; the limbs of
the giants, the mighty corpse of Samson,
and the skeleton of the stubborn Goliath ;
Og, moreover, the son of the giants, who
made for himself a bed of iron and lay there-
on, from whence I hurled him and cast him


down ; that cedar I laid low to the gate of
hell.

4. I by myself alone have conquered
multitudes, and one may single-handed seek
to conquer me. Prophets and priests and
men of renown have I carried off; I have
conquered kings in their armies, and mighty
men in their hunts, and righteous men in
their excellencies. Streams of corpses are
hurled by me into hell, and though they pour
into her she is athirst. Though one be near
or though he be far off, the end brings him to
the gate of hell.

5. Silver I despised at the hand of the rich,
and their offerings corrupted me not. The
lords of slaves never once persuaded me, to
take a slave instead of his lord, and a poor
man instead of a rich man, or an old man
instead of a child. As for wise that are able
to charm wild beasts, their charms enter not
into my ears. Hater of persuasion all men
call me ; and I the thing that is command-
ed me that I do.

6. Who is this, or whose son is He, or
what His lineage who has conquered me }
The book of families is by me ; lo ! I went
in and read and studied the names from
Adam till now, and not one of the dead do
I forget. Family by family, lo ! they are
written, upon my limbs. Because of Thee,
O Jesus, I went in and made a reckoning,
that I might show Thee that there is none
that escapeth my hands.

7. Yet were there two men (that I lie not)
whose names have escaped me in Hell. For
Enoch and Elijah came not to me. In all
the world I have sought them ; yea thither
where Jonah descended, I descended and
sought and they were not. And though I
suppose that into Paradise, they have en-
tered and escaped, a mighty Cherub guards
it. The ladder Jacob saw, what if haply by
it they have entered into Heaven !

8. Who is there that has measured the
sand of the sea, and has spilt only two
grains .f* This harvest wherein every day
there labour, diseases as harvesters, I alone
carry the handfuls and gather them up ;
other gatherers in making haste, drop


NISIBENE HYMNS.


197


handfuls. Vintagers overlook clusters ;
hut two grapes have escaped me, in that
great vintage which I alone have plucked.

9. I am He that has taken (said Death),
on sea and on dry land, all prey in chase.
Eagles of the air come to me ; yea and drag-
ons of the deep : creeping things and fowl
and cattle ; old men, youths and children.
These will convince Thee, O Son of Mary,
that this my power rules over all. Thy
Cross how shall it conquer me, who by a
tree lo ! 1 have prevailed and conquered
from old time .?

10. But I was desirous to speak yet farther,
for I am not wanting in words ; yea words
are not to be sought by me, for lo ! deeds
call on me close at hand. Not as you do I
make promise, to the simple of secret things,
that forsooth there is to be a resurrection at
some time or other. If then Thou art very
powerful, give a present pledge, that Thy
distant promise also may be believed.

11. Death ended his speech of derision :
and the voice of our Lord sounded into Hell,
and He cried aloud and burst the graves one
by one. Tremblings took hold on Death ;
Hell that never of old had been lighted up,
into it there flashed splendours, from the
Watchers who entered in and brought out
the dead to meet Him, who was dead and
gives life to all. The dead came forth, and
the living were ashamed, they who thought
that they had conquered the Life Giver of
all.

12. But who gave me the day of Moses,
(said Death) who made a feast for me .? For
that lamb that was slain in Egypt gave me,
from every house the first fruit : heaps and
heaps of the first born, at the gate of Hell he
piled me them. But this Lamb of the festi-
val, has robbed Hell; of the dead He has
taken title and carried them off from me.
That lamb filled the graves for me ; but this
has emptied the graves that were full.

13. The death of Jesus to me is a torment ;
I prefer for myself His life rather than His
death. This is the Dead whose death (lo !)
is hateful to me ; in the death of all men
else I rejoice, but His Death, even His, I


detest ; that He may come back to life I
hope. While He was living He brought to
life and restored three that were dead ; but
now by His death, at the gate of Hell they
have trampled on me, the dead who have
come to life, whom I was going to shut
in.

14. I will haste and will close the gates of
Hell, before this Dead, Whose death has
spoiled me. Whoso hears will wonder at
my humiliation, that by a dead man who is
without I am overcome. All the dead seek
to go forth, but this one presses to enter in.
A medicine of life has entered into Hell, and
has restored life to its dead. Who then has
brought in and hidden from me, that living
fire wherein have reposed, the cold and dark
recesses of Hell.?

15. Death has seen the Watchers in Hell ;
the immortal instead of the mortal; and he
said Confusion has entered our abode, for in
these two things is torment to me : That the
dead have come forth out of Hell, and the
Watchers that die not have entered therein.
Lo ! one at the pillow in this tomb, has
entered and sat down by it, and a second
his companion at His feet. I will entreat of
Him and will persuade Him, with His pledge
to ascend and go to His Kingdom.

16. Be not wroth against me, gracious
Jesus, for the words that my pride has spo-
ken before Thee ! Who is there that when
seeing Thy Cross, shall have doubted that
Thou art man } Who is there that shall have
seen Thy Power, and shall not believe that
Thou art also God.? Lo ! thus by these two
things I have learnt to confess that Thou
art man and likewise art God ! For as much
as the dead in Hell repent not, go up among
the living, O Lord, and preach repentance.

1 7. O Jesus King, receive my supplication,
and with my supplication take to Thyself a
pledg^, even Adam the great pledge accept
for Thyself, him in whom are buried all the
dead ; even as when I received him. in him
were hidden nil the living. The first pledge
I have given Thee, the body of Adam ; go
Thou up therefore and reign over all : nnd
when I shall hear Thy trumpet, I with mine


iqS


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


own hand will lead forth the dead at Thy
Coming-.

1 8. Our King living has gone forth and
gone up, out of Hell, as Conqueror. Woe
He has doubled to them that are of the left
hand; to m/ spirits and demons He is sor-
row, to Satan and to Death He is pain, to
Sin and Hell mourning. Joy to them that
are of the right hand, has come to-day. On
this great day, therefore, great glory let us
give to Him, who died and is alive that,
unto all He may, give life and resurrection !

XXXVH.

1. Death was weeping for her, even for
Sheol, when he saw her treasury that it was
emptied. And he said, Who, then, has
plundered thy riches .? Gehazi stole and
was discovered ; I am stealing every day,
hut theft has not been laid to my charge. I
am sent to Kings, in their sicknesses, their
guards are set around them, guards are also
at their gate. The soul of kings I snatch
and I go forth. R., Blessed is He Who
has broken the sting of Death by His Cross !

2. All women grieve that are barren ;
Sheol rejoices because of her barrenness ;
she is desolate if so be that she brings forth.
The all-compelling Power constrained it,
even the bosom that was barren and cold,
and it rendered back though wont to deny
its debts. Rebekah, when the two babes
afflicted her, asked for death. How great
then the pain of Sheol, when there smote
her strange pangs ; the dead were roused
and brake forth and came out from her
bowels.

3. Is this then perchance that saying,
which was heard by me from Isaiah.? (but I
despised it) when he arose and said, "Who
hath heard such a thing as this .? that the
earth should travail in one day, and bring
forth a nation in one hour." Is it this that
has come to pass } or else, is it reserved for
us hereafter? And if it be this it is a vain
shadow that I thought I am a king ; I knew
;iot it was but a deposit I was keeping,

4. Two utterances that were different,


have I heard from him, even this Isaiah.
For he said that a virgin should conceive
and bring forth ; and he said again that the
earth should bring forth. But lo ! the Virgin
has brought Him forth, and Sheol the bar-
ren has brought Him forth ; two wombs
that contrary to nature, have been changed
by Him ; the Virgin and Sheol both of them.
The Virgin in her bringing forth He made
glad; but Sheol He grieved and made sad
in His Resurrection.

5. I saw in the valley that Ezekiel, who
quickened the dead when he was questioned ;
and I saw the bones that were in heaps and
they moved. There was a tumult of bones
in Sheol, bone seeking for his fellow, and
joint for her mate. There was there none
that questioned, or that was questioned,
whether those bones lived. Unquestioned,
the voice of Jesus, the Master of all creat-
ures quickened them.

6. Sheol was made sorrowful when she
saw them, even the sorrowful dead made to
rejoice. She wept for Lazarus when he
went forth, "Go in peace thou dead that
livest, bewailed by two houses of mourn-
ing." Within and without were lamenta-
tions for him ; for his sisters wept for him
when he came into the grave unto me, and
I wept for him as he went forth. In his
death there was weeping among the living ;
likewise in Sheol is great mourning at his
resurrection.

7. Now it is that I have tasted the taste
of his sorrow, even of him who weeps over
his beloved. The dead that are thus be-
loved of Sheol, how dear were they to their
fathers ! The limbs which I severed and
carried away, lo ! they are shorn away and
carried off from me. If I thus suffer for the
departure of him, the youth who was re-
stored to life, blessed is He Who had com-
passion on the widow ; in her only son He
gave peace to her dwelling that had been
made desolate.

8. Lo ! this suffering which I cause men to
suffer in their beloved ones, in the end on
me it gathers itself altogether. For when
the dead shall have left Sheol, for every


NISIBENE HYMNS.


199


I


man there will be resurrection, and for me
alone torment. And who is he then that shall
bear for me all these things, that I shall see
Sheol left alone, because this voice which
has rent the graves, makes her desolate and
sends forth the dead that were in her midst?

9. If a man reads in the Prophets, he
hears there of righteous w^ars. But if a man
meditate in the story of Jesus, he learns of
grace and tender mercy. And if a man
think of Jesus, that He is a strange God it
is a reproach against me. No other strange
key into the gate of Sheol could ever be
fitted. One is the key of the Creator, that
which has opened it, ye^t, is to open it at
His Coming.

10. Who is he that is able to join the
bones, save that Power which created them ?
What is it that shall reunite the shreds of
the body, save the hand of the Maker?
What is it that shall restore the forms, save
the finger of the Creator? He, who created
and turned and destroyed, is He that is able
also to renew and raise up. Another God
is unable to enter in and restore creatures
not his own.

11. But w^ere he another Power, I should
be very joyful that He is coming to me.
Into the bosom of Sheol He would descend
and learn that One alone is God, Mortals
that have erred and preached that there are
Gods many, lo ! they are bound for me in
Sheol, and their Gods have never grieved
because of them. One God do I know, and
His Prophets and His Apostles do I ac-
knowledge.

XXXVIII.

I. My throne was set for me in Sheol :
and one arose that was dead, and hurled
me from it. Every man feared me alone,
and I feared no man. Terror and trouble
7t'ere among the living, rest and peace among
the dead. In a man that was slain lo !
there has entered into Sheol He that takes
her captive. I used to take all men captive :
the Son of Captivity Whom I took captive
has taken me captive. He Whom I took


captive has led her away and is gone to
Paradise. J^., Blessed is He Who has

quickened the dead 0/ Sheol by His Cross !

2. All men complain much against me ;
and I against one only have complained.
Who is there among men so just as I ? Has
corruption touched my integrity ? I held all
men in afi'ection, and w^hoso hates me
knows it ; I know not all my days what a
bribe is. The person of a king have I not
accepted. By me is preached equality, for
bondman and his lord in Sheol I make
equal.

3. Before God it is that I minister, with
Whom is no acceptance of persons. What
other is there that endures as I do, I that am
curs-ed when I do good ? Perversely are
requited to me the benefits I have rendered.
Though my deeds are goodly, my name is
not goodly. Yet my mind rests in its integ-
rity : in God it is that I comfort myself ;
for though He is good He is denied every
day and endures it.

4. The old I remove from all sufferings,
likewise the young from all sins. Secret
contention I quell in Sheol ; in our land
there is no iniquity : it is Sheol and Heaven
alone, that are removed from all sins ; this
earth that lies between, in her iniquity
dwells. He therefore that is prudent will
either go up into Heaven, or, if that he too
hard, will go down to Sheol which is easy.

5. To one man because of one that is
dead, every man hastes to comfort him.
But for me though many of my dead have
come to life, there is none that comes in
and comforts me. Satan came in, against
Whom, had been proclaimed seven woes
even against him ; though mightily the Son
of Mary had trodden on him, yet uplifted is
his spirit ; for he is the serpent that strives
though bruised. Better is it for me to fall
and worship, before this Jesus Who has
conquered me by His Cross.

6. Wlien He enters at the gate of Sheol,
in place of John who preached before His
coming, then will I cry *' Lo ! He that quick-
ens the dead is come ; Thy servant am I from
henceforth, Jesu ! Because of The Body I


200


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


reviled Thee, for it covered Thy Godhead.
Be not angry, O Son of the King, against Thy
treasury ; at Thy command I have opened
and closed. Though my wings be very swift
it is at thy nod I haste to every quarter.

7. All that have been raised were not
first born ; for our Lord is the First-born of
Sheol. How can a7iy thai is dead go before
Him, that power whereby he was raised.?
There are last that are first, and younger
that have become first-born. For though
Manasseh was first-born, how could it be
that Ephraim should take the birthright .?
And if the second born was set before him,
how much rather shall the Lord and Creator
prevent all in His Resurrection !

8. Lo ! John as a herald declares that he
is later, though he was elder-born ; for he
said, ^' Behold a man cometh after me, and
yet He was before me." For how could he
be before Him, that Power in Whom he
preached.? For everything that comes to
pass because of another thing, is after that
other even though it seern to be before. For
the cause which called it into being, is elder
than it and before // in all things.

9. The cause of Adam was elder than all
creatures, which were made for him, for to
him even to Adam He had respect continu-
ally, the Creator even while he was creating.
Thus though Adam as yet was not, he was
elder than all creatures. How much more
then, my Lord, must this Thy manhood
be elder, which in Thy Godhead is, from
eternity with Him that begat Thee ! To
Thee be praise and through Thee to Thy
Father from us all !

10. To Thee be praise for Thou art the
first, in Thy Godhead and in Thy manhood !
For even though Elijah was first to go up,
he was not able to prevent Him, for whose
sake he was taken up. For his type de-
pended on Thy verity : and even though
the types apparently are before Thy fulfil-
ment, it is before them secretly. Creatures
were before Adam ; he was before them
because for his sake they were made.

11. O my Lord, work for me this resurrec-
tion, not of Thy compulsion but of Thy love.


For Thy compulsion gives life to sinners
also : Iscariot would rather again choose
for himself the death of Sheol, than the life
of Gehenna. Work for me then the resur-
rection that is of Thy mercy ; and even
though Thy justice permits not, let there be
occasion for Thy grace. This only let it
remember for me, that in it I have sought
refuge.

XXXIX.

1. There have come to me ransomers from
among the saints, but none has plundered
me like the Son of Mary. For lo I Elijah
brought a dead •man to life ; and even
though he himself escaped from my hands,
vet had I consolation after him, for the dead
man whom he quickened, I carried off from
him. By Elisha son of Shaphat, I was
beaten as with rods, for he brought two dead
men to life. By one staff I in turn bore
away both the prophet and the dead men
whom he had raised. R., Blessed is He
Who cleft the tombs of Sheol by His voice /

2. I feared him even Gehazi when I saw,
him lay the staff upon the youth. The
thief took the staff away and returned ;
Elisha came and bowed himself; laid him-
self low as the child and raised himself up,
and walked hither and thither. 1 marvelled
at the new mysteries which I saw there,
which restored but one youth to life. It was
well with me then when those were but
mysteries, and not now when the dead have
rebelled and conquered me.

3. Moses when I saw the mighty splendour
upon his face, I feared him : yet not accord-
ing to what I feared befel it me. Nisan in
Sheol he caused to spring for me ; for a pas-
ture, a pasture of corpses, of six hundred
thousand fell. — This lowly and despised one
whom I coritemned, has healed the sick and
the diseased : to others He has multiplied
bread, but our bread even ours from our
mouths He snatches.

4. A mighty feast there was in Sheol,
when I swallowed up Korah and his com-
pany. A great delight Satan made for me,
when he made strife amonir the Levites. A


NISIBENE HYMNS.


201


fount of milk and honey, made he flow for
me in a dry place, when the congregation
of transgressors went down to Sheol. — Lo !
the righteous have lived and come forth :
Moses sent down the living thither, but
Jesus has revived and brought up the dead.

5. It was well with me then, in the day
of the zealous, those in whose swords I had
delight. Phinehas the zealous pierced and
gave me, on the head of his spear/br my de-
light, Zimri and Cozbi both together ; on the
head of his lance he presented thetn to me.
To whom then were there ever two fatted
oxen, offered on the head of a spear? — But
instead of Cozbi, daughter of princes, the
daughter of Jairus has Jesus rescued from
my hands.

6. The censer of Aaron caused me to fear,
for he stood between the dead and the living
and conquered me. The Cross causes me
to fear more exceedingly, which has rent
open the graves of Sheol. The Crucified
Whom on it I slew, now by Him am I slain.
Not very great is his reproach, who is over-
come by a warrior in arms. Worse to me
is my reproach than my torment, in that by
a crucified man my strength has been over-
come.

7. The lanceof Phinehas again has caused
me to fear, for by the slaughter he wrought
with it he hindered the pestilence. The
lance guarded the tree of life, it made me
glad and made me sad ; it hindered Adam
from life, and it hindered death from the
people. But the lance that pierced Jesus,
by it I have suffered ; He is pierced and I
groan. There came out from Him water
and blood ; Adam washed and lived and
returned to Paradise.

8. The Sadducees were as a mouth for me,
and disputed with Him after my mind, that
there is no rising of the dead at all. Jesus
answered them in a saying, which I alone
understood ; Pie spake aloud the hateful
word and saddened me, ''lam the God of
him even of Abraham, and God is not the
God of the dead. '' It was well with me then
these were hut words, and He had not yet
showed me the life of the dead indeed.


9. Jesus son of Nun, slew thirty kings,
and filled the graves and pits for me ; he
laid waste Jericho and filled Sheol. But
this Jesus who is come, has wasted the
graves oi their dead, and has filled the cities
of the upper world. Wherefore thus when
lo ! they are like in their names, are they
unlike in their doings .? That gave me the
body of Achor, but this snatched from me
the body of Lazarus.

10. Moses trod down that Egyptian, with
his meekness he mingled justice. Whence
has this new law sprung for me, " If one smite
thee on thy cheek, turn to him thy other
cheek, and see that thou hate him not.'''
Instead of the strong man of zeal who trod
dowii and slew, a new man of mercy has
risen for us. Samuel hewed Agag in pieces,
but Jesus healed the paralytic.

11. Tender mercy which had as it were
waxed less, lo ! in this time has waxed
great. And moreover it was then detested,
lest through it one should transgress the
commandment ; for without mercy Saul and
Ahab, were slain because they desired, to
have mercy on the evil ones, and they were
not slain who were deserving of punish-
ment. In my time Jesus has changed this,
by giving life to all men and having compas-
sion on His slayers.

12. I remember Samson that lion's whelp,
who brake and gave me the pillars of Phi-
listia ; also that mighty man of valor Abner
son of Ner, took for me that fleet wild roe,
Asahel son of Zeruiah, and smote him and
cast him on the ground. Benaiah in the
holy temple slew Jacob, justly as it is writ-
ten.— Because justice has restrained her
sword, henceforth penitents shall rejoice in
grace.

13. David measured the Edomites, byline
and line and destroyed them. How merci-
ful then art Thou, O Son of David ! David s
justice was twofold, when he put to death
two lines, and saved one full line alive. —
Lo ! the Son of David teaches us, " Forgive
thy brother even unto seventy times seven."
There justice was measured ; but here clem-
ency is without measure.


202


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


14. Of zeal and strength David was pos-
sessed ; the lion and the bear he slew to-
gether. He left that mighty lion and hasted,
to meet the strong giant. With a stone he
quenched his light, and his soul left him
and he perished. But Jesus cried to the
young man that was dead "Young man ! "
Even the dead to Him are sleepers. That
young man He brought to life and rescued
from me. The despised swine He drowned
for me in the sea.

15. The Levites slew because of the calf,
their fathers and their brethren. Jephthah
by his own hands was ready to slay his
daughter. The King of Moab on the wall,
was sacrificing his first-born son : In pres-
ence of his sword I rejoice. — By Jesus the
sword was blunted ; yea the fever was re-
buked, the sister of Sheol : the mother-in-law
of Simeon was healed, but the fame of her
healing smote Sheol with pain.

16. This Jesus though he be the Son of
the Just One, all that He preaches is grace.
But to me this His grace is torment. Envy
is the cause of pleasure to us, for Envy at
the beginning mixed for me the first shed-
ding of blood. Why is it guilty in the sight
of the Son of Mary Who is come command-
ing, "Thou shalt not be angry against thy
brother ? " He has taken away the sword
from between brethren ; while in the sword
of Cain I had pleasure from the beginning.

17. An honeycomb in the midst of the
skeleton, Samson found — was it then a mys-
tery ? This Jesus has multiplied for us mys-
teries. Amid billows of mysteries have I
fallen, which show me in parable the life of
the dead, in all mysteries and in all types.
"Out of the eater came forth meat " was
Samson's parable. But to me it has befallen
contrariwise ; for the eater has come forth
to me out of the meat, for out of Adam lo !
has come the Son of Adam Who has de-
stroyed me.

18. Just men likewise have robbed me
manifold, when by them was preached the
rising of the dead : but they mingled with
my sorrows great consolation. By the
prayer of Asa and Hezekiah, I was fed upon


the dead, yea I feasted upon corpses. Elijah
slew the prophets of Baal and gave them to
me, who on the bread of Jezebel had waxed
fat. The righteous has constrained me to
devour, but Jesus has compelled me to dis-
gorge all that I had eaten.

19. I was afraid because of the sprinkled
blood, which Moses sprinkled on every door;
for though the blood of the slain, it was that
which saved the living. Blood from of old I
feared not, save that blood that was on the
doors, and this moreover that was on the
Tree. The blood of the slain is a delight,
and is as sweet perfume : but the blood
of Jesus is to me a terror ; for whenever I
come and smell His blood, the savour-of life
that lurks therein terrifies me.

20. Priests and pontiffs, anointed men
and kings, who foreshow types of the
rising of the dead, have never triumphed
through their crosses. Crowns and diadems
were set on them ; and when I engaged in
struggles with them, I was smitten some-
times and sometimes also I smote. But this
carpenter's son with his crown of thorns,
has humbled and cast down my pride, in
His shame and His dying : Sheol has seen
Him, yea, and fled from before Him.

21. When the sea saw Moses and fled,
it feared because of his rod, and likewise
because of his glory. His splendour and his
rod and his power, the rock also saw which
was cleft. But Sheol when her graves were
rent, what saw she in Him even in Jesus }
— Instead of splendour He put on the pale-
ness of the dead and made her tremble.
And if His paleness when slain slew her,
how shall she be able to endure, when He
comes to raise the dead, in His Glory !

XL.

I. The Evil One perceived his great humil-
iation, and boasted himself in the presence
of his servants : he spoke great words to
persuade them and said : ^ ' The knowledge
which I possess, little of it is by nature ;
and much of it, yea all of it, is by learning.
I to myself have been master, and have exer-


NISIBENE HYMNS.


203


cised my understanding. Without a teacher
I have learnt all ; I have armed myself with
every weapon, and have won by it the
crown which I desired among mankind."
R., Blessed is He that has come and undo7te
the snares of sin ■'

2. Among- the Pharisees I clothed myself
in hatred, that I might contend with Him,
even the Son of Mary. Wrath like a bow
rained shafts ; boldness railed upon Him ;
fury rebelled against Him ; ingratitude
slandered Him; envy and jealousy in their
wrath, strove with Him ; and blasphemy
took up stones. The Healer came in and
stood among the sick, and I stirred up the
diseased in contention against Him.

3. Because He fell not under reproach, it
was in questions that I took refuge. Many
times did I stir up occasions, but I saw that
my falsehood was rebuked, and my impu-
dence was made known, and my vain
babbling was despised. To the windings
of contention I betook myself. Everywhere
that I disputed with Him, all my labor was
as chaff, and the word of truth scattered it
on every side.

4. I saw that there is a warrior and a
mighty lord, in cunning within man : [and
the snake that is without makes it fear.]
His lusts within him is coiled continually ;
his jealousy hisses like a serpent. Deadly
desires he begets, and of a fever he is in
dread. Command as a drug, is able to
quell derision, which smites unto destruc-
tion. It is love that avails to break the
sting secret and bitter of the tongue.

5. Who is more foolish than men, who
rather than for himself cares for his dwell-
ing ! The garments that are in his chest he
examines daily, and a worm is lurking in
his members. The rents that are in his
clothes he mends, but a rent is made in his
soul. His house is lighted up but his heart
is dark. He shuts up his senses but opens
his windows. He closes his door and
guards his money ; his mouth is open and
the treasure of his thought is stolen.

6. The fool makes more of his beasts than
of himself, for he cares for his possessions


rather than for his soul. Good seed he
sows in his ground ; in his heart he sows
tares. His understanding is thrown open
and cast down ; but at the fences of his
vineyard he labours. He chooses and plants
vine-plants ; while his mind is a vine of the
vines of Sodom. He keeps off the wild ass
from his sowing ; but the wild boar of the
wood devours his thoughts.

7. I am a furnace to the sons of men, and
in me are tried their counsels. Therefore is
it lawful to me to weave deceit. I teach
the Chaldean art : by reason of the true
things that befall, the false things are be-
lieved. In the midst of Egypt I closed
meiis eyes ; I showed insects, men thought
they were though they were not. By clos-
ing mens eyes I teach the signs of the
Zodiac, though they are not in the heavens.

8. By reason of my swiftness I fly and
see, and I show beforehand to the sooth-
sayer; they who err concerning me count
me a prophet. But sometimes I make bold ;
and I ask that for an hour, secret things be
revealed to me, that true men may be
proved by me even as Job, likewise de-
ceivers as Saul. For the one I revealed his
sorcery ; and for the other I purged his truth
and he was praised.

XLI.

1. The Evil One said, '' I fear Him, even
Jesus, lest He destroy my arts. For lo ! I
am thousands of years old, and never have
I had repose. I have seen nothing estab-
lished, that I have turned from and left.
There has come One making the unchaste
pure : there is sorrow since He has de-
stroyed all that I had built. Many have
been my labours and my teachings, that I
might cover all creation with all evils.
R., Blessed is He Who came and laid hare the
wiles of the Crafty One!

2. I matched my speed with the swift,
and I outstripped them : I waged war; the
tumult of multitudes was armour to me. In
the tumult of the people I rejoiced, because
it gave me ready room, for grievous is the


204


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


onslaught of multitudes. By the strength
of multitudes I raised a great mountain, a
tower I stretched unto heaven. If they
waged war with the Height, how much
more shall they conquer Him w^hose war-
fare is on earth .?

3. As time serves and as help offers, I
wage war, but cautiously. The people used
to hear that God is one ; they made for
themselves a multitude of gods. And when
they saw the Son of God, they made haste
to the One God, that as though confessing
God they might deny Him, and as though
in zeal might flee from Him ; so that they in
all times perverse shall be found to be with-
out God.

4. Lo ! I am ancient of many years, and
no infant have I ever rejected. The burden
of children have I ofttimes borne, so that
from the beginning I might make them ac-
quire habits that are not goodly, that their
faults might grow up with them. But there
are foolish fathers, who do not crush the
seed that I have sown in their sons ; and
there are some who like good husbandmen,
root up faults from the mind of their chil-
dren.

5. As with a chain I have bound men
with sloth, and they sat in idleness. I have
drawn away their senses from all good
things ; their eyes from reading, their
mouths from singing praise, their under-
standing from doctrine. For hurtful and
vain fables how eager are they ; for empty
talk how ready ! If the word of life fell
among them, they either thrust it from them,
or rose and went forth from its presence.

6. How many Satans are there among
men ! and me even me alone every man
curses. For lo ! the anger of men — it is a
devil that grinds him every day. Demons
are like wayfarers, who depart if they are
compelled : but against anger though all
righteous men adjure, it is not rooted out
from its place. Instead of pernicious envy,
every one hates a weak and wretched de-
mon.

7. The enchanter is put to shame with the
wizard, who every day tames serpents.


The viper that is within him is out of his
power; for the lust that is within him he
tames not. Secret sin like an asp, when it
breathes on him he is scorched. Even
w^hen he takes the viper through his cunning,
delusion smites him secretly. He lulls the
snake by his incantations : he wakens
against himself mighty wrath by his incan-
tations.

8. I set my stings and I sat and waited r
who is long-enduring as /with all.? Beside
the patient-spirited I sat, and step by step I
bewitched him, so that he came unto de-
spair. Him who was ashamed of his trans-
gressions, habits subdued him : little by
little I mastered him, till he became under
the yoke, till he came in to it and was used
to it and did not even wish to go forth.

9. I perceived and saw that the long-
enduring is he that can subdue all. At the
time when I conquered Adam, he was but
one. I left him till he had begotten chil-
dreii, and I sought for myself another task,
for idleness is not to my taste. I counted
the sands of the sea, that thereby I might
make my spirit patient, and might prove
my memory whether it would suffice, for
the sons of men when they w^ere multiplied.
Before they were multiplied, I proved them
in many things.

10. The servants of the Evil One disputed
with him, and they refuted his words with
their rejoinder. ' ' But lo ! Elisha brought the
dead to life, and conquered death in the up-
per chamber, and brought to life the widow's
son. Lo ! now is he in bondage in Sheol. '*
But because the reasoning of the Evil One
was very powerful, with their own words he
refuted their words. "How has Elisha been
overcome.'* Lo ! in Sheol he brought the
dead to life by his bones."

11. *'If Elisha, who was 0/* small power,
was great in might in the midst of Sheol,
and if so be he brought one dead to life
therein, how many dead then will be raised
therein, by the death of Jesus the mighty !
Hence even from this consider ye, how much
greater therefore is Jesus, than we, my com-
rades. For lo ! by His craftiness He de-


NISIBENE HYMNS.


205


ceived you, and ye sufficed not to determine,
His greatness when ye compared Him to the
prophets.

12. " Your consolations are (ysmall pow-
er," said the Evil One to them of his com-
pany. ''For He Who brought Lazarus to
life though dead, how can Death suffice
against Him ? And if Death conquers Him,
it is that He wills to be subdued unto him ;
and if so be He wills to be subdued, fear ye
greatly, for He dies not in vain. He has
wrought in us great terror, lest when dying
He may enter in to raise Adam to life."

13. Death looked forth from within his
den, and marvelled when he saw our Lord
crucified, and he said "O raiser of the dead
to life where ar/ thou ! Thou shalt be to
me/br meat, instead of the sweet Lazarus,
whose savour lo ! it is still in my mouth.
Jairus' daughter shall come and see this Thy
cross. The widow's son gazes on Thee. A
tree caught Adam for me : blessed be the
Cross which has caught for me the Son of
David ! "

14. Death opened his mouth and said,
' ' Hast Thou not heard, O Son of Mary, how
Moses was great and excellent above all ?
became a God and wrought fhe works of
God.'' slew the first-born and saved the first-
born ? turned aside the pestilence from the
living ? To the mount I went up with
Moses, and He Whose glory be blessed gave
him to me from hand to hand. For how-
ever great the son of Adam becomes, dust
he is and to his dust returns, because he is
of the ground."

15. Satan came with his servants, that he
might see our Lord cast into Sheol, and
might rejoice with Death his Counsellor;
and he saw Him sorrowful and mourning,
because of the dead who at the voice of the
Firstborn, lived and came forth thence even
from Sheol. The Evil One arose to console
Death his kinsman. " Thou hast not de-
stroyed as much as thou wast able. Even
as Jesus is in thy midst, to thy hand shall
come they that have lived and that live.

16. "Open for us to see Him, yea and
mock Him : let us answer and say, ' Where


is Thy powder.? For lo ! three days have
passed for Him, and let us say to Him, O
Thou of three days, Who didst raise Lazarus,
when he had lain four days, raise Thine own
self.'" Death opened the gates of Sheol,
and there shone from it the splendour of the
face of our Lord ; and like the men of Sodom
they were smitten ; they groped and sought
the gate of Sheol, which they had lost.

XLH.

1. The Evil One wailed ''Where now, is
there a place for me to flee to from the right-
eous ? I stirred up Death to slay the Apos-
tles, that I might be safe from their blows.
By their deaths now more exceedingly am I
cruelly beaten. The Apostle whom I slew
in India is before me in Edessa : he is here
wholly and also there. I went there, there
was he : here and there I have found him
and been grieved." R. , Blessed is the
might that dwells in the hallowed hones I

2. The bones that merchantmen carried,
or was it then that they carried him ? For lo !
they made gain each of the other. But for
mfe what did they profit me .? yea they prof-
ited each by each, while to me from both
of them there was damage. O that one
would show me that bag of Iscariot, for by
it I acquired strength ! The bag of Thomas
has slain me, for the secret strength that
dwells in it tortures me.

3. Moses the chosen carried the bones, in
faith as for gain. And if he a great prophet
believed, that there is benefit in bones, the
merchant did well to believe, and did well
to call himself merchant. That merchant
made gain, and waxed great and reigned.
His storehouse has made me very poor : his
storehouse has been opened in Edessa, and
has enriched the great city with benefit.

4. At this storehouse of treasure I was
amazed, for small was its treasure at first ;
and though no man took from it, poor was
the spring of its wealth. But when multi-
tudes have come round it, and plundered it
and carried off its riches, according as it is
plundered, so much the more does its wealth


2o6


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


increase. For a pent-up spring, if one seeks
it out, when deeply pierced it flows forth
mightily and abounds.

5. It is evident that Elisha was a fountain
in a thirsting people : and because they that
thirsted sought him not out, his outflow was
not great. But when Naaman sought him
out, he abounded and poured forth healing.
The fountain into the midst of a fountain, he
took him and plunged him ; for in the river
he cleansed the leper. Jesus the Sea of
benefits, into Siloam sent the blind man
whose eyes were opened.

6. Gehazi, with the staff that brought to
life the dead, was unable to raise the child.
And how could the famous prophet have
been brought up by the sorceress ? We were
they that mocked Saul, for instead of one
demon whom he questioned, two demons
came up and mocked him. From the bones
of Elisha learn also oi /he bo?tes (?/" Samuel ;
for though Elisha' s bones brought to life the
dead, the sorcerers could not bring up the
dead, the living and sacred bones.

7. And though I asked this petition, He who
gives all gave it not to me. For though the
demons were troubled, by the bones of sotne
priest, or magician or wizard, of Chaldean
or soothsayer, yet I was aware that this was
but mockery. In two ways I cause men to
err : either I make the Apostles to lie, or
I make my Apostles like the Apostles.

8. The party of the demons lo ! it is spoil-
ed ; the party of the devils endures stripes :
though there be none that lifts the rod
openly, the demons cry out with pain ;
though there be none that fetters and binds,
the spirits hang bound. This silent judg-
ment, which is calm and still, and works
not even by questioning, the one power that
is all sufficing, lo ! it dwells in the bones of
this second Elisha.

9. He gave judgment unto His Twelve,
that they might judge the twelve Tribes.
And if so be that they are to judge the sons
of the great Abraham, this is then no great
matter, that they shall judge demons now.
And unless they make the crucifiers fulfil the
judgment that is to be, by our judgment shall


they be proved. For worse than we did they
cry out, in presence of the Apostles the
judges of the tribes.

10. For a wolf was Saul the Apostle, and
on the blood of the sheep I reared him ; and
he waxed strong and became a singular
wolf. But nigh to Damascus suddenly, the
wolf was changed into a sheep. He said
that the Apostles, are to judge Angels; for
by the Angels he signified the priest as it is
written. If so be then they are thus power-
ful, woe to the demons from the strokes of
their bones !

LII.

Concerning Satan and Death.

I. I heard Death and Satan, as they dis-
puted, which was the more powerful, among
men. R., To Thee he glory, Son of the

Shepherd of All, Who deliver edst His flock
from the secret wolves that devoured it, the
Evil One and Death ! — 2. Death showed
his power, that he conquers all ; Satan
showed his guile, that he makes all to sin. —
3. Death, To thee, O Evil One, none
hearkens save he that wills : to me he that
wills and he that wills not, even to me they
come. — 4. Satan, Thine, O Death, is but
the force of tyranny : mine are snares and
nets of subtlety. — 5. D., Hear, O Evil One,
that who so is subtle breaks off thy yoke :
but none is there that is able to escape my
yoke. — 6. S., Thou, Death, on him that is
sick provest thy might : but I over them
that are whole, am exceeding powerful. —
7. D., The Evil One prevails not over all
those that revile him : but for me he that has
cursed me and he that curses me, come into
my hands. — 8. S., Thou, Death, from God,
hast gotten thy might : I alone by none am
I helped, when I lead 77ie7i to sin. — 9. D.,
Thou, O Evil One, like a weakling : while
like a king I exercise my dominion. — 10.
S., Thou art a fool, O Death, not to know
how great am I : who suffice to capture free
will, the sovereign power. — 11. D., Thou,
O Evil One, like a thief, lo ! thou goest
round : I like a lion break in pieces and


NISIBENE HYMNS.


■07


fear not. — 12. -5"., To thee, O Death, none
does service or worship : to me kings do
service of sacrifice as to God. — 13. D., On
Death there are man)^ that call, as on a kind
Power : on thee, O Evil One, none has
called or calls. — 14. S., Markest thou not
this, O Death, how many there are : who in
sundry fashions call on me and make obla-
tion } — 15. D., Hated is thy name, O Satan,
nor canst thou clear it : thy name every one
curses, hide thy reproach. — 16. S., Thine
ear, O Death, has waxed dull, that thou
hearest not : how against thee all men
groan, conceal thyself. — 17. D., My face is
shown to the world, for I am guileless : not
like thee who without guile canst not abide.
— 18. S., Thou hast not in aught surpassed
me for it is true : that thou art hateful as I to
the sons of men. — 19. D.^ Of me all men are
afraid as of a lord : but as for thee they hate
thee as the Evil One. — 20. S., For thee, O
Death, they hate thy name, and also thy
work : my name they hate but my delights
they greatly love. — 21. D., To bitterness of
teeth is turned, this thy sweetness : peni-
tence of soul cleaves ever unto thy lusts. —
22. ^S*. , Sheol is hated because in her is no
repentance : a pit that swallows and closes
on all movements. — 23. D., Sheol is a
gulf wherein whoso falls shall rise again :
sin is hated because it cuts off the hope of
man. — 24. S., Though I mislike penitents,
I give place for repe^itance : thou cuttest
off hope from the sinner who dies in his sin.
— 25. D., It was of thee that at first his
hope was cut off : for he whom thou hast
not caused to sin dies happily. — 26. Blessed
is He who raised against each other those
cursed servants : that we might see them as
they have seen us and mocked at us. — 27.
This that we have seen of them is a pledge,
my brethren : of what we shall see of them
hereafter when we rise again.

LHI.

I. Come, let us hear how they contend
for victory : the guilty ones who never have
conquered, nor will conquer. — 2. Death said


unto the Evil One, In the end the victory is
mine : for Death is master of the close, as
a conqueror. — 3. Saian, This were to be
Death indeed, wert thou able : to bring to
death a living man, by means of lusts. — 4.
Z^., Lo ! I who behold the dead, both good
and bad : the righteous who despise thee,
O Evil One, me they despise not. — 5. S.,
This dying of the body, is sleep for a time :
think not, O Death, that thou art Death, who
art as a shadow. — 6. D., Thee, O Evil One,
the just have conquered, yea will conquer :
but these that have conquered thee, lo ! I
conquer. — 7. S., Even this that thou bring-
est to death the just, is not of thyself: be-
cause of Adam whom I conquered, they
drink this cup. — 8. D., Lo ! Sheol is full of
the men of Sodom, and the Assyrians : and
the giants who were in the flood, who is like
me.? — 9. -S". , These, O Death, all of them,
by me were slain : I am he that caused
them to sin, so that they perished. — 10. D.,
Joseph who conquered thee I conquered, O
Satan : in the chamber he conquered thee
but I conquered, and cast him into the tomb.
— II. S., Moses who conquered thee, O
Death, by sprinkling of blood : he conquered
thee in Egypt, but at the rock, who con-
quered him.? — 12. D., Elijah who feared
thee not, O Satan : fled before Jezebel's face,
because he feared me. — 13. S., Aaron who
withstood thee, O Death, with smoke of in-
cense : to him I gave earrings of gold : and
he fashioned a calf. — 14. D., Thou wentest
down to contend with Job, and he conquered
thee and came up : but I, after he had con-
quered thee, then conquered him. — 15. S.,
David who by his sackcloth stayed that
pestilence : him on the house-top I con-
quered, who had conquered Goliath. — 16.
D., Jehu who destroyed the house of Baal,
the temple of the Evil One : was unable to
destroy Sheol, the stronghold of my realm.
17. S., Solomon who snatched from thy
mouth, a child by his judgment : him in his
old age I made a builder of idol-altars. — 18.
D., Samuel who in respect 0/ gold scorned
thee, O Satan : him I conquered, the con-
queror, who conquered bribes. — 19. S.y


208


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


Samson who in respect o/ih^ lion's whelp,
scorned thee, O Death :. through Delilah,
frail vessel, I yoked him to the mill. — 20. Z?, ,
Josiah from his childhood despised thee,
Evil One : but me not even in his old ag-e,
could he withstand. — 21. S., Hezekiah with-
stood thee, Death, when he overcame the
bound of life : I misled him and he neglected
the miracle, and showed his treasures. — 22.
D., John who conquered thee, Evil One,
and absolved and baptized : I extinguished
that torch, which had disclosed thee. — 23.
S., Simon overcame thee, when he brought
to life that blessed woman : in a woman he
overcame thee and by a woman I overcame
him and made him deny. — 24. ^S*. , Apostles
and prophets with one voice, curse thee, O
Death: "Where is the victory of Death,
and the sting of Sheol.?" — 25. Thy Lord in
Sheol thou hast shut up, O cursed servant :
God hates thee and also man, hold then thy
peace. — 26. S. , It was the will of Him who
gives life to all, that shut him in Sheol : it
was thou that called Him to this, when
thou madest Adam sin. — 2"]. O comrade of
Nabal who in the wilderness reproached
his lord : abhorred be thy mouth which said
to Him, " Fall down and worship me ! "


LIV.

I. Hear, O Freedom, the dispute of two
servants : how they are convicted by each
other, that they are powerless. — 2. R., To
Thee he glory by Whose humiliation Adam
was exalted : and by Whose death he was raised,
and regained Eden / — 3. If then the Evil
One overcome thee, great is the shame :
Death his comrade has convicted him, as
being weak. — 4. And if again Death subdue
thee, lo ! what reproach : for the Evil One
his comrade derides him, as but a shadow.
— 5. Their dispute is for thee a mirror,
wherein thou mayest see : that they both
are but as chaff, before thy breath. — 6. Yea
and Prophets and Apostles, in their promises :
assure thee that they like flowers, shall fade
at the rising. — 7. S., Thou, Death, art he


whom they hate, the quick and dead : for
every combination thou dissolvest, and de-
stroyest. — 8. D., It is not open death that
kills, O Satan : thy death which is secret
kills the sons of men. — 9. S., My name is
not hateful as thine, for the angel : showed
himself in Satan's likeness to Balaam on
the way. — 10. D., How fit is this thy name,
O Satan : who hast erred and made unwary
Adam err, from the way ! — 11. S., Wander
not like one ignorant, and lose thy cause :
dispute, O Death, if thou are competent, for
replying. — 1 2. D. ,\ know that thou art wily,
O Satan : so that thou out of sand canst
twist a snare. — 13. S., Thy disputmg
Death, is ended : for he who is worsted :
when his words fail and are ended, begins
to rail. — 14. D.^ Among all I am conqueror,
and by thee am I worsted .? Let Adam per-
suade thee whom I have overcome, O Satan !
— 15. S., I am he who bound Adam, and
cast him before thee : the mighty man whom
my wiles had bound, thou didst come and
subdue. — 16. D., I am he who have been
crowned anew, with a diadem in the world :
for Adam, chief of the mighty, I hold cap-
tive in Sheol. — 1 7. ^S*. , I killed him by secret
death, even Adam when he sinned : thou,
Death, hast slain one that was dead, killed
by me. — 18. Z>. , In thy desire to conquer.
Evil One, thou hast made thyself hated : for
thou art Death as well as Satar,, and this
se^ws a little thing to thee. — 19. S., Thou
hast then been silenced. Death, as a weak-
ling : for neither in words nor in deeds, hast
thou strength to stand. — 20. D., It is for
thy evil thou conquerest, O Evil One, if thou
discernest : thy crown is wholly of shame,
if thou perceivest. — 21. I shall be defeated
and thou shalt be cursed, O Satan : it is well
for me to be ignorant, and not mischievous.
— 22. Blessed be the Just One who divided
them, though they were quite of one mind :
Blessed be the Good One who made us of
one mind, when w^e were divided. — 23. I
will overcome the Evil One through Thy
forgiveness, O All-Merciful : and I shall
overcome death through Thy Resurrection,
O All-Life-giver !


NISIBENE HYMNS.


209


LV.


I. Lo ! the Evil One reproached Death,
and was in turn reproached : from each and to
each and against each, w^r^ their taunts. — 2.
Ji. , To Thee be glory, So?i 0/ the Lord 0/ All,
Who died si /or all : for He was raised to give
life to all, in the day of His Comi^ig ! — 3. S.,
Jonah who conquered thee, and returned
back from Sheol, became my advocate in
asking, why sinners were spared? — 4. D.,
Slander not, O Evil One, the son of Amit-
tai : he showed a face of anger, that they
might praise thee more. — 5. S., Quite pow-
erless is all thy persuasion, O tyrant Death :
for there pleases me nothing, of all thou
hast said. — 6. D., For when was the word
of truth pleasing to thee } A gulf is between
thee and truthfulness, O lying one. — 7. I
am righteous all my days, with nought to
repent : I am he that rescues from thee the
sons of men. — 8. -5"., Proclaim thy repent-
ance, Death, thou art well come : lo ! Saul
also among the prophets, great cause of
scorn. — 9. If thou. Death, be 'justified, then
for myself : I cut not off hope, likewise,
of repentance. — 10. D,, No idol with my Lord
have I made, O hater of thy Lord ! lo ! thou
by dead idols, slayest the living. — 11. S.,
That thou, Death, art half of me, I know, and
I half of thee : if half of me repents, it re-
pents, but I marvel. — 12. D., Thy partner
am I in share, but not in sin : mine are the
slain and thine the slayers, whom thou
madest sin.— -13. S., My craftiness weeps
for itself, when I dispute with thee : my
wiles mourn over me, when I meet thee. —
14. D., Workers of witchcraft and sooth-
sayers, with all their offences : the fire that
thou kindledst in the world, in Sheol I have
quenched. — 15. S., Thou penitent who
strainest out gnats, and swallowest the just :
the chaste shall rend thee, who cry, from
within thy belly. — 16. D., It is the treasure-
house ivhere I keep all the righteous : their
resurrection threatens ill to thee, who didst
persecute them. — 17. S., The greedy one
who carries all creatures, in his bowels : lo !

he casts up to me that I am robbed, of my
Vol. XIII. — 14


possessions. — 18. D., Before the stroke la-
ment not, for it has not yet reached thee :
the day will come when thou shalt cry out,
and I shall hear and rejoice. — 19. The fire
will come that shall strip off thee thy
very skin : as by the potsherd thou didst
strip the skin of Job. — 20. D., The savour of
sloth begins, as if to hover on me ; it is then
a dream that I ceased, for a short space. —
21. It was not that words failed me, and
therefore I was silent : it is for the time I
grieve, that has passed idly. — 22. The hurt
do7ie by thy speech is very great : would I
had not heard it ! For my whole mind is
intent upon my w^ork. — 23. This human-
kind that is lost, was undone by wander-
ing thought : slothfulness, with negligence,
brought it under yoke. — 24. The madness
of desire bid for wealth, and bought it : con-
tention with boastfulness, were the sureties.
— 25. With persistence for strength, I wage
my war : and if I neglect but a little, my
sway is naught. — 26. By continual drop-
ping, I clean the rocks : for continual drop-
ping can dissolve even a mountain. — 27.
Habit even over nature, becomes master : it
trains and leads even lions, as beasts of bur-
den.— 28. Habit, repose, and increase, with
persistence ; by these is freedom conquered,
though stubborn above all. — 29. If its will
be firmly set, it breaks the fetters ; but if lax,
a fragile net, can capture it. — 30. If so be
that Freedom shouts, we are scattered : but
if she be silent we gather together, to mock
at her. — 31. Let us cease from much speak-
ing, lest it lead to much sloth: with one mind
let us assail the wall, and lo ! it is broken
down. — 32. ^S"., Go thou and see to dis-
eases, and I to snares : for to me sins and to
thee pestilences, are great solace. — ^^. And
even though I have paused, I have not
paused from my cares : for my will at no
time rests, but is ready.

LVL

I. With Freedom is thy struggle, O Evil
One : it can cast on thee a muzzle, if it so
please. — 2. R., To Thee be glory in whose


2IO


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


victory we have gained strength : and in
whose resurrection we defy even Death it-
self! — 3. Lo ! again these two exposed each
other, how weak both are : Death reminded
the Evil One of thy mightiness (O Free-
dom).— 4. Thy fire is in thy nest, O Death,
and thou perceivest not : the fate of the de-
parted, to thee is overthrow. — 5. Lo ! Death
and the Evil One proclaim thy mightiness
{0 Freedo77i) : yea, the Evil One calls to
mind thy faith. — 6. If then these that were
against thee are on thy side : this is a great
thing that thy persecutors have become thy
heralds. — 7. D., I confess, O Evil One, that
as usury : I lay up the King's treasures, till
His Coming. — 8. S.,\,0 Death, rather deny
that this belongs to God : this treasure of
subtlety, which I have stored. — 9. Z?. , Thy
coinage is fraudulent, then, O Satan : that
into the treasuries of God, is not received. —
10. S., A new coinage do I coin, in kingly
wise : lo ! my merchantmen bring loss, into
the world. — 11. God created everything out
of nothing : and I created great sin out of
nothing — 12. D., Closed and bound be thy
mouth, Evil One, who art thus bold : to set
thyself, lo ! in comparison with the Creator.
— 13. S., To me, O Death, it is lawful to
dare and speak : thy tongue, even thine, is a
slave, and under fear. — 14. D., A gulf is
henceforth between us, O Satan : for madly
against thy Lord, lo ! thou assailest. — 15. S.,
Wherefore doubtest thou, O Death, of our
concord.? Be to us comrade and member :
and lo ! we reign. — 16. Come, draw we our
pair of swords, against mankind : I secretly,
thou openly, and lo ! we end them. — 17. Sin
and Sheol they too gave counsel to those
two : saying ''If ye be divided, ye are un-
done. " — 1 8. See the waters how if dispersed,
they run low : but if gathered they gain
strength, and thus ye likewise. — 19. If di-
vided ye perish, as the feeble : but yoked
together ye reign, as the mighty. — 20. Love
melts down many, as in a furnace : and
makes one powerful mass, that overcomes
all. — 21. In it are wisdom and cunning, and
force and power: it is greater far than an
image of sixty cubits. — 22. Be reconciled.


let us assemble and go, against that party :
which if it be at one can never be defeated.
— 2^. These things the troublers discoursed,
and gathered and came : Thy day, Lord, will
gather them, into Gehenna. — 24. Through
Thy mercy, Lord, will I worship Thee,
when I have risen : at Thy trumpet I will
praise Thy Son, when I am purged.

LVII.

I. Listen, my brethren, to Death, mock-
ing the Evil One : that caused the head of
our race to sin, and its mother. — 2. R., To
Thee he glory that by Thy humiliation, Satan
is subdued : and that Thy abasement has ex-
alted Adam, who was abased. — 3. D., Thy
great nakedness shall be seen, by the sons
of Adam ; as thou mockedst his nakedness,
when thou madest him sin. — 4. Eve will
cease from that serpent, and rail at thee :
for thou, O Dragon, wast he that beguiled
her simpleness. — 5. Abel will see him, even,
Cain, who has come to thee : the disciple of his
wrath will blame his cursed master. — 6. S.,
Noah who conquered the flood, as it were
death : by the mouth of Ham I laughed at,
when wine overcame him. — 7. D., Noah
was not harmed, but thy garment, where-
with thou clothedst him : even cursings, he
put on, and became a slave. — 8. S., Lot
who overcame anger which is, thy likeness,
Death : to his daughters I gave such coun-
sels, as were pleasing to me. — 9. D., And
Lot's wife who was thy vessel hearkened,
to thy counsel : may half of thee be dried
up, as thy whole vessel was dried up ! —
10. Gehenna be overturned, upon thy head :
as thy malice overturned Sodom, its dwell-
ers ! — II. Floods of fire be stirred against
thee, in the resurrection : who against Moses
and Elijah, didst stir the people! — 12. Let
the just mock thee at the last, and Joseph
rejoice ! whose brethren mocked him, set
on by thee ! — 13. Let vapour of smoke come
in, and choke thy senses : as the waters of
the sea choked, the senses of the wicked ! —
14. Let chaste women also mock thee, by
whose counsel : the daughters of Midian


NISIBENE HYMNS.


211


mocked, the foolish people ! — 15. Flame be
kindled on thy head, for Samson's sake : for
by a woman thou shavedst his locks, that
lion of strength ! — 16. S., Saul whom I con-
quered by envy, by witchcraft conquered
thee : for he asked for and brought up
Samuel, out of his grave. — 17. D., Slander
not the living dead, for he came not up :
thou wast he that came up in the phantom :
for thou wast worthy. — 18. Let the com-
mandment hang thee over the flame, thou
Evil One ! for by thee they hanged Absalom,
upon a tree. — 19. In the fire mayst thou see
thyself humbled, among vile women ! for
Solomon by thee was degraded, among
profane women. — 20. Justice be measured
to thee, as thou didst inflame her ! even
Jezebel who devoured the prophets, thou
kindledst her. — 21. In fire mayst thou justly
burn, who madest them drunken ! the two
whom Elijah burnt up, when they went up
and assailed htm.- — 22. On thee also be coals
heaped ! may he see and rejoice : that
Naboth in whom thou heapedst, a pile of
stones ! — 23. Be thou clad in scorn in the
day of judgment, before all beholders ! who
clothedst Gehasi in a leprosy, by means of
thy theft. — 24. With lightning for a dart be
thou pierced, O Satan ! who in the heart of
Josiah, didst fix /hy darts. — 25. Sink thou in
the dregs of Gehenna, O Satan ! who didst
sink Jeremiah in the mire of the pit. —
26. Daniel escaped from the pit, whither thou
didst cast him : may he have comfort in
seeing thee, in the furnace for ever ! — 27. Be
thy wickedness returned on thy head. Hater
of man : as his wickedness was returned on
the head, of Haman thy fellow ! — 28. May
the King's Bride mock thee, as did Esther :
when thou beseechest her in the judgment-
day, to plead for thee ! — 29. Fire released
the righteous ones, whom thou hadst bound :
a mighty bond be to thee, the flame of fire !
— 30. Be thou torn in sunder, and may the
seven brothers, see thy defeat : the sons of
Shemuni who by thy wolves, were torn in
sunder! — 31. May fire triumph over thy
pate, as thou didst mock : the two heads of
Nazarites, sons of the barren ! — ^2. May fire


make mock of thy head, for mother and
daughter : triumphed over John's head,
when thou didst madden them ! — ;^^. Flame
triumphed over thy head, O Evil One : for on
the charges thou didst triumph, over John's
head !

LVIII.

I. Lo ! Death was prompt beforehand,
to mock Satan : him who was doomed to
become a mockery at the last. — 2. i?. ,
Glory to Thee Who by Thy crucifixion^ didst
conquer the Evil One : and by Thy resurrec-
tion gain victory, likewise over Death ! — 3. And
for our Lord's sake Death spake curses on
him : who was the cause of His shame, and
crucifixion. — 4. D., The fiery pit be thy
grave, O Satan : who blasphemedst the
Voice from the grave, that rent the graves !
— 5. My Lord I know", and the Son of my
Lord, O thou- Satan ! thou hast denied thy
l!,ord, and crucified the Son of thy Lord. —
6. This is the name that fits thee, "Slayer
of thy Lord " : when He appears 'Whom
thou slewest. He shall slay thee. — 7. At
thee shall every one shake the head, for by
thee the chiefs : shook their heads at Him,
the Lord of life. — 8. A bruised reed under
the feet, of the just shalt thou be : for
through thee they put a reed in His hand.
Who upholds all. — 9. With a crown of
thorns was He crowned, to signify : that
He took the diadem of the kingdom, of the
house of David — 10. With a crown of
thorns was He crowned, the King of kings :
but He took the diadem of the kings, of
those that shamed Him. — 11. In the robes
of mockery that they gave him, in those He
mocked them : for He took the raiment of
glory, of priests and kings. — 12. To vinegar
is thy memory akin, O thou Satan : who
didst offer vinegar for the thirst, of the
Fount of Life. — 13. The hand shall every
man lift against thee who strengthenedst
the hand that smote Him by Whose hand,
all creatures stand. — 14. He was smitten by
the hand and He cut off the hand, of
Caiaphas : the hand of the priesthood is cut
off, in the cutting off of the unction. — 15. On


212


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


the pillar again they stretched Him, as for
scourging : Him Whose pillar went before,
to ^z//<i^ their tribes. — 16. The pillar on the
pillar, He was scourg-ed : He removed Him-
self from out of Zion, and its fall came. —

17. When they put two beams together, to
form the Cross : He broke them, even
the two staves, the guardians of them. —

18. Ezekiel put together the sticks, the two
in one : in the two beams of the Cross,
their staves have ceased. — 19. The two
sticks, as it were wings, bore the people :
lo ! his two staves were broken, even as
his wings. — 20. The bosom and wings of
the Cross, He opened in mercy : its pinions
bowed and bore the nations, to go to Eden.
— 21. It is akin to the Tree of Life, and unto
the son of its stock : it leads its beloved
that on its boughs, they may feed on its
fruits. — 22. Go howl and weep. Evil One,
for me and for you : for not one of us shall
enter the ''Garden of Life." — 23. S., Now
that thou hast confessed O Death, come let
me tell thee : that all this discourse of thine,
to me is idle talk. — 24. I will go and watch
the snares, which I have set : thou too.
Death, fly and look after, all that are sick.
— 25. Our Lord has brought both to nought,
on either hand : the Evil One shall be
brought to nought here, and Death here-
after there.

LIX.

I. Lo ! Death for us on Satan, inflicts
vengeance : come let us hear his shame and
rejoice, for he rejoiced in our shame. — 2.
J^., To Thee he glory from Thy flock, from
Thee : are subdued hoih Death and Satan,
under Thy Feet! — 3. D., Evil ones shall
be hung upright, but thou, head down-
ward : for, reversely, thou crucifiedst,
Simon on the tree. — 4. S., Touching all else
I am silent, Death, for my time wanes :
Simon himself conjured me, "Crucify me
thus." — 5. Were it the just that cursed me, I
had not grieved : the curse of Death unto me,
is worse than hell. — 6. D., The shame of
our Lord I have not spoken of, it is too
great for my mouth : that I should weigh


and compare His Passion, with Thy torment.
— 7. TwqXyq judgment thrones shall He set,
for His Twelve : for by the twelve tribes
thou, even thou, shall be condemned. — 8. A
halter unbought shalt thou hang thee, O
thou Satan : as that Thy disciple hung him,
a halter for a price. — 9. Haply yon hell in
mercy, shall be emptied : and thou shalt
dwell there alone, with Thy ministers. — 10.
Manifold are Thy curses, and how shall I
count them P Lo ! the sum of all thy curses,
IS on thy members. — 11. The evil in the fire
shall stab thee, who madest them evil : they
shall upbraid thee ''wherefore, broughtest
thou us hither.?" — 12. Sinners shall rail
against thee, and haply their threats : shall
be worse to thee than the torment, of yonder
hell. — 13. These shall be unto thee there, all
of them Satans : as thou hast been to them
here, the one Satan. — 14. The Watchers
shall seize and hurl thee down, calling to
mind : how through thee men hurled their
Lord, from the height to the depth. — 15. All
men will run to stone thee, not forgetting
that through thee the maddened people ran,
to stone their Maker. — 16. On thee, Evil One,
from all mouths shall be, the spitting of
wrath : for through thee they spat on Him
Whose spittle, gave sight to the blind. — 17.
On thee, Evil One, from all tongues, shall be
all curses : for through thee men blasphemed
Him, Who opened dumb mouths. — 18.
Blessed is He Who avenged our wrong,
though in silence : and stirred up Death
against the Evil One, to fall upon him ! —
19. Sound we Hosannas, my brethren, as G??<i
Gideon : ^ who when he sounded, the op-
pressors, fell on one another !


LX.

I. O what amazement befel the Evil One,
of a sudden, my brethren : when the suiful
woman was corrected, and gained wisdom !
— 2. R., Glory to the One Who alone, con-
quered the Evil One : and to Him yea Him be
also co7ifession. Who vanquished Death / — 3.


' Judg. vii. 18-22.


NISIBENE HYMNS.


213


The Evil One marvelled "Where /s her laugh-
ter? where her perfumes? where herdanc-
ingr and outward ornament, and mward
wickedness ?'' — 4. Instead of that light laugh-
ter, she is given up to tears : She has cut off
her hair to wipe the dust, off the feet of Jesus.
— 5. Naught lasts in her of any doctrine, nor
abides in her : from our instruction she has
escaped and cast away, all that I taught
her. — 6. She has denied us and our acquaint-
ance, and even as though : she had never
seen me she has blotted my image, out of
her mind. — 7. The living leaven of Jesus
flew to her, Jesus was silent : but she made
bold to press and enter, though none called
her. — 8. She forgot our love of many years,
and in the twinkling of an eye : from be-
tween me and her she removed it, and set
Death there. — 9. For instead of laughter
weeping delights her, and instead of paint :
a shower of tears, and instead of ornament,
a sad countenance. — 10. Zaccheus I made
chief of extortioners, and her I made : chief
of wantons ; my two wings, Jesus has
broken. — 11. If so be Zaccheus becomes his
disciple, and if so be she : becomes his
hearer, henceforth they fetter, my craftiness.
— 12. Carved images henceforth are a mock-
ery and the carvers : a derision, and the
worshippers a laughing-stock. — 13. I shut
mens eyes that they might not perceive, that
they are carved images: Jesus opens their
eyes to see that they are the works of metis
hands. — 14, If Jesus has chosen for Himself
preachers, then our preaching : whereof the
whole world is full, is put to silence. — 15. For
lo I the Chaldeans with the soothsayers, and
lo ! the wizards : with the diviners they are
smitten and the priests, with all evil ones ! —
16. Ye priests are ended and have given up
the Ghost from henceforth, depart ye divin-
ers ! become husbandmen, the Chaldeans
likewise, shall close their books. — 17. If the
Hebrews have become His disciples, who
by all miracles : were not subdued, who of
the nations, shall not obey him? — 18. If he
begins to set straight the reverse, He brings
to naught our speech : henceforth He will
not hesitate against us, He who rebukes all


men. — 19. In that I was worshipped in all
temples, our disgrace is greater : than our
\\ox\onx was , for all men spit, upon our altars.
— 20. Flesh of sacrifice becomes abhorred,
into fragments : idols are broken^ and carven
images burn, under their pots. — 21. All our
workbecomesa laughing-stock, and a ruin :
all that we have built, and a mockery, all
that we have taught. — 22. The secret mys-
teries that I taught them, laboriously : are
about to be spread abroad, on the housetops.
— 23. Of the Egyptians I was more proud,
than of any nation : for they used to wor-
ship even, the onions and garlic. — 24. Lo !
I fear lest even here, where delusion was so
great : truth shall prevail that there exceedr
ingly, Jesus may reign, — 25. And if when
He was an infant, and fled and went down,
Egypt marvelled : yea lulled him — this
strangler of babes, loved their Babe. — 26.
Was it a pledge He w^ent down to give her,
as a betrother : giving assurance that when
of full age. He will also take her /o wife P —
27. Pharaoh cannot set his foot /r?;z, for this
is no stammerer: that he should deceive
Him, and no bondman, that he should lie
unto Him. — 28. Moses smote and the Egyp-
tians rebelled, and he chastised the people :
and the Hebrews rebelled — Jesus is smitten,
and gives life to all. — 29. This is hard to
understand that not by force ; lays He His
yoke : on the rebellious : He was rebuked,
and He instructs others. — 30. The spittle of
His mouth, wiped off and took away, the
shame of Adam : by the smiting of His
cheeks, He rooted out our wrathfulness,
from His disciples. — 31. By the nails which
he received, He made me to suffer. I re-
joiced when I crucified Him : and I knew
not that He was crucifying me, in His cru-
cifixion.

LXI.

I. In wisdom let us hearken to Death, O
my beloved : how he accuses us for our
weeping, and for our mourning. — 2. R., To
thee he praise Who cameth down, to fottow
Adam : and foinidest Adam and also in liim^
the children of Adam. — 3. And rightly per-


214


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


haps he says, ' ' Ye slay : without mercy and
lo ! ye weep, as though merciful." — 4. Ye
have made me as a cruel one,0 ye murderers:
for ye slay one another, without my help !
— 5. While Death was bti/ desivin or to come,
the sword came before him : let us see then
aeainst whom cries out, the blood of the
slain. — 6. Against you cry out the strangled,
who were suffocated : for it shames me of
the rope, of their strangulations. — 7. They
take away from me even my rest, for with-
out me : how could the strangled and the
slain, enter Sheol .? — 8. Lo ! your infants are
cast out, as those in Egypt : your sons
have ye sacrificed to demons, O demoniacs !
— 9. While Death was bu/ desiring to taste,
of your corpses : Cain refreshed me before-
hand, with blood of man. — 10. While I was
but desiring to wait patiently, till Adam
should die : before I had power ye gave
me power, over your bodies. — it. Cain
with his sword overthrew, the gate of
Sheol : for it was closed and before the
time, he first opened it. — 12. He by tread-
ing made the way of Sheol, without my help :
for in the way ye have trodden out for me,
lo ! I walk therein. — 13. Nine hruidred years
I sat and waited, for Adam to die : but
Cain not even a day, endured his brother.
— 14. Robbers upon the highways, are worse
than I : I am slumbering while they, are
watching to slay. — 15. Lo ! your slaugh-
tered in the graves, and your murdered in
your ways ; and your strangled upon your
stakes ! — 16. " If I rebelled against my lord,
yea and slew him : who was he that slew
these here," said Jehu. — 17. And if I Death
have taken, your departed : the strangled,
the slain, and the slaughtered, who was it
slew them.? — 18. Ye are Satan to each
other, and the Evil One is abhorred : ye
are pestilence to each other, and Death is
blamed ! — 19. Your own will to you is
Satan, yea and a murderer : but of Death
and of Satan, all men complain. — 20. Poison
of Death ye give also to drink, each to
other: lo ! how many Deaths have ye, be-
side me. — 21. Wiles, stratagems, yea and
snares, sword and poison : how many


Deaths from you and in you, lo ! are there
born. — 22. The judge in the judgment-hall,
is a second Death : he slays for secret
reward, but I for naught. — 23. I have seen
bribery and marvelled at it, that ran and
outran me: how many slain does bribery,
slay, and none perceives ! — 24. I am
ashamed that so unskilfully, I conduct my-
self: if I take even one corpse, all men per-
ceive it. — 25. In the houses weeping and in
the streets, also wailing: and even unto the
gates of Sheol, they groan over me. — 26.
Groan over yourselves that ye are thus
hateful, and ye hate me : Sheol henceforth
shall groan over you, O murderers ! — 27.
With torture, scourging and fire, yea with
stoning : ye put to death the sons of men,
and ye are proud ! — 28. I am more modest
than you and merciful, also reverent : for
with reverence I bear away, your departed.
— 29. On the bed I deal gently, with him
that is sick : and quietly I lay him to sleep,
for hut a while.

LXIL

I. Lo ! Death, the King of silence, com-
plains, my brethren : that we have filled his
abode with the wailing, of Hope cut off. —
2. R. To Him he great praise Who contest
down, to us here helow : a?td suffered and
rose again a?id in His Body, raises our hodies !
— 3. While we weep like madmen, at the
gates of Sheol : hearken what Death says,
reproaching us. — 4. It shames me, says
Death, that ye, have overcome me : the
half of Sheol suffices not, to contain your
slain. — 5. For alien corpses together, lie
heaped in Sheol : there are two divisions
there, the dead, the slain. — 6. Whereas I
should complain that ye have wronged me,
lo ! ye are weeping : ye have burst the gate
of Sheol, and done me hurt. — 7. For ye are
like unto an infant, which while yet weep-
ing : laughs again as ye also, over your
dead. — 8. For there is no discretion in your
mourning, and no understanding : in your
laughter — for to me ye seem like, to a
weaned babe. — 9. One hour weeping and
wailing, and after a little : both jesting and


NISIBENE HYMNS.


215


wantonness, as of children. — 10. For ye are
unable to become, perfect men : that weep
not yea and laugh not, as the discreet. —
II. Touching your books we are grieved,
that they have toiled over them : who should
read them unto you, even the divine Scrip-
tures.— 12. The readers are crying aloud,
for ye are deaf: this tlieu' crying proves
concerning you, that ye are as stocks. —
13. For since the reader and the interpreter,
are crying aloud: your ears therefore are
heavy, or else your hearts. — 14- For if there
were with you an ear, open to persuasion : it
were meet to hear little, and to do much. —
15. But because its hearing is closed, whoso
knocks at it : the voice returns back to him,
who sent it forth. — 16. There is no crying
with me of mine, I am not deaf: none that
reads or interprets /br me^ I am not dull. —
17. The breath that is from Him commands
me, sons the God of truth : and with the
command there follows, also the fulfilment.
— 18. With me is no holding back, no turn-
ings aside : I wot no arrow even, could out-
strip me. — 19. But your voices are scorned
by me, when ye are weeping : over the
graves of your departed, in the cutting off of
hope. — 20. Were it possible or permitted,
when ye are weeping : I would go forth and
tell you, to your faces. — 21. "I am en-
deavouring to give, an account of the death :
and your voices disturb me, that I err in my
count." — 22. Venations, let not your under-
standing, become childish: like that nation
whose intelligence, was never great. — 23. In
which prudence bestows not itself, as in a
fool : for its thoughts are darkness, without
discernment. — 24. For your infants and your
sons, in the resurrection : they shall before-
most to come forth, as the first fruits. —
25. Then after them shall come the just, as
victorious : last shall come forth the sinner,
as put to shame. — 26. For although in the
twinkling of an eye, they be quickened : yet
is it in order that their ranks, come forth
from Sheol. — 27. Prophets come forth and
Apostles, and holy Fathers : following them
in due array, according to command. —
28. Lo ! that which now is sown, in random


mixture : is yielded back in great order, as
garden-herbs. — 29. For though one in the
sowing, should mix all seeds : that which is
earlier than its fellow, prevents its fellow. —
30. And not as their going down was con-
fused, so disordered shall be : their coming
up from the earth, for its order is fixed.
— 31. Lo ! I have been against myself, in
what I have said : for secret things which
ye comprehended not, from me ye have
learned. — 2>'^. Instead of the tears that profit
not, which are at the tomb : pour them
forth \\\ your prayer, in the midst of the
Church. — T^T^. For to the dead there is profit
in these, and likewise to the living : weep
not with a weeping that afflicts, both dead
and living !

LXIII.

I. Who shall weigh the recompense of
Abraham.? whom I marvelled at when he
bound, his only son. — 2. R., To thee he glory ^
Voice that hj'ingest to life the dead i?i Sheol :
and they have come up as preachers, of His
So?i Who quickens all! — 3. At that time I
came forth in haste, to see the marvel : how
that his knife w^as drawn out, against his
beloved. — 4. I gathered my manifold mem-
ories, from all quarters: and I collected my
spirit to marvel, at that illustrious one. —
5. How therefore can ye read, that great
story } ye have despised the reading of it, in
your very ears. — 6. The sword of Jephthah
rebukes, him that laments : his daughter
was to him a mirror of life from the dead. —
7. She gave herself for her father, so com-
mend ye : your life to the Father of all, in the
hope of_yoz/r end. — 8. In the womb then did
ye not make trial, of a mystery of Sheol .-^
yet in Sheol ye had more rest, than in the
womb. — 9. It is stubborn in you to stand up
against, my mighty will : for lo ! to succour
them I take away, your departed. — 10. By
the king of Moab who slew, his son with his
hands : he is put to shame who laments, for
the departed one. — 11. He was a profane
man, lo ! according, to what you read : but
ye are doctors and teachers, as ye suppose.
— 12. He endured, but ye are furious, in


2l6


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


your mourning : ..£,


against the will of the
Lord of all, while ye are weeping. — 13. I
fear however to let pass, the story of Job :
through this feeble mouth of mine, for I
am unworthy. — 14. So in like manner I
turn aside, from nientioji of their bones :
though I praise Him who granted, that
they should come to me. — 15. Dishonour not
your members, by your sins : for in Sheol
the bones are despised, of evildoers. —
16. Whenever I see the body of one of the
evil : I trample on it and curse, even his
memory. — 17. But wherever I see a bone,
of one of the just ; I set it apart and honour
\i, and do it worship. — 18. Ye feeble ones
understand not, all my ordinances : with
you orders are confused, for ye are blind. —
19. It is Moses alone that I know, to have
honoured like me : the bones of that Joseph
whom I magnify. — 20. But Moses did such
honour, to one pure body : but I to the
body and the bones, of all the righteous.
— 21. Brightly shine the bones of Prophets,
and of Apostles : a lamp to me in darkness,
are all the righteous. — 22. I worship Him
Who lightens for me, the darkness of Sheol :
the splendour of Moses who was so great,
was as the sun to me.

LXIV.

I. O feeble ones, why weep ye, over your
dead : who in death are at rest from sor-
rows and sins .? — 2. 7?., Glory to Him Who
e7idured all, for the sake 0/ all men : yea
tasted death for the sake of all ^ to bring all to
life — 3. I reveal unto you, that even Satan,
though much content : at your weeping, yet
laughs much, at your mourning. — 4. In
mockery he winks at me and nods to me, as
a jester: "Come let us laugh at sinners,
for lo ! they are mad." — 5. Truly they have
given up remembrance of that fire, which
I have hidden for them : and lo ! the fools
are drunken with weeping, for their de-
parted.— 6. Instead of weeping as though,
without provision : I had plundered and
sent forth their dead, lo ! they are mad. —
7. The souls of the evil are to be afflicted,


till the judgment day : and these weep over
the graves, like to madmen. — 8. They care
not for their own sins, that haply to-morrow :
they must go in shame of face,' to join their
dead. — 9. And thus shall all be put to shame
alike, family by family: in Sheol the wretches
shall repent without avail. — 10. Leave the
drunken and the madman, until that day :
wherein each shall shake off his wine
wherewith he was maddened. — 11. I will go
to gather them, like children : that they may
play the wanton and the madman, until
they perish. — 12. Lo ! 1 have revealed to
you the mystery, the secret of my comrade :
go forth therefore, depart, amend, in repent-
ance.— 13. Leave me, I too will depart, I
will see to my affairs : that with open face
I may give my account to my Lord. — 14. I
know that the wind as it blew, has borne
away my words : for ye are the same whom

1, ofttimes have proved. — 15. I remember
Jeremiah how he, compared boldness : to
the Indian who changes not ///s 5-^m, though
it is of freedom. — 16. For this too belongs
to it, even to freedom : that it binds itself
by the will, as though by nature. — 17. For
so powerful is the will, in them that are free :
that it may be likened to nature, through its
workings.^

LXV.

I. Man, O Death, despise thou it not, that
image of Adam : which like a seed is com-
mitted to earth, till the Resurrection. —

2. R. To thee he glory Who didst descend and
plunge, after Adain : and draw him out from
the depths of Sheol, and bring him into Eden /
— 3. Death, I marvel at this seed, and at your
words : for lo ! after five thousand years, it
springs not yet. — 4. M., Its present state
passes away, as winter does : and as a hand-
ful oi corn it comes in the resurrection, to
the garner of life. — 5. D., That there is
vintage-time, lo ! - I know, but I have not
seen : the dead at any time sown, or yet
reaped. — 6. 31., There is coming a reaping.


2 I.e. though boldness is matter of free will, it be-
comes a second nature.


NISIBENE HYMNS.


217


0 Death, that will leave thee bare : and the
Watchers shall go forth as reapers, and
make thee desolate. — 7. D., When did I
become husbandman, instead of vine-
dresser? who has turned Sheol the wine-
press, into a tilled field? — 8. yl/. Does not
the seed then teach thee, which decays and
dies : and is cut off from hope, yet frorfi the
rain, recovers hope ? — 9. D. , A dream have
ye seen ye feeble ones, of life from the dead :
for in waking- time the resurrection, ye do
not see. — 10. J\L, Thy drowsiness hinders
thee, that thou seest not : the multitudes of
mysteries which cry aloud, of the resurrec-
tion.— II. D., I know that seeds come to
life, but I have not seen : bones that grew
in Sheol, and sprang and came up. — 12. M.,
All thy discourse is like thyself, for lo !
Ezekiel : has taught thee how^ in the valley,
the dead come to life.' — 13. D., Trees have

1 seen how in summer, they put on their
garments : but bones in their nakedness,
are cast into Sheol. — 14. M., Moses broke
by his splendour, thy heart, O Death : the
son of Adam has regained and put on, the
glory of Adam. — 15. D., Our law in Sheol
is this, to keep silence : for you are words
and for me deeds, O feeble ones. — 16. M.,
How are the aged passed over if thou be
vinedresser? He Who hindered thee from
taking their lives, the same quickens all.
17. — The babe in the womb confutes thee,
which is as buried there : to me it pro-
claims life from the dead, but to thee de-
spoiling.— 18. The despised flower despises
thee, for it is shut up and passed over : yet
though lost it is not lost, but blossoms
again. — 19. The chick cries out from the
^ZZ-> wherein it is buried : and the graves
are rent by a Voice, and the body arises.
20. For a body too is the chick, that is in
the ^^"g : lo ! its body to our body proclaims,
the life from the dead. — 21. With the
locust thy plea is overthrown, and ended,
O Death : for in coming forth from the dust
it teaches, the life from the dead. — 22. D., I
had been content if already, the resurrection
had been : for the day of resurrection had
disturbed me less, than your judgments. —


2^. Merciful is the Son of the Highest, yea
good and just : and will not harshly avenge
on me, the death of Adam. — 24. Have ye
then no understanding, to perceive this :
that your father laid on you, this retribution ?

LXVI.

I. Hold your peace, O mortals (said
Death), a little while : and be like me who
am so silent, in the midst of Sheol. — 2. i?.,
To Thee he glory , Watcher, that didst corne
down, after them that slept : and utter the
voice from the Tree, and waken them! — 3. Ye
are grieving, yea, weeping, for him that
has gone : as though he came to grind for
me, the mill in Sheol. — 4. Great is the peace
I give, unto the wearied : I wax not weary
as you, nor weary them. — 5. I hear all
manner of curses, from thankless men : the
sons of Adam are like Adam, who was
thankless to his Lord. — 6. Contrary one to
the other are your voices, and your doings :
with your voices ye weep and in your do-
ings, ye fight daily. — 7. I heard weeping
and I thought to myself, that none labours :
I saw toiling and I thought to myself, that
no man dies. — 8. The struggles of man
made me think, that he is not mortal : his
great weeping made me think, that to-mor-
row he is not. — 9. Hear and let me be your
counsellor, if ye be willing : for these two,
these burdens, are very bitter. — 10. Cease a
little while from this toil, and from this
weeping : toil ye and weep as mortals, who
to-morrow vanish. — 11. Ye are frantic with
weeping, for your departed : and ye struggle
in toiling, for your possessions. — 12. It is
well with the infants that die, and blessed
are they : for they are freed from the misery,
whereunto ye are cast. — 13. Suffer me to go
to Sheol, and there to say : " Happy are ye
silent dead, how tranquil are ye ! " — 14. Hear
the conclusion of our own words, If there be
a resurrection : weep not ye, neither labour
as though strangers. — 15. Ye struggle as
one who was to live, here forever : and ye
weep as one who never, should rise again.
— 16. Hear my words, if there be with you


2l8


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


place for hearing : and prepare you pro-
vision that when I call ye may answer. —
17. For I hearken even I, to Him that calls
me : and will restore your bodies, with your
treasures. — 18. Let there be peace between
us, until that day : and when ye come forth
I will cry and say, " Depart in peace ! " —
19. Come ye, you and I even now, shall
give glory : to Him that brings to death and
to life, that He may give aid. — 20. Praise
from us all be to thee, O Lord, the living
Sacrifice ! Who by the sacrifice of Thy
Body hast given life to quick and dead. —
21. Praise to Him Who clothed Himself in
our body, and died and rose again : He
died in us and we live in Him, blessed be
He Who sent Him !

LXVH.

I. Come ye, let us hear how Death con-
victs the People : that harsher than Death
was their sword, against the just. — 2. R.,
To Thee he glory ^ Who by Thy sacrifice, hast
redeemed our disgrace : and Whose death
was instead of all deaths, that Thou mightst
raise all / — 3. It was not Death indeed that
crucified Jesus, but it was the People : how
hateful then the People, that are yet more
hateful than I I — 4. Into the pit they cast
Jeremiah, the miry pit : but I in Sheol al-
lotted, honour to his bones. — 5. Naboth they
bruised to death with stones, as though he
were a dog : how good am I who have
never stoned, even a dog ! — 6. The Hebrew
women in famine, ate their children : Sheol
is good who delivers and gives them up,
without difficulty. — 7. To the widow I gave
her son, by the hand of Elijah : to the
Shunamite her beloved, by the hand of
Elisha. — 8. The Hebrew women in greed,
ate their children : Sheol gave up the dead
and learned, to fast soberly. — 9. Sheol was
not indeed Sheol, but its semblance : Jeze-
bel was the true Sheol, who devoured the
just. — 10. The sons of the prophets and the
prophets, she slew and cast down : to
heaven Elijah escaped, from her fury. —
1 1. How many deaths instead of one Death,


were among the People ! and how many
Sheols instead of one, were there also I —
12. Samaria and Jezrael her daughters, in
Israel : and Zion and Jerusalem her sister,
in Judea. — 13. Prophets and just men in
Judea, and in Israel : in these two abysses,
they were drowned. — 14. Why then is Sheol
hated, and she alone : though there be
many that are hateful, rather than she .? —
1 5. The dead of the men of Judah, to me are
right hateful : yea, abhorred by me are their
bones, in the midst of Sheol. — 16. Would
that then I had a way to cast them out : to
cast their bones thence from Sheol, for they
cause her to rot. — 17. I wonder at the Holy
Spirit, that He thus dwelt : in the midst of
a People whose savour stank, as their con-
versation.— 18. Onions and garlic are the
heralds of their doings : as is the food so is
the understanding, of this defiled people.
— 19. Through the supplication of all that
bow, and worship Thy Father : have mercy
on Thy worshipper, who is thankless for Thy
love. — 20. From Hebrews and Aramaeans,
and also from the Watchers : to Thee be
praise and through Thee to Thy Father, be
also glory ! — 21. For that I have a mouth to
Death, who is without mouth : may the Son
Who is all mouths, hold back my offence
from His Father !

LXVIIl.

I. Man. O, Death, be not thou boastful,
over the just : the sons of thy Lord who at
His command, come to dwell with thee. — 2.
R., To thee be glory that by Thy command,
Death has reigned : and by Thy Resurrec-
tion has been humbled to low estate ! — 3.
Death. Herein am I exceeding great, accord-
ing to thy saying : that though I be bond-
man I trample on them that are free. — 4 M.,
Adam was chosen and ruler, and under his
yoke : thou. Death, and the Evil One, thy
fellow, became bondmen. — 5. Z>. , This is
our pride that lo ! the slaves have become
lords : Death, and Satan, his fellow, have
trampled on Adam. — 6. M., Lo ! the hum-
bling of thee and thy fellow, accurst serv-
ants ! how Enoch trampled on you both,


NISIBENE HYMNS.


219


and rose aloft and reigned. — 7. D., If so be
Enoch made me grieve, yet have I comfort :
for on Noah's dust in Sheol, lo ! I trample. —
8. M., Tremble, O Death, before man, for
though a servant, the yoke of his dominion
reigns on all creatures. — 9. D., I rejoice
then that they are no mean foes that I
have overcome : for according to the great-
ness of the vanquished, he is great that
overcomes. — 10. M., Well does thy voice
sing triumph, O Death, over the just :
for Enoch and Elijah have broken thy
pair of wings. — 11. D., I know how to
weigh my sorrows with my comforts : in
place of two, 16 ! many are come and com-
ing.— 12. M., All that are come and coming
to thee dwell as sojourners, and depart from
thy abode as Lazarus. — 13. D., This thy
saying hurts me not, rather it heals me : for
Lazarus who rebelled against me, I again
subdued. — 14. M.^ Make answer, O Death,
and argue what constrained him, to be
raised unless it were a mystery, showing
forth his resurrection. — 15. D., Ye are
famous in arguing as idle ones, while I
labour in my task to discern and perform. —
16. M., Thou wast well prepared for argu-
ment, what has checked thee.? The truth of
our resurrection has constrained thee by its
reputations. — 17. D., Ye have made me
hated by you, though I be not hateful : I
am he that gives rest to your aged, and your
afflicted. — 18. Ye have made me as one that
troubles, O ye mortals : Adam brought
death upon you, and I bear the blame. — 19.
Gently will I expose you, for I am a slave,
and ye are they that by your sins have made


me king. — 20. The will of Adam roused me
for I was at rest : I was dead and ye quick-
ened me, that ye might die by me. — 21. I
accuse the lying ones, who slew and denied
it : for Adam slew himself and charges me.
— 22. The beginning of strife was the ac-
cursed serpent which has rightly been
crippled : which crept, entered, and set
enmity between me and you. — 23. Satan is
passed by and it is against me that ye are
roused : go, strive with the Evil One who
made you transgress. — 24. He is my com-
rade and I deny // not, but though he be
much hated, what need that I be blamed for
him. I deny him henceforth. — 25. Hearken
to my words, O mortals, and I will console
you : I have afflicted you and I confess the
life from the dead. — 26. For there begins to
steal into my ears a voice of preparation : of
the trumpet that holds itself ready to sound.
— 27. Hear my words and put much oil into
your lamps : for hindrance from my part
there is none for you. — 28. Yet, Know ye
that even although I have said these things,
dear is the sound of your voice in the soli-
tude of Sheol. — 29. For man has been
weighed by me, and great is his peace : for
snakes and fishes and birds come to meet
him. — 30. But it is a marvel that to the
Watchers, too, his converse is dear : yea,
the Evil One in Gehenna, desires his pres-
ence.— 31. Ye shall have life from the dead,
O ye mortals, and I who am bereft shall be
bereft in the midst of Sheol. — 32, Let praise
ascend from all to Thee Who quickenest all,
and from every quarter gatherest the dust of
Adam !


NINETEEN HYMNS

ON THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST IN THE FLESH.


(Translated, I.-XIII. by Rev. J. B. Morris, M.A., [Oxford Library of the Fathers] ; XIV. -XIX. by

Rev. A. Edward Johnston, B.D.).


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY.


HYMN I.

This is the day that gladdened them, the Prophets, Kings, and Priests, for in it were
their words fulfilled, and thus were the whole of them indeed performed ! For the
Virgin this day brought forth Immanuel in Bethlehem. The voice that of old Isaiah
spake, ^ to-ddy became reality. He was born there who in writing should tell the
Gentiles' number ! The Psalm that David once sang, by its fulfilment came to-day ! ^
The word that Micah once spake, ^ to-day was come indeed to pass ! For there came
from Ephrata a Shepherd, and His staff swayed over souls. Lo ! from Jacob shone the
Star,* and from Israel rose the Head. ^ The prophecy that Balaam spake had its inter-
preting to-day ! Down also came the hidden Light, and from the Body rose His beauty !
The light that spake in Zachary, to-day shined in Bethlehem !

Risen is the Light of the kingdom, in Ephrata the city of the King. The blessing
wherewith Jacob blessed, to its fulfilment came to-day ! That tree likewise, [the tree]
of life, brings hope to mortal men ! Solomon's hidden proverb ^ had to-day its explana-
tion ! To-day was born the Child, and His name was called Wonder ! ' For a wonder
it is that God as a Babe should show Himself. By the word Worm did the Spirit
foreshow Him in parable,^ because His generation was without marriage. The type
that the Holy Ghost figured to-day its meaning was [explained.] He came up as a
root before Him, as a root of parched ground.^ Aught that covertly was said, openly
to-day was done ! The King that in Judah was hidden, Thamar stole Him from his
thigh ; to-day arose His conquering beauty, which in hidden estate she loved. Ruth
at Boaz' side lay down, because the Medicine of Life hidden in him she perceived.
To-day was fulfilled her vow, since from her seed arose the Quickener of all. Travail
Adam on the woman brought, that from him had come forth. She to-day her travail
ransomed, who to her a Saviour bare ! To Eve our mother a man gave birth, who
himself had had no birth. How much more should Eve's daughter be believed to have
borne a Child without a man ! The virgin earth, she bare that Adam that was head
over the earth ! The Virgin bare to-day the Adam that was Head over the Heavens.
The staff of Aaron, it budded, and the dry wood yielded fruit ! Its mystery is cleared
up to-day, for the virgin womb a Child hath borne ! ^^

Shamed is that people which holds the prophets as true ; for unless our Saviour has
come, their words have been falsified ! Blessed be the True One Who came from the
Father of the Truth and fulfilled the true seers' words, which were accompHshed in


^ Is. X. 19. 2 ps. ixxxvii. 6. =^ Mic. v. 2. 4 Num. xxiv. 17. s Hos. i. il.

« Proy. iii. 18. "^ Isa. ix. 6. « Ps. xxii. 6. » Is. liii. 2.

1 Notice here, how St. Ephraim (in common with others) speaks of the celebration of the day as if it was
the day itself, partly in exhibiting his intense realization through faith of the mystery and the re-presentation
of it, to use the word in its ancient sense ; partly as evincing, perhaps, a belief in the unabidingness of our
conceptions of time— a belief resulting, it may be, from the mystical union with God in Christ which the
saints enjoy. For to God time is as nothing, and those who through grace are one with Him, begin to view
things as He views them.

223


224 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


their truth. From thy treasure-house put forth, Lord, from the coffers of Thy Scriptures,
names of righteous men of old, who looked to see Thy coming ! Seth who was in
Abel's stead shadowed out the Son as slain, by Whose death was dulled the envy
Cain had brought into the world ! Noah saw the sons of God, saints that sudden
waxed wanton, and the Holy Son he looked for, by whom lewd men were turned to
holiness. The brothers twain, that covered Noah, '^ saw the only Son of God who should
come to hide the nakedness of Adam, who was drunk with pride. Shem and Japhet,
being gracious, looked for the gracious Son, Who should come and set free Canaan from
the servitude of sin.

Melchizedek expected Him ; as His vicegerent, looked that he might see the Priest-
hood's Lord whose hyssop ^ purifies the world. Lot beheld the Sodomites how they
perverted nature : for nature's Lord he looked who gave a holiness not natural. Him
Aaron looked for, for he saw that if his rod ate serpents up,* His cross would eat the
Serpent up that had eaten Adam and Eve. Moses saw the uplifted serpent that had
cured the bites of asps, and he looked to see Him who would heal the ancient Serpent's
wound. Moses saw that he himself alone retained the brightness from God, and he
looked for Him who came and multiplied gods by His teaching : ^

Caleb the spy bore the cluster on the staff, and came and longed to see the Cluster,
Whose wine should comfort the world. Him did Jesus son of Nun long for, that he
might conceive the force of his own surname : for if by His name he waxed so mighty,^
how much more would He by His Birth.? This Jesus that gathered and carried, and
brought with him of the fruit, was longing for the Tree of Life to taste the Fruit that
quickens all. For Him Rahab too was looking ; for when the scarlet thread in type
redeemed her from wrath, in type she tasted of the Truth. For Him Elijah longed, and
when Him on earth he saw not, he, through faith most throughly cleansed, mounted up
in heaven to see Him. Moses saw Him and Elijah ; the meek man from the depth
ascended, the zealous from on high descended, and in the midst beheld the Son. They
figured the mystery of His Advent : Moses was a type of the dead, and Elijah a type of
the living, that fly to meet Him at His coming."^ For the dead that have tasted death,
them He makes to be first : and the rest that are not buried, are last caught up to meet
Him.

Who is there that can count me up the just that looked for the Son, whose number
cannot be determined by the mouth of us weak creatures ? Pray ye for me, O beloved,
that another time with strength endued, I in another legend may so set forth their
foretaste, as I am able. Who is adequate to the praising of the Son of the Truth that has
risen to us ? For it was for Him the righteous longed, that in their generation they
might see Him. Adam looked for Him, for He is the Cherub's Lord, and could minister
an entrance and a residence hard by the branches of the Tree of life. Abel longed
after Him, that in his days He might come; that instead of that lamb that he offered,
the Lamb of God he might behold. For Him Eve also looked ; for woman's nakedness
was sore, and He capable to clothe them ; not with leaves, but with that same glory
that they had exchanged away. The tower that the many builded, in mystery looked
for One, who coming down would build on earth a tower that lifts up to Heaven. Yea
the ark of living creatures looked in a type for our Lord ; for He should build the Holy
Church, wherein souls find a refuge. In Peleg's days earth was divided into tongues,


'^ Gen. ix 23. 3 Lev. xiv. 52. 4 Exod. vii. 12.

5 St. E. refers here to St. John x. 34, where the Word Himself teaches us that it was by His coming to
them that Saints of old were called Gods.

« Heb. iv. 8. ♦ ' i Thess. iv. 17.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 225


threescore and ten/ For Him Who by the tongues, to His Apostles divided earth.
Earth which the flood had swallowed up, in silence cried to her Lord. He came down
and opened Baptism, and men were drawn by it to Heaven. Seth and Enos, Cainan
too, were surnamed sons of God ; for the Son of God they looked, that they by grace
mip-ht be His brethren. But little short of a thousand years did Methuselah live :
He looked for the Son Who makes heirs of life that never ends ! Grace itself in hidden
mystery was beseeching on their behalf that their Lord might come in their age and fill
up their shortcomings. For the Holy Spirit in them, in their stead, besought with
meditation :^ He stirred them up, and in Him did they look on that Redeemer, after
whom they longed.^

The soul of just men perceive in the Son a Medicine of life ; and so it felt desires
that He might come in its own days, and then would it taste His sweetness. Enoch
was longing for Him, and since on earth the Son he saw not, he was justified by great
faith, and mounted up in Heaven to see Him. Who is there that will spurn at grace,
when the Gift that they of old gained not by much labour, freely comes to men now }
For Him Lamech also looked who might come and lovingly give Him quiet from his
labour and the toiling of his hands, and from the earth the Just One had cursed.^
Lamech then beheld his son, Noah, — him, in whom were figured types relating to the
Son. In the stead of the Lord afar off, the type at hand afforded quiet. Yea Noah
also longed to see Him, the taste of whose assisting graces he had tasted. For if the
type of Him preserved living things, Himself how sure to bestow life upon souls !
Noah longed for Him, by trial knowing Him, for through Him had the ark been
established. For if the type of Him thus saved life, assuredly much more would He in
person. Abraham perceived in Spirit that the Son's Birth was far of; instead of Him
in person he rejoiced to see even His day.^ To see Him Isaac longed, as having
tasted the taste of His redemption ; * for if the sign of Him so gave life, much more
would He by the reality.

Joyous ^ were to-day the Watchers,^ that the Wakeful came to wake us ! Who would
pass this night in slumber, in which all the world was watching .? Since Adam brought
into the world the sleep of death by sins, the Wakeful came down that He m.ight awake
us from the deep sleep of sin. Watch not we as usurers, who thinking on money put
to interest, watch at night so oft, to reckon up their capital, and interest. Wakeful and
cautious is the thief, who in the earth hath buried and concealed his sleep. His wake-
fulness all [comes to] this, that he may cause much wakefulness to them that be asleep.
W^akeful likewise is the glutton, who hath eaten much and is restless ; his watching is
to him his torment, because he was impatient of stint. Wakeful likewise is the
merchant ; of a night he works his fingers telling over what pounds are coming, and if
his wealth doubles or trebles. Wakeful likewise is the rich man, whose sleep his
riches chase away : his dogs sleep ; he guards his treasures from the thieves. W^akeful
also is the careful, by his care his sleep is swallowed : though his end stands by his
pillow, yet he wakes with cares for years to come. Satan teaches, O my brethren, one
watching instead of another; to good deeds to be sleepy, and to ill awake and watchful.
Even Judas Iscariot, for the whole night through was wakeful ; and he sold the righteous
Blood, that purchased the whole world. The son of the dark one put on darkness,
having stripped the Light from off him : and Him who created silver, for silver the
thief sold. Yea, Pharisees, the dark one's sons, all-the night through kept awake: the

8 This in round numbers is the received account of the number of languai^es at the dispersion.

9 Rom. viii. 26. 1 i Pet. i. 11. - Gen. v. 29. '■'• Joh'n viii. 56. ^ Heb. xi. 19.
5 Dan. iv. 13. « /. e., the Angels ; as usually in St. E.'s writings.

VOL. XIII. — 15


226 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


dark ones watched that they might veil the Light which is unlimited. Ye then watch
as [heaven's] lights in this night of starry light. For though so dark be its colour yet
in virtue it is clear.

For whoever is like this clear One, wakeful and prayerful in darkness, him in this
darkness visible a light unseen surrounds ! The bad man that in daylight stands, yet
as a son of darkness deals ; though with light clad outwardly, inly is with darkness
girt. Be we not deceived, beloved, by the fact that we are watching ! For whoso
does not rightly watch, his watch is an unrighteous watch. Whoso watches not cheer-
fully, his watching is but a sleeping : whoso also watches not innocently, even his
waking is his foe. This is the waking of the envious one ! a solid mass, compact with
harm. That watch is but a trafficking, with scorn and mockery compact. The wrath-
ful man if he wakes, fretful with wrath his wake will be, and his watching proves to
him full of rage and of cursings. If the babbler be waking, then his mouth becomes a
passage which for sins is ready but for prayers shows hindrance.

The wise man, if so be he that watches, one of two things chooseth him ; either
takes sweet, moderate, sleep, or a holy vigil keeps. "^ That night is fair, wherein He
Who is Fair ^ rose to come and make us fair. Let not aught that may disturb it enter
into our watch ! Fair be kept the ear's approach,^ chaste the seeing of the eye ! hal-
lowed the musing of the heart 1 the speaking of the mouth be cleared. Mary hid in
us to-day leaven that came from Abraham. Let us then so pity beggars as did Abra-
ham the needy. To-day the rennet fell on us from the gentle David's house. Let a
man show mercy to his persecutors, as did Jesse's son to Saul. ^ The prophets' sweet
salt ^ is to-day sprinkled among the Gentiles. Let us gain a new savour ^ by that whereby
the ancient people lost their savour. Let us speak the speech of wisdom ; speak we
not of things outside it, lest we ourselves be outside it !

In this night of reconcilement let no man be wroth or gloomy ! in this night that
stills all, none that threatens or disturbs ! This night belongs to the sweet One ; bitter
or harsh be in it none ! In this night that is the meek One's, high or haughty be in
it none ! In this day of pardoning let us not exact trespasses ! In this day of glad-
nesses let us not spread sadnesses ! In this day so sweet, let us not be harsh ! In
this day of peaceful rest, let us not be wrathful in it ! In this day when God came to
sinners, let not the righteous be in his mind uplifted over sinner ! In this day in which
there came the Lord of all unto the servants, let masters too condescend to their ser-
vants lovingly ! In this day in which the Rich became poor for our sakes, let the rich
man make the poor man share with him at his table. On this day to us came forth the
Gift, although we asked it not ! Let us therefore bestow alms on them that cry and
beg of us. This is the day that opened for us a gate on high to our prayers. Let us
open also gates to supplicants that have transgressed, and of us have asked [forgive-
ness.] To-day the Lord of nature was against His nature changed ; let it not to us be
irksome to turn our evil wills. Fixed in nature is the body ; great or less it cannot
become : but the will has such dominion, it can grow to any measure. To-day God-
head sealed itself upon Manhood, that so with the Godhead's stamp Manhood might be
adorned.

^ Ps. xlv. 5. 8 Cant, i.- 15.

9 St. E. here alludes to the early days of David ; he brought cheeses to his brethren ; these were made
by separating the curd from the whey with rennet, a small quantity of which will curdle much milk, as a
little leaven leavens the whole lump.

' I Sam. xxvi., xxvi. 2 2 Kings ii. 20. ^ Matt. v. 13.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 227


HYMN II.

Blessed be that Child, Who gladdened Bethlehem to-day ! Blessed be the Babe
Who made manhood young again to-day ! Blessed be the Fruit, Who lowered Himself
to our famished state ! Blessed be the Good One, Wno suddenly enriched our necessi-
tousness and supplied our needs ! Blessed He Whose tender mercies made Him con-
descend to visit our infirmities !

Praise to the Fountain that was sent"* for our propitiation. Praise be to Him Who
made void the Sabbath by fulfilling it ! Praise too to Him Who rebuked the leprosy
and it remained not, Whom the fever saw and fled ! Praise to the Merciful, Who bore
our toil ! Glory to Thy coming, which quickened the sons of men !

Glory to Him, Who came to us by His first-born ! Glory to the Silence,^ that spake
by His Voice. Glory to the One on high, Who was seen by His Day-spring ! Glory
to the Spiritual, Who was pleased to have a Body, that in it His virtue might be felt,
and He might by that Body show mercy on His household's bodies !

Glory to that Hidden One, Whose Son was made manifest ! Glory to that Living
One, Whose Son was made to die ! Glory to that Great One, W^hose Son descended
and was small ! Glory to the Power Who did straiten His greatness by a form, His
unseen nature by a shape ! With eye and mind we have beheld Him, yea with both
of them.

Glory to that Hidden One, Who even with the mind cannot be felt at all by them
that pry into Him ; but by His graciousness was felt by the hand of man ! The Nature
that could not be touched, by His hands was bound and tied, by His feet was pierced
and lifted up. Himself of His own will He embodied for them that took Him.

Blessed be He Whom free will crucified, because He let it : blessed be He Whom
the wood also did bear, because He allowed it. Blessed be He Whom the grave
bound, that had [thereby] a limit set it. Blessed be He Whose own wull brought Him
to the Womb and Birth, to arms and to increase [in stature]. Blessed He whose
changes purchased life for human nature."

Blessed He Who sealed our soul, and adorned it and espoused it to Himself. Blessed
He Who made our Body a tabernacle for His unseen Nature. Blessed He Who by our
tongue interpreted His secret things. Let us praise that Voice whose glory is hymned
with our lute, and His virtue with our harp. The Gentiles have assembled and have
come to hear His strains.

Glory to the Son of the Good One, Whom the sons of the evil one rejected ! Glory
to the Son of the Just One, Whom the sons of wickedness crucified ! Glory to Him
Who loosed us, and was bound for us all ! Glory to Him Who gave the pledge, and
redeemed it too ! Glory to the Beautiful, Who conformed us to His image ! Glory to
that Fair One, Who looked not to our foulnesses !

Glory to Him Who sowed His Light in the darkness,' and was reproached in His
hidden state, and covered His secret things. He also stripped and took off from us the
clothing of our filthiness. ' Glory be to Him on high, Who mixed His salt ' in our minds.
His leaven in our souls. His Body became Bread, to quicken our deadness.


4 There is perhaps an allusion here to the pool of Siloam, which comes from the root employed in the
original.

5 This name is given by St. E. to the Father, to suggest to the mind that there was a period when the
Father had not begun to work by His Word.

^ St. E. seems to mean, that whereas the alterations man undergoes in his body tend ultimately to decay
the same when undergone by our Lord tended to life.

' Ps. xcvii. ii. ^ Zech. iii. 3. 9 Mark ix. 49.


228 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


Praise to the Rich, Who paid for us all, that which He borrowed not ; * and wrote
[His bill], and also became our debtor ! By His yoke He brake from us the chains
of him that led us captive. Glory to the Judge Who was judged, and made His Twelve
to sit in judgment on the tribes, and by ignorant men condemned the scribes of that
nation !

Glory to Him Who could never be measured by us ! Our heart is too small for Him,
yea our mind is too feeble. He makes foolish our littleness by the riches of His
Wisdom. Glory to Him, Who lowered Himself, and asked ; ^ that He might hear and
learn that which He knew ; that He might by His questions reveal the treasure of His
helpful graces !

Let us adore Him Who enlightened with His doctrine our mind, and in our hearing
sought a pathway for His words. Praise we Him Who grafted into our tree His
fruit. Thanks to Him Who sent His Heir, that by Him He might draw us to Himself,
yea make us heirs with Him ! Thanks to that Good One, the cause of all goods !

Blessed He Who did not chide, because that He was good ! Blessed He Who did
not spurn, because that He was just also ! Blessed He Who was silent, and rebuked ;
that He might quicken us with both ! Severe His silence and reproachful. Mild His
severity even When He was accusing ; for He rebuked the traitor, and kissed the thief.

Glory to the hidden Husbandman of our intellects ! His seed fell on to our ground,
and made our mind rich. His increase came an hundredfold into the treasury of our
souls ! Let us adore Him Who sat down and took rest ; and walked in the way, so
that the Way was in the way, and the Door also for them that go in,^ by which they go
in to the kingdom.

Blessed the Shepherd Who became a Lamb for our reconcilement ! Blessed the
Branch Who became the Cup of our Redemption ! Blessed also be the Cluster, Fount
of medicine of life ! Blessed also be the Tiller, W^ho became Wheat, that He might
be sown ; and a Sheaf,* that He might be cut ! [Blessed be] the Architect Who became
a Tower for our place of safety ! ^ Blessed He Who so tempered the feelings of our
mind,^ that we with our harp should sing that which the winged creatures' mouth
knows not with its strains to sing ! Glory to Him, Who beheld how we had pleased
to be like to brutes in our rage and our greediness ; and came down and was one of
us, that we might become heavenly !

Glory be to Him, Who never felt the need of our praising Him ; yet felt the need
as being kind to us, and thirsted^ as loving us, and asks us to give to Him, and longs
to give to us. His fruit was mingled with us men, that in Him we might come nigh
to Him, Who condescended to us. By the Fruit of His stem He grafted us into His
Tree.

Let us praise Him, Who prevailed and quickened us by His stripes ! Praise we
Him, Who took away the curse by His thorns ! Praise we Him Who put death to death
by His dying ! Praise we Him, Who held His peace and justified us ! Praise we Him,
Who rebuked death that had overcome us 1 Blessed He, Whose helpful graces cleansed
out the left side! ®

Praise we Him Who watched and put to sleep him that led us captive. Praise we
Him Who went to sleep, and chased our deep sleep away. Glory be to God Who
cured weak manhood ! Glory be to Him Who was baptized, and drowned our iniquity

• Ps. Ixix. 4. Comp. Luke xvi. 6. 2 Luke ii. 46. 3 John x. 9, xiv. 6.

4 Alluding to the wave-offering, Levit. xxiii. 11, which was ordinarily interpreted of Christ.
^ Ps. Ixi. 3. 6 Prov. xviii. 10. '' Mat. xxv. 40.

8 Allusion is here made perhaps to Eccles. x. 2, " a wise man's heart is at his right hand, but a fool's
heart is at his left.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 229


in the deep, and choked him ^ that choked us ! Let us glorify with all our mouths the
Lord of all creatures !

Blessed be the Physician Who came down and amputated without pain, and healed
wounds with a medicine that was not harsh. His Son became a Medicine, that showed
sinners mercy. Blessed be He Who dwelt in the womb, and wrought therein a perfect
Temple, that He might dwell in it, a Throne that He might be in it, a Garment that
He might be arrayed in it, and a Weapon that He might conquer in it.

Blessed be He Whom our mouth cannot adequately praise, because His Gift is too
great for skill of orators [to tell]; neither can the faculties adequately praise His good-
ness. For praise Him as we may, it is too little.

And since it is useless to be silent and to constrain ourselves, may our feebleness
excuse such praise as we can sing.

How gracious He, Who demands not more than our strength can give ! How would
Thy servant be condemned in capital and interest, did he not give such as he could,
and did he refuse that which He owed ! Ocean of glory Who needest not to have Thy
glory sung, take in Thy goodness this drop of praise ; since by Thy Gift Thou hast
supplied my tongue a sense for glorifying Thee.'

HYMN IIL

Blessed be that first day of thine, Lord, wherewith this day of Thy Feast is stamped !
Thy day is like Thee, in that it shows mercy unto men, in that it is handed down and
comes with all generations.

This is the day that ends with the aged, and returns that it may begin with the
young ! a day that by its love refreshes itself, that it may refresh by its might us de-
cayed creatures. Thy day when it had visited us and passed and gone away, in its
mercy returned and visited us again : for it knows that human nature needs it, in all
things like unto Thee as seeking us.

The world is in want of its fountain ; and for it. Lord, as for Thee, all therein are
athirst. This is the day that rules over the seasons ! the dominion of Thy day is like
Thine, which stretches over generations that have come, and are to come ! Thy day
is like unto Thee, because when it is one, it buds and multiplies itself, that it may be
like Thee !

In this Thy day. Lord, which is near unto us, we see Thy Birth that is far off! Like
to Thee be Thy day to us. Lord ; let it be a mediator and a warranter of peace.

Thy day reconciled Heaven and earth, because therein the Highest came down to
the lowest.

Thy day was able to reconcile the Just One, who was wroth at our sins ; Thy day
forgave thousands of sins, for in it bowels of mercy shone forth upon the guilty !

Great, Lord, is Thy day ; let it not be small upon us, let it show mercy according
as it used to do, upon us transgressors !

And if every day. Lord, Thy forgiveness wells forth, how exceeding great should it
be upon this day ! All the days from the Treasure of Thy bright day gain blessings.

All the feasts from the stores of this feast have their fairness and their ornaments.

Thy bowels of mercy upon Thy day make Thou to abound unto us, O Lord ! Make
us to distinguish Thy day from all days ! for great is the treasure-house of the day of
Thy Birth ; let it be the ransomer of debtors ! Great is this day above all days, for in

^ Luke viii. 33.


230 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


it came forth mercy to sinners. A store of medicines is this Thy great day, because on
it shone forth the Medicine of Life to the wounded ! A treasure of helpful graces is
this day, for that on it Light gleamed forth upon our blindness ! Yea, it also brought a
sheaf unto us ; and it came, that from it might flow plenty upon our hunger. This day is
that forerunning Cluster, in which the cup of salvation was concealed ! This day is
the first-born feast, which, being born the first, overcomes all feasts. In the winter
which strips the fruit of the branches off from the barren vine, Fruit sprang up ' unto us ;
in the cold that bares all the trees, a shoot was green for us of the house of Jesse. In
December^ when the seed is hidden in the earth, there sprouted forth from the Womb
the Ear of Life. In March ^ when the seed was sprouting in the air, a Sheaf * sowed itself
in the earth. The harvest thereof, Death devoured it in Hell ; which the Medicine of
life that is hidden therein did yet burst open ! In March when the lambs bleat in the
wilderness, into the Womb the Paschal Lamb entered ! Out of the stream whence the
fishers came up, ^ He was baptized and came up Who incloses all things in his net ; out
of the stream the fish whereof Simon took, out of it the Fisher of men came up, and
took him. With the Cross which catches all robbers, He caught up unto life that
robber ! ^ The Living by His death emptied Hell, He unloosed it and let fly away from
it entire multitudes ! The publicans and harlots, the impure snares, the snares of the
deceitful fowler the Holy One seized ! The sinful woman, who was a snare for men.
He made a mirror for penitent women ! The fig that cast its fruit, that refused fruit, ^
offered Zacchseus as fruit; the fruit of its own nature it gave not, but it yielded one
reasonable fruit ! The Lord spread His thirst over the well, and caught her that was
thirsty with the w^ater that He asked of her. He caught one soul at the well, and again
caught with her the whole city : * twelve fishers the Holy One caught, and again caught
with them the w^hole world. As for Iscariot, that escaped from His nets, the strangling
halter fell upon his neck ! His all-quickening net catches the living,® and he that escapes
from it escapes from the living.

And who is able. Lord, to tell me up the several succours that are hid in Thee ? How
shall the parched mouth be able to drink from the Fountain of the Godhead ! Answer to-
day the voice of our petition ; let our prayer which is in words take effect in deeds. Heal
us, O my Master ; every time that we see Thy Feast, may it cause rumours that we have
heard to pass away. Our mind wanders amid these voices. O Voice of the Father,
still [other] voices ; the world is noisy, in Thee let it gain itself quiet ; for by Thee the
sea was stilled from its storms. The devils rejoiced when they heard the voice of blas-
phemy : let the Watchers rejoice in us as they are wont.' From amongst Thy fold there
is the voice of sorrowfulness ; OThou that makest all rejoice,^ let Thy flock rejoice ! as
for our murmur, O my Master, in it reject us not : our mouth murmurs since it is sinful.
Let Thy day, O Lord, give us all manner of joy, with the flowers^ of peace, let us
keep Thy passover. In the day of Thy Ascension we are lifted up : * with the new
Bread shall be the memorial thereof. O Lord, increase our peace, that we may keep the
three feasts of the Godhead. Great is Thy day, Lord, let us not be despised. All men
honour the day of Thy birth. Thou righteous One, keep Thou the glory of Thy birth ;
for even Herod honoured the day of Llis birth ! The dances of the impure one pleased the
tyrant ; to Thee, Lord, let the voice of chaste women be sweet !, Thee, Lord, let the
voice of chaste women please, whose bodies Thou guardest holily. The day of Herod

^ Isa 5. 2. 2 (Coniim.) 3 (Nisan.) ^ L^y xxiii. 10. ^ Ezek. xlvii. 10, etc. 6 Luke xxiii. 43.

■^ St. E. seems to blend here the account of the withering of the fig-tree and that of Zacchaeus climbing
into the zvild fig-tree, as the Peshitto renders it.

8 John iv.42. 9 Mat. xiii. 47. ' Mat. xviii. 10. 2 i^uke xv. 7.

3 Flowers used at Easter in the Churches are here alluded to, •* John xx. 17.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 231

was like him : Tliy day too is like Thee ! The day of the troubled one was troubled
with sin ; and fair as Thou art is Thy fair day ! The feast of the tyrant killed the
preacher ; in Thy feast every man preaches glory. On the day of the murderer, the
Voice' was put to silence ; but on Thy day are the voices of the feast. The foul one in
his feast put out the Light, that darkness might cover the adulterers. The season of the
Holy One trims lamps, that darkness may flee with the hidden things thereof The
day of that fox" stank like himself; but holy is the feast of the True Lamb.'' The day of
the transgressor passed ® away like himself; Thy day like Thyself abideth for ever. I'he
day of the tyrant raged like himself, because with his chain it put to silence the righteous
Voice. The feast of the Meek One is tranquil like Himself, because His sun shines upon
His persecutors. The tyrant was conscious that He was not a king, therefore to the
King of kings he gave place. The whole day, Lord, suffices me not to balance Thy
praise with his blame. May Thy Gracious day cause my sin to pass away, seeing that
it is with the day of the impure one, that I have weighed Thy day ! For great is Thy
day beyond comparison ! nor can it be compared with our days. The day of man is
as of the earthy : the day of God is as of God ! Thy day, Lord, is greater than
those of the prophets,^ and I have taken and set it beside that of the murderer!
Thou knowest, O Lord, as knowing all things, how to hear the comparison
that my tongue hath made. Let Thy day grant our requests for life, since his day
granted the request for death. The needy king swore on his feast that half his king-
dom should be the reward of the dance ! Let Thy feast then, O Thou that enrichcst
all, shed down in mercy a crumb of fine wheat flour ! From the dry land gushed the
Fountain, which sufficed to satisfy the thirst of the Gentiles 1 From the Virgin's womb
as from a strong rock sprouted up the seed, whence was much fruit ! Barns without
number did Joseph fill ; ^ and they were emptied and failed in the years of the famine.
One true Sheaf gave bread ; the bread of Heaven, whereof there is no stint. The
bread which the First-born brake in the wilderness,^ failed and passed away though
very good. He returned again and broke the New Bread ^ which ages and generations
shall not waste away ! The seven loaves also that He brake failed,* and the five loaves
too that He multiplied were consumed ; ^ the Bread that He brake exceeded the
world's needs, for the more it was divided, the more it multiplied exceedingly. With
much wine also He filled the waterpots ; they drew it out, yet it failed though it was
abundant : of the Cup that He gave though the draught was small, very great was its
strength, so that there is no stint thereto. A Cup is He" that contains all strong wines,
and also a Mystery in the midst of which He Himself is ! The one Bread that He
brake has no bound, and the one Cup that He mingled has no stint ! ' The Wheat that
was sown,^ on the third day came up and filled the Garner of Life. ^ The spiritual
Bread, as the Giver of it, quickens the spiritual spiritually, and he that receives it
carnally, receives it rashly to no profit. This Bread of grace let the spirit receive dis-
cennngly, as the medicine of Life. If the dead sacrifices in the name of devils were
offered,' yea eaten, not without a mystery ; at the holy thing of the offering, how much
more does it behove us that this mystery be circumspectly administered by us. He
that eateth of the sacrifice in the name of devils, becomes devilish without all contra-

5 This was a common name of old for St. John Baptist, with allusion to St. John i. 23.
*» Luke xiii. 32.

'' It may be well to observe once for all, that true is often use, as in John xv, i, for " real," in opposition to
"typical," as in Scripture, so in the Fathers.

** The same Syriac verb means to pass, and to transgress.

^ It might seem from this that there were some days kept in their honour in the East.

' Gen. xli. 49. '•^ John vi. i, etc. '^ p. 227. -i Mat. xv. 36. ^ Mat. xiv. 17.

6 Ps. xvi. 5 ^ Prov. ix. 5. » John xii. 24. ^ ]vjat. xiii.\3o. ' i Cor. x. 20.


232 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


diction. He that eateth the Heavenly Bread, becomes Heavenly without doubt !
Wine teaches us, in that it makes him that is familiar therewith like itself : for it hates
much him that is fond of it, and is intoxicating and maddening, and a mocker ^ to him !
Light teaches us, in that it makes like unto itself the eye the daughter of the sun : the
eye by the light saw the nakedness, and ran and chastely hid the chaste man.^ As for
that nakedness it was wine that made it, which even to the chaste skills not to show
mercy !

With the weapon of the deceiver the First-born clad Himself, that with the weapon
that killed, He might restore to life again ! With the tree wherewith he slew us, He
delivered us. With the wine which maddened us, with it we were made chaste 1
With the rib that was drawn out of Adam, the wicked one drew out the heart of Adam.
There rose from the Rib * a hidden power, which cut off Satan as Dagon : for in that Ark
a book was hidden that cried and proclaimed concerning the Conqueror ! There was
then a mystery revealed, in that Dagon was brought low in his own place of refuge ! ^
The accomplishment came after the type, in that the wicked one was brought low in
the place in which he trusted ! Blessed be He Who came and in Him were accom-
plished the mysteries of the left hand, and the right hand.^ Fulfilled was the mystery
that was in the Lamb, and fulfilled was the type that was in Dagon. Blessed is He
Who by the True Lamb redeemed us, and destroyed our destroyer as He did Dagon ! In
December when the nights are long, rose unto us the Day, of Whom there is no bound !
In winter when all the world is gloomy, forth came the Fair One Who cheered all in
the world ! In winter that makes the earth barren, virginity learned to bring forth. In
December, that causes the travails of the earth to cease, in it were the travails of vir-
ginity. The early lamb no one ever used to see before the shepherds : and as for the
true Lamb, in the season of His birth, the tidings of Him too hasted unto the shepherds.
That old wolf saw the sucking Lamb, and he trembled before Him, though He had con-
cealed himself; for because the wolf had put on sheep's clothing, the Shepherd of all
became a Lamb in the flocks, in order that when the greedy one had been bold against
the Meek, the Mighty One might rend that Eater.' The Holy One dwelt bodily in the
womb ; and He dwelt spiritually in the mind. Mary that conceived Him abhorred the
marriage bed; let not that soul commit whoredom in the which He dwelleth. Because
Mary perceived Him, she left her betrothed : He dwelleth in chaste virgins, if they
perceive Him.* The deaf perceive not the mighty thunder, neither does the heady
man the sound of the commandment. For the deaf is bewildered in the time of the
thunderclap, the heady man is bewildered also at the voice of instruction ; if fearful
thunder terrifies the deaf, then would fearful wrath stir the unclean ! That the deaf
hears not is no blame to him ; but whoso tramples [on the commandments] it is
headiness. From time to time there is thunder : but the voice of the law thunders
every day. Let us not close our ears when their openings, as being opened and not
closed against it, accuse us ; and the door of hearing is open by nature, that it might
reproach us for our headiness against our will. The door of the voice and the door of
the mouth our will can open or close. Let us see what the Good One has given us ;
and let us hear the mighty Voice, and let not the doors of our ears be closed.

Glory to that Voice Which became Body, and to the Word of the High One Which
became Flesh ! Hear Him also, O ears, and see Him, O eyes, and feel Him, O hands,
and eat Him, O mouth ! Ye members and senses give praise unto Him, that came and
quickened the whole body ! Mary bare the silent Babe, while in Him w^ere hidden all

2 Prov. XX. I. 3 Gen. jx. 23. ^ Gen. iii. 15. ^ j Sam. v. 4.

6 Mat. XXV. 33. "^ Judg. xiv. 6. ^ Mat. v. 28.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 233

tongues ! Joseph bare Him, and in Him was hidden a nature more ancient than aught
that is old ! The High One became as a little child, and in Him was hidden a treasure
of wisdom sufficing for all ! Though Most High, yet He sucked the milk of Mary, and
of His goodness ail creatures suck ! He is the Breast of Life, and the Breath of Life ;
the dead suck from His life and revive. Without the breath of the air no man lives,
without the Might of the Son no man subsists. On His living breath that quickeneth
all, depend the spirits that are above and that are beneath. When He sucked the milk
of Mary, He was suckling all with Life. While He was lying on His Mother's bosom,
in His bosom were all creatures lying. He was silent as a Babe, and yet He was
making His creatures execute all His commands. For without the First-born no man
can approach unto the Essence, to which He is equal. The thirty years He was in the
earth, W^ho was ordering all creatures, W^ho was receiving all the offerings of praise
from those above and those below. He was wholly in the depths and wholly in the
highest ! He was wholly with all things and wholly with each. While His body was
forming within the womb, His power was fashioning all members ! While the Concep-
tion of the Son was fashioning in the womb, He Himself was fashioning babes in the
womb. Yet not as His body was weak in the womb, was His power weak in the
womb ! So too not as His body was feeble by the Cross, was His might also feeble by
the Cross. For when on the Cross He quickened the dead, His Body quickened them,
yea, rather His Will ; just as when He was dwelling wholly in the womb, His hidden
Will was visiting all ! For see how, when He was wholly hanging upon the Cross, His
Power was yet making all creatures move ! For He darkened the sun and made the
earth quake ; He rent the graves and brought forth the dead ! See how when He was
wholly on the Cross, yet again He was wholly everywhere ! Thus was He entirely
in the w^omb, while He was again wholly in everything ! While on the Cross He
quickened the dead, so while a Babe He was fashioning babes. While He was slain,
He opened the graves ; while He was in the womb, He opened wombs. Come
hearken, my brethren, concerning the Son of the Secret One that was revealed in His
Body, while His Power was concealed ! For the Power of the Son is a free Power ; the
womb did not bind it up, as it did the Body ! For while His Power was dwelling in
the womb, He was fashioning infants in the womb ! His Powder compassed her, that
compassed Him. For if He drew in His Power, all things would fall ; His Power up-
holds all things; while He was within the womb, He left not His hold of all. He in
His own Person shaped an Image in the womb, and was shaping in all wombs all
countenances. Whilst He was increasing in stature among the poor, from an abundant
treasury He was nourishing all ! While she that anointed Him was anointing Him,
with His dew and His rain He was anointing all ! The Magi brought myrrh and gold,
while in Him was hidden a treasure of riches. The myrrh and spices which He had
prepared and created, did the Magi bring Him of His own. It was by Power from
Him that Mary was able to bear in Her bosom Him that bears up all things! It was
from the great storehouse of all creatures, Mary gave Him all which she did give
Him ! She gave Him milk from Himself that prepared it, she gave Him food
from Himself that made it ! He gave milk unto Mary as God: again He sucked it
from her, as the Son of Man. Her hands bare Him in that He had emptied. His
strength ; and her arm embraced Him, in that He had made Him.self small. The
measure of His Majesty who has measured.? He caused His measures to shrink into
a Raiment. She wove for Him and clothed Him because He had put off His glory.
She measured Him and wove for Him, since He had made Himself little.


9 Ps. cxxxix. 16. 1 Mat. xxvii. 52. ^ p. ii. n. d. ^ Jer. xxxi. 22.


234 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


The sea when it bore Him was still and calmed, and how came the lap of Joseph to
bear Him ? The womb of hell conceived Him and was burst open, and how did the
womb of Mary contain Him ? The stone that was over the grave He broke open by
His might, and how could Mary's arm contain Him ? Thou camest to a low estate,
that Thou mightest raise all to life ! Glory be unto Thee from all that are quickened
by Thee ! Who is able to speak of the Son of the Hidden One who came down and
clothed Himself with a Body in the womb ? He came forth and sucked milk as a child,
and among little children the Son of the Lord of all crept about. They saw Him as a
little Child in the street, while there was dwelling in Him the Love of all. Visibly
children surrounded Him in the street ; secretly Angels surrounded Him in fear. Cheer-
ful was He with the little ones as a child ; awful was He with the Angels as a Com-
mander : He was awful to John for him to loose His shoe's latchet : He was gentle to
sinners that kissed His feet ! The Angels as Angels saw Him ; according to the
measure of his knowledge each man beheld Him : according to the measure of each
man's discernment, thus he perceived Him that is greater than all. The Father and
Himself alone are a full measure of knowledge so as know Him as He is ! For every
creature whether above or below obtains each his measure of knowledge ; He the Lord
of all gives all to us. He that enriches all, requires usury of all. He gives to all things
as wanting nothing, and yet requires usury of all as if needy. He gave us herds and
flocks as Creator, and yet asked sacrifices as though in need. He made the water wine
as Maker : and yet he drank of it as a poor man. Of His own He mingled [wine] in
the marriage feast, His wine He mingled and gave to drink when He was a guest. In
His love He multiplied [the days of] the aged Simeon ; that he, a mortal, might pre-
sent Him who quickeneth all. By power from Him did Simeon carry Him ; he that
presented Him, was by Him presented [to God]. He gave imposition of hands to
Moses in the Mount,* and received it in the midst of the river from John. In the power
of His gifts John was enabled to baptize, though earthy, the heavenly. By power from
Him the earth supported Him : it was nigh to being dissolved, and His might strength-
ened it. Martha gave Him to eat : viands which He had created she placed before Him.
Of His own all that give have made their vows : of His own treasures they placed upon
His table.

HYMN IV.

This is the month which brings all manner of joy ; it is the freedom of the bonds-
men, the pride of the free, the crown of the gates, the soothing of the body, that also in
its love put purple upon us as upon kings.

This is the month that brings all manner of victories ; it frees the spirit ; it subdues
the body ; it brings forth life among mortals ; it caused, in its love, Godhead, to dwell
in Manhood.

In this day the Lord exchanged glory for shame, as being humble ; because Adam
changed the truth for unrighteousness as being a rebel : the Good One had mercy on
him, justified and set right them that had turned aside.

Let every man chase away his weariness, since that Majesty was not wearied with
being in the womb nine months for us, and in being thirty years in Sodom among the
madmen.^

Because the Good One saw that the race of man was poor and humbled, He made
feasts as a treasure-house, and opened them to the slothful, that the feast might stir up
the slothful one to rise and be rich.

'* Exod. xxxiii 22. s jg^ j_ jq. Rev. xi. 8.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 235


Lo ! the First-born has opened unto us His feast as a treasure-house. This one day
in the whole year alone opens that treasure-house : come, let us make gain, let us
grow rich from it, ere they shut it up.

Blessed be the watchful, that have taken by force ^ from it the spoil of Life. It is a
o-reat disgrace, when a man sees his neio^hbor take and carry out treasure, and himself
sits in the treasure-house slumbering, so as to come forth empty.

In this feast, let each one of us crown the gates of his heart. The Holy Spirit longs
for the gates thereof, that He may enter in and dwell there, and sanctify it, and He
goes round about to all the gates to see where He may enter.

In this feast, the gates are glad before the gates, ^ and the Holy One rejoices in the
holy temple, and the voice resounds in the mouth of children, and Christ rejoices in
His own feast as a mighty man.

At the Birth of the Son the king was enrolling all men for the tribute-money, that
they might be debtors to Him : the King came forth to us Who blotted out our bills,*
and wrote another bill in His own Name that He might be our debtor. The sun gave
longer light, and foreshadowed the mystery by the degrees which it had gone up. ^ It
was twelve days since it had gone up, and to-day is the thirteenth day : a type exact
of the Son's birth ^ and of His Twelve.

Moses shut up a lamb in the month Nisan on the tenth day ; a type this of the Son
that came into the womb and shut Himself up therein on the tenth day.^ He came
forth from the womb in this month in which the sun gives longer light.

The darkness was overcome, that it might proclaim that Satan was overcome ; and
the sun gave longer light, that it might triumph, because the First-born was victorious.
Along with the darkness the dark one was overcome, and with the greater light our
Light conquered !

Joseph caressed the Son as a Babe ; he ministered to Him as God. He rejoiced in
Him as in the Good One, and he was awe-struck at Him as the Just One, greatly be-
wildered.

"Who hath given me the Son of the Most High to be a Son to me ? I was jealous
of Thy Mother, and I thought to put her away, and I knew not that in her womb was
hidden a mighty treasure, that should suddenly enrich my poor estate. David the king
sprang of my race, and wore the crown : and I have come to a very low estate, who
instead of a king am a carpenter. Yet a crown hath come to me, for in my bosom is
the Lord of crowns ! "

With rival words Mary burned, yea she lulled Him, [saying,] Who hath given me,
the barren, that I should conceive and bring forth this One, that is manifold; a little
One, that is great ; for that He is wholly with me, and wholly everywhere.?

The day that Gabriel came in unto my low estate, he made me free instead of a
handmaid, of a sudden : for I was the handmaid of Thy Divine Nature, and am also
the Mother of Thy human Nature, O Lord and Son !

Of a sudden the handmaid became the King's daughter in Thee, Thou Son of the
King. Lo, the meanest in the house of David, by reason of Thee, Thou Son of David,
lo, a daughter of earth hath attained unto Heaven by the Heavenly One I

How am I astonied that there is laid before me a Child, older than all things !

6 Mat. xi. 12. "^ /. e., the gates of the heart, before the gates of the Church.

^ Col. ii. i^. 9 The increase of hght at the time of the Nativity is meant.

• Exod. xii. 3.

2 Of Nisan. So St. E. writes on Exod. xii. 3. " The Lamb is a type of our Lord, who on the tenth of
Nisan entered into the womb ; for from the tenth day of the seventh month when Zachary received the
message of John's birth, even to the tenth day of the first month when Mary received the message from the
Angel, are six months."


236 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


His eye is gazing unceasingly upon Heaven. As for the stammering of His mouth, to
my seeming it betokens, that with God its silence speaks.

Who ever saw a Child the whole of Whom beholdeth every place.? His look is like
one that orders all creatures that are above and that are below ! His visage is like
that Commander that commandeth all.

How shall I open the fountain of milk to Thee, O Fountain ? Or how shall I give
nourishment to Thee that nourishest all from Thy Table.? How shall I bring to swad-
dling clothes One wrapped round with rays of glory .?

My mouth knows not how I shall call Thee, O Thou Child of the Living One : for
to venture to call Thee as the Child of Joseph, I tremble, since Thou art not his seed :
and I am fearful of denying the name of him to whom they have betrothed me.

While Thou art the Son of One, then should I be calling Thee the Son of many. For
ten thousand names would not suffice Thee, since Thou art the Son of God and also
the Son of man, yea, David's Son and Mary's Lord.

Who hath made the Lord of mouths to be without a mouth.? For my pure concep-
tion of Thee wicked men have slandered me. Be, O Thou Holy One, a Speaker for
Thy Mother. Show a miracle that they may be persuaded, from Whom it is that I
conceived Thee !

For Thy sake too I am hated, Thou Lover of all. Lo ! I am persecuted who have
conceived and brought forth One House of refuge for men. Adam will rejoice, for
Thou art the Key of Paradise.

Lo, the sea raged against Thy mother as against Jonah. Lo, Herod, that raging
wave, sought to drown the Lord of the seas. Whither I shall flee Thou shalt teach me,
O Lord of Thy Mother.

With Thee I will flee, that I may gain in Thee Life in every place. The prison with
Thee is no prison, for in Thee man goes up unto Heaven : the grave with Thee is no
grave, for Thou art the Resurrection ! ^

A star of light which was not nature, shone forth suddenly ; less than the sun and
greater than the sun, less than it in its visible light, but greater than it in its hidden
might, by reason of its mystery.

The Morning Star cast its bright beams among the darknesses, and led them as blind
men, and they came and received a great light : they gave offerings and received life,
and they worshipped and returned.

In the height and the depth two preachers were there to the Son : the bright star
shouted above ; John also preached below, two preachers, an earthly and a heavenly.

That above showed His Nature to be from the Majesty, and that below too showed
his Nature to be from mankind. O great marvel, that His Godhead and His Manhood
each was preached by them.

Whoso thought Him earthly, the bright star convinced him that He was heavenly ;
j^nd whoso thought Him spiritual, John convinced him that Lie was also corporeal.

In the Holy temple Simeon carried Him, and lulled Him, [saying,] "Thou art come,
O Merciful One, showing mercy on my old age, making my bones to go into the grave
in peace. In Thee shall I be raised from the grave into Paradise ! "

Anna embraced Him, and put her mouth to His lips, and the Spirit dwelt upon her
own lips. As when Isaiah's mouth was silent, the coal" which approached his lips
opened his mouth ; so Anna burned with the Spirit of His mouth, yea, she lulled Him,
[saying,] '' Son of the Kingdom, Son of the lowliness, that hearest and art still, that

3 John xi. 25. 4 isai 5


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 237


seest and art hidden, that knowest and art unknown, God, Son of Man, glory be unto
Thy Name."

The barren also heard, ran, and came with their provisions : the Magi came with
their treasures, the barren came with their provisions. Provisions and riches were sud-
denly heaped up in the house of the poor.

■ The barren woman cried out, as at that which she looked not for. Who hath granted
me this sight of thy Babe, O Blessed One, by whom the heaven and earth are filled !
Blessed be thy Fruit, which made the barren vine to bear a cluster.

Zacharias came and opened his venerable mouth and cried, "Where is the King, for
whose sake I have begotten the Voice that is to preach before His face .? Hail, Son of
the King, to whom also our Priesthood shall be given up ! "

John approached with his parents and worshipped the Son, and He shed glory upon
his countenance; and he was not moved as when in the womb ! Mighty miracle, that
here he was worshipping, there he leaped.

Herod also, that base fox, that stalked about like a lion, as a fox crouched down,
and howled, when he heard the roaring ot the Lion, who came to sit in the kingdom
according to the Scriptures. The fox heard that the Lion was a whelp, and as a suck-
ling ; and he sharpened His teeth, that while He was yet a child the fox might lie in
wait and devour the Lion ere He had grown up, and the breath of His mouth should
destroy him.

The whole creation became mouths to Him, and cried concerning Him. The Magi
cried by their offerings ! the barren cried with their children, the star of light criea in
that air, lo I the Son of the King !

The Heavens were opened, the waters were calmed, the Dove glorified Him, the
voice of the Father, louder than thunder, was instant and said. This is my beloved
Son. The Angels proclaim Him, the children shout to Him with their Hosannas.

These voices above and below proclaim Him and cry dloud. The slumber of Sion
was not dispersed by the voice of the thunders, but she was offended, stood up, and
slew Him because He aroused her.

HYMN V.

At the birth of the Son, there was a great shouting in Bethlehem ; for the Angels
came down, and gave praise there. Their voices were a great thunder : at that voice
of praise the silent ones came, and gave praise to the Son.

Blessed be that Babe in whom Eve and Adam were restored to youth ! The
shepherds also came laden with the best gifts of their flock : sweet milk, clean flesh,
befitting praise ! They put a difference, and gave Joseph the flesh, Mary the milk, and
the Son the praise ! They brought and presented a suckling lamb to the Paschal
Lamb, a first-born to the First-born, a sacrifice to the Sacrifice, a lamb of time to the
Lamb of Truth. Fair sight [to see] the lamb offered to The Lamb !

The lamb bleated as it was offered before the First-born. It praised the Lamb, that
had come to set free the flocks and the oxen from sacrifices : ^" yea that Paschal Lamb,
Who handed down and brought in the Passover of the Son.

The shepherds came near and worshipped Him with their staves. They saluted
Him with peace, prophesying the while, " Peace, O Prince of the Shepherds. " The rod
of Moses' praised Thy Rod, O Shepherd of all ; for Thee Moses praises, although his
lambs have become wolves, and his flocks as it were dragons, and his sheep fanged
beasts. In the fearful wilderness his flocks became furious, and attacked him.

"^ Ps. 1. 9 ; Is. Ixvi. 3, ** Exod. iv. 4, etc.


238 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


Thee then the Shepherds praise, because Thou hast reconciled the wolves and the
lambs within the fold ; O Babe, that art older than Noah and younger than Noah, that
reconciled all within the ark amid the billows !

David Thy father for a lamb's sake slaughtered a lion. Thou, O Son of David, hast
killed the unseen wolf that murdered Adam, the simple lamb who fed and bleated in
Paradise.

At that voice of praise, brides were moved to hallow themselves, and virgins to be
chaste, and even young girls became grave : they advanced and came in multitudes,
and worshipped the Son.

Aged women of the city of David came to the daughter of David ; they gave
thanks and said, " Blessed be our country, whose streets are lightened with the rays of
Jesse ! To-day is the throne of David established by Thee, O Son of David."

The old men cried, " Blessed be that Son Who restored Adam to youth, Who w^as
vexed to see that he was old and worn out, and that the serpent who had killed him,
had changed his skin and had gotten himself away. Blessed be the Babe in Whom
Adam and Eve were restored to youth.''

The chaste women said, O Blessed Fruit, bless the fruit of our wombs ; to Thee
may they be given as first-born. They waxed fervent and prophesied concerning their
children, who, when they were killed for Him, were cut off, as it were first-fruits.

The barren also fondled Him, and carried Him ; they rejoiced and said, Blessed
Fruit born without marriage, bless the wombs of us that are married ; have mercy on
our barrenness, Thou wonderful Child of Virginity !


HYMN VI.

Blessed be the Messenger that was laden, and came ; a great peace ! The Bowels
of the Father brought Him down to us ; He did not bring up our debts to Him, but
made a satisfaction to that Majesty with His own goods.

Praised be the Wise One, who reconciled and joined the Divine with the Human
Nature. One from above and one from below, He confined the Natures as medicines,
and being the Image of God, became man.

That Jealous One when He saw that Adam was dust, and that the cursed serpent
had devoured him, shed soundness into that which was tasteless, and made him [as]
salt, wherewith the accursed serpent should be blinded.

Blessed be the Merciful One, who saw the weapon by Paradise, that closed the way
to the Tree of Life ; and came and took a Body which could suffer, that with the Door,
that was in His side, He -might open the w^ay into Paradise.

Blessed be that Merciful One, who lent not Himself to harshness, but without con-
straint conquered by wisdom ; that He might give an ensample unto men, that by
virtue and wisdom they might conquer discerningly.

Blessed is Thy flock, since Thou art the gate thereof, and Thou art the staff thereof.
Thou art the Shepherd thereof. Thou art the Drink thereof. Thou art the salt thereof,
yea, the Visitor thereof. Hail to the Only-Begotten, that bare abundantly all manner
of consolations !

The husbandmen came and did obeisance before the Husbandman of Life. They
prophesied to Him as they rejoiced, [saying,] "Blessed be the Husbandman, by
Whom the ground of the heart is tilled, Who gathereth His wheat into the garner of
Life."

The husbandmen came and gave glory to the Vineyard that sprang of the root and


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 239

stem of Jesse, the Virgin Cluster of the glorious Vine. " May we be vessels for Thy
new Wine that renews all things."

" In Thee may the Vineyard of my Well-beloved that yielded wild grapes ^ find peace !
Graft its vines from Thy stocks ; let it be laden entirely from Thy blessings with a fruit
which may reconcile the Lord of the Vineyard, Who threatens it.''

Because of Joseph the workmen came to the Son of Joseph saying, '' Blessed be Thy
Nativity, Thou Head of Workmen, the impress whereof the ark bore, after which was
fashioned the Tabernacle of the congregation that was for a time only ! " ^

"Our craft praises Thee, Who art our glory. Make Thou the yoke which is light, yea
easy, for them that bear it ; make the measure, in which there can be no falseness,
which is full of Truth ; yea, devise and make measures^ by righteousness ; that he that
is vile may be accused thereby, and he that is perfect, may be acquitted thereby.
Weigh therewith both mercy and truth, O just One, as a judge. "

' ' Bridegrooms with their brides rejoiced. ' Blessed be the Babe, whose Mother was
Bride of the Holy One! Blessed the marriage feast, whereat Thou wast present, in
which when wine was suddenly wanting, in Thee it abounded again ! ' "

The children cried out, ''Blessed He that hath become unto us a Brother, and Com-
panion in the midst of the streets. Blessed be the day which by the Branches * gives
glory to the Tree of life, that made His Majesty be brought low, to our childish
age '.

Women heard that a Virgin should conceive and bring forth a Son : honourable
women hoped that thou wouldest rise from them ; yea noble ladies that Thou mightest
spring up from them ! Blessed be Thy Majesty, that humbled Itself, and rose from the
poor !

Yea the young girls that carried Him prophesied, saying, '' Whether I be hated or
fair, or of low estate, I am without spot for Thee. I have taken Thee in charge for the
bed of Childbirth."

Sarah had lulled Isaac, who as a slave ^ bare the Image of the King his Master on
his shoulders, even the sign of His Cross ; yea, on his hands were bandages and suffer-
ings, a type of the nails.

Rachel cried to her husband, and said. Give me sons.^ Blessed be Mary, in whose
womb, though she asked not. Thou didst dwell holily, O Gift, that poured itself upon
them that received it.

Hannah with bitter tears asked a child ; " Sarah and Rebecca with vows and words,
Elizabeth also with her prayer, after having vexed themselves for a long time, yet so
obtained comfort.

Blessed be Mary, who without vows and without prayer, in her Virginity conceived
and brought forth the Lord of all the sons of her companions, who have been or shall
be chaste and righteous, priests and kings.

Who else lulled a son in her bosom as Mary did.'* who ever dared to call her son,
Son of the Maker, Son of the Creator, Son of the Most High .?


7 S. husks.

8 So too St. E. himself upon Exodus xxxvii. " And Bezaleel made an ark of undecaying wood, a type of the
Body of Immanuel, which is incorruptible, and not soiled by sin. By the gold within and without he indi-
cates the Divine Nature of the Word, which was united unto all the functions (S. vessels) of the Soul and the
Body in a manner no discourse can reach, seeing he anointed our manhood with His Godhead." These
words appear to make it plain, that St. E. means the same ark above as in this passage ; he, however, uses a
different word, and one which others contend is only applied to Noah's ark,

9 St. Mark, vi. 3, intimates that our Lord was a carpenter Himself, while on earth.

1 He alludes to Palm Sunday, on which the children carried them.

2 Gen. xxii. 6. 3 Qcn. xxx. i. ■* i Sam. i. 7.


240 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


Who ever dared to speak to her son as m prayer ? O Trust of Thy Mother as God,
her Beloved and her Son as Man, in fear and love it is meet for thy Mother to stand
before Thee !

HYMN VII.

The Son of the Maker is like unto His Father as Maker ! He made Himself a pure
body, He clothed Himself with it, and came forth and clothed our weakness with glory,
which in His mercy He brought from the Father.

From Melchizedek, the High Priest, a hyssop came to Thee, a throne and crown from
the house of David, a race and family from Abraham.

Be thou unto me a Haven, for Thine own sake, O great Sea. Lo ! the Psalms of
David Thy Father, and the words also of the Prophets, came forth unto me, as it were
ships.

David Thy father, in the hundred and tenth Psalm, twined together two numbers as
it were crowns to Thee, and came [to Thee], O Conqueror ! With these shalt Thou be
crowned, and unto the throne shalt Thou ascend and sit.

A great crown is the number that is twined in the hundred, wherein is crowned Thy
Godhead ! A little crown is that of the number ten, which crowns the Head of Thy
Manhood, O Victorious One !

For Thy sake women sought after men. Tamar desired him that was widowed,
and Ruth loved a man that was old, yea, that Rahab, that led men captive, was captiv-
ated by Thee.

Tamar went forth, and in the darkness ^ stole the Light, and in uncleanness stole the
Holy One, and by uncovering her nakedness she went in and stole Thee, O glorious
One, that bringest the pure out of the impure.

Satan saw her and trembled, and hasted to trouble her. He brought the judgment
to her mind, and she feared not ; stoning and the sword, and she trembled not. He
that teacheth adultery hindered adultery, because he was a hinderer of Thee.

For holy was the adultery of Tamar, for Thy sake. Thee it was she thirsted after,
O pure Fountain. Judah defrauded her of drinking Thee. The thirsty womb stole a
dew-draught of Thee from the spring thereof.

She was a widow for Thy sake. Thee did she long for, she hasted and was also an
harlot for Thy sake. Thee did she vehemently desire, and was sanctified in that it was
Thee she loved.

May Tamar rejoice that her Lord hath come and hath made her name known for
the son of her adultery ! Surely the name she gave him ^ was calling unto Thee to come
to her.

For Thee honorable women shamed themselves. Thou that givest chastity to all !
Thee she stole away in the midst of the ways, who pavest the way into the kingdom !
Because it was life that she stole, the sword was not able to put her to death.

Ruth lay down by a man in the threshingfloor for Thy sake ; her love made her
bold for Thy sake, O Thou that teachest all penitents boldness. Her ears refused [to
listen to] any voices for the sake of Thy voice.

The live coal that glowed went up into the bed, of Boaz, lay down there, saw the
High Priest, in whose loins was hidden a fire for his incense ! '' She hasted and was a
heifer to Boaz, that should bring forth Thee, the fatted Calf.

6 Gen. xxxviii. e Gen. xxxviii. 29.

' The introduction of Ruth after Tamar was doubtless suggested by Ruth iv. 12. Mat. i. 3, etc. St. E.
seems to mean, " Ruth saw by faith Christ the High Priest, in whose loins was to be that Fire of Righteous-
ness which alone could make the incense (i.e. the child which rose up from Ruth, who is called a coal) to
be acceptable."


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 241


She went gleaning for her love of Thee ; she gathered straw. Thou didst quickly
pay her the reward of her lowliness ; and instead of ears of corn, the Root of Kings,
and instead of straws, the Sheaf of Life, didst Thou make to spring from her.

HYMN VIII.

That Thy Resurrection might be believed among the gainsayers, they sealed Thee up
within the sepulchre, and set guards ; for it was for Thee that they sealed the sepulchre
and set guards, O Son of the Living One !

When they had buried Thee, if they had neglected Thee and left Thee, and gone,
there would have been room to lie [and say] that they did steal, O Quickener of all I
When they craftily sealed Thy sepulchre, they made Thy Glory greater.

A type of Thee therefore was Daniel, and also Lazarus ; one in the den, which the
Gentiles sealed up, and one in the sepulchre, that the People opened. Lo ! their signs
and their seals reproved them.

Their mouth had been open, if they had left Thy sepulchre open. But they went away
because they had shut Thy sepulchre and sealed it, and closed up their own mouths.
Yea they closed it, and when they had senselessly covered Thy sepulchre, all the
slanderers covered their own heads.

But in Thy Resurrection Thou persuadest them concerning Thy Birth ; since the
womb was sealed, and the sepulchre closed up ; being alike pure in the womb, and
living in the sepulchre.^ The womb and the sepulchre being sealed were witnesses
unto Thee.

The belly and hell cried aloud of Thy Birth and Thy Resurrection : The belly con-
ceived Thee, which was sealed ; hell brought Thee forth which was closed up. Not
after nature did either the belly conceive Thee, or hell give Thee up !

Sealed was the sepulchre whereto they had entrusted Thee, that it might keep the
dead [safe]. Virgin was the womb which no man knew. Virgin womb and sealed
sepulchre, like trumphets, proclaimed Him in the ears of a deaf people.

The sealed belly and the closed rock were amongst the accusers. For they slan-
dered the Conception as being of the seed of man, and the Resurrection as being of the
robbery of man ; the seal and the signet convicted them, and pleaded that Thou wert
of Heaven.

The people stood between Thy Birth and Thy Resurrection. They slandered Thy
Birth, Thy Death condemned them : they set aside Thy Resurrection, Thy Birth refuted
them ; they were two wrestlers that stopped the mouth that slandered.

For Elijah they went and searched the mountains : ^ as they sought him on earth,
they the more confirmed that he was taken up. Their searching bare witness that he
was taken up, in that it found him not.

If then prophets chat had had forewarning of Elijah's ascension, doubted as it were
of his going up, how much more would impure men speak slander of the Son ? By
their own guards He convinced them that He was risen again.

To Thy Mother, Lord, no man knew what name to give. Should he call her Virgin,
her Child stood [there] ; and married no man knew her to be ! If then none compre-
hended Thy Mother, w^ho shall suffice for Thee.?

For she was, alone, Thy Mother ; along with all, Thy Sister. She was Thy mother,
she was Thy Sister. She along with chaste women' was Thy betrothed. With every-
thing didst Thou adorn Her, Thou ornament of Thy Mother.

8 Ps. Ixxxyiii. 5. 9 2 Kings ii. 16. 1 Ps. xlv. 14.

16


242 • EPHRAIM SYRUS.


For she was Thy Bride by nature ere Thou hadst come ; she conceived Thee not
by nature after Thou wast come, O Holy One, and was a Virgin when she had brought
Thee forth holily.

Mary gained in Thee, O Lord, the honours of all married women. She conceived
[Thee] within her without marriage. There was milk in her breasts, not after the way
of iiature. Thou madest the thirsty land suddenly a fountain of milk.

If she carried Thee, Thy mighty look made her burden light ; if she gave Thee to
eat, it was because Thou wert hungry ; if she gave Thee to drink [it was], because
Thou wert thirsty ; willingly if she embraced Thee, Thou, the coal of mercies, didst keep
her bosom safe.

A wonder is Thy Mother. The Lord entered her, and became a servant : the Word
entered her, and became silent within her ; thunder entered her, and His voice was still :
the Shepherd of all entered her ; He became a Lamb in her, and came forth bleating.

The Belly of Thy Mother changed the order of things, O Thou that orderest all !
The rich went in. He came out poor : the High One went in, He came out lowly.
Brightness went into her and clothed Himself, and came forth a despised form.

The Mighty went in, and clad Himself with fear from the Belly. He that giveth
food to all went in, and gat hunger. He that giveth all to drink went in, and gat thirst.
Naked and bare came forth from her the Clother of all.

The daughters of the Hebrews that cried in the Lamentations of Jeremiah, instead
of lamentations of their Scriptures, used lulling-songs from their own books : a hidden
Power within their words was prophesying.

Eve lifted up her eyes from Sheol and rejoiced in that day, because the Son of her
daughter as a medicine of life came down to raise up the mother of His mother.
Blessed Babe, that bruised the head of the Serpent that smote her !

She saw the type of Thee from the youth of Isaac the fair. For Thee Sarah, as see-
ing that types of thee rested on his childhood, called him, saying, O child of my vows,
in whom is hidden the Lord of vows.

Samson the Nazarite shadowed forth a type of Thy working. He tore the lion, the
image of death, whom Thou didst destroy, and caused to go forth from his bitterness
the sweetness of life for men.

Hannah also embraced Samuel ; for Thy righteousness was hidden in him who
hewed in pieces Agag as [a type] of the wicked one. He wept over Saul, because Thy
goodness also was shadowed forth in him.^

How meek art Thou ! How mighty art Thou, O Child ! ^ Thy judgment is mighty
Thy love is sweet ! Who can stand against Thee.? Thy Father is in Heaven, Thy
Mother is on earth ; who shall declare Thee } "

If a man should seek after Thy Nature, it is hidden in Heaven in the mighty Bosom
of the Godhead ; and if a man seek after Thy visible Body, it is laid down before their
eyes in the lowly bosom of Mary.

The mind wanders between Thy generations, O Thou Rich One ! Thick folds are
upon Thy Godhead. Who can sound Thy depths. Thou great Sea that made itself
little.?

We come to see Thee as God, and, lo ! Thou art a man : we come to see Thee as
man, and there shineth forth the Light of Thy Godhead !

Who would believe that Thou art the Heir of David's Throne .? A manger hast Thou
inherited out of [all] his beds, a cave has come down to Thee out of all his palaces.
Instead of his chariots a common ass's colt, perchance, comes down to Thee.

'■^ I Sam. ii. 26. 3 Luke ii. 52. ^ is_ ijij y^


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 243


How fearless art Thou, O Babe, that dost let all ha.ve thee [to carry] : upon every
one that meets with Thee dost Thou smile : to every one that sees Thee, art Thou glad-
some ! Thy love is as one that hungers after men.

Thou makest no distinction between Thy fathers and strangers, nor Thy Mother and
maidservants, nor her that suckled Thee and the unclean. Was it Thy forwardness or
Thy love, O Thou that lovest all ?

What moves Thee that Thou didst let all that saw Thee have Thee, both rich and
poor? Thou helpedst them that called Thee not. Whence came it that Thou hun-
geredst so for men ?

How great was Thy love, that if one rebuked Thee, Thou wast not wroth ! if a man
threatened Thee, Thou wast not terrified ! if one hissed at Thee, Thou didst not feel
vexed ! Thou art above the laws of the avengers of injuries.

Moses was meek, and [yet] his zeal was harsh, for he struggled and slew. Elisha
also, who restored a child to life, tore a multitude of children in pieces by bears. Who
art Thou, O Child, whose love is greater than that of the Prophets ?

The son of Hagar who was wild, kicked at Isaac." He bore it and was silent, and
his mother was jealous. Art Thou the mystery of him, or is not he the type of Thee.?
art thou like Isaac, or is it not he that is like Thee.?


HYMN IX.

Come rest, and be still in the bosom of Thy Mother, Son of the Glorious. Forward-
ness fits not the sons of kings. O Son of David, Thou art glorious, and [yet] the Son
of Mary, who dost hide Thy beauty in the inner chamber.

To whom art Thou like, glad Babe, fair little One, Whose Mother is a Virgin, Whose
Father is hidden. Whom even the Seraphim are not able to look upon ? Tell us whom
Thou art like, O Son of the Gracious !

When the wrathful came to see Thee, Thou madest them gladsome : they exchanged
smiles one with another : the angry were made gentle in Thee, O sweet One. Blessed
art Thou, little One, for that in Thee even the bitter are made sweet.

Who ever saw a Babe that was gladsome when in arms to those that came near him,
lo ! reached Himself unto them that were far off.? Fair sight [to see] a Child, that takes
thought for every man that they may see him !

He that hath care came and saw Thee, and his care fled away. He that had anxiety ;
at Thee forgat his anxiety ; the hungry by Thee forgat his victuals ; and he that had an
errand, by Thee was errant and forgot his journey !

O still Thyself, and let men go to their works ! Thou art a son of the poor, learn
from Thyself that all the poor had to leave their work to come. Thou who lovest men,
hast bound men together by Thy gladsomeness.

David, that stately king, took branches,*' and in the feast amongst the children as he
danced, he gave praise. Is it not the love of David Thy father that is warm in Thee .?

That daughter of Saul ! her father's devil spake in her : she called the stately [king]
a vile fellow, because he gave an ensample to the elders of her people of taking up
branches with the children in the day of praise to Thee.

Who would not fear to lay it to Thee that Thou art forward .? For lo, the daughter
of Saul who mocked the child, cut off her womb from childbearing ; because her mouth
derided, the reward of its mouth was barrenness.''

^ Gen. xvi. 12, and xxi. 9. ^ Scripture does not mention this. '' 2 Sam. vi. 23.


244 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


Let mouths tremble at blasphemy, lest they be shut up ! Refrain, O daughter of
Sion, thy mouth from Him, for He is the Son of David, Who is gladsome before thee.
Be not unto Him as the daughter of Saul, whose race is extinct.

Because Elijah restrained the desire of the body, he withheld rain from the adulter-
ous ; because he kept under his body, he withheld dew from the whoremongers, who
let their fountains be loosely poured out.

Because the hidden fire of the lust of the body ruled not in him, to him the fire from
on high was obedient. And since he subdued on the earth the lust of the flesh, he went
up thither where holiness dwells and is at peace,

Elisha also who deadened his own body, quickened the dead. The resurrection of
the dead was in the usual course by a sanctification not in the usual course ; He raised
the child, because he purified his soul like a weaned child.

Moses, who divided and separated himself from his wife, divided the sea before the
harlot, Zipporah though daughter of a heathen priest kept sanctity : with a calf the
daughter of Abraham® went a whoring.

HYMN X.

In Thee will I begin to speak, Thou Head that didst begin all created things.^ I,
even I will open my mouth, but it is Thou that fiUest my mouth. ^ I am the earth to
Thee, and Thou art the husbandman. Sow Thy voice in me,^ Thou that sowedst Thy-
self in the womb of thy Mother.

"All the chaste daughters of the Hebrews,^ and the virgins' daughters of the chief
men, are astonished at me ! For Thee doth the daughter of the poor meet with envy,
for Thee, the daughter of the weak with jealousy. Who hath given Thee to me ?

''O Son of the Rich One, Who abhorred the bosom of the rich women, who led
Thee to the poor.? for Joseph was needy and I also in want, yet Thy merchants have
come, and brought gold, to the house of the poor, '^

She saw the Magi : her songs increased at their offerings ; *' Lo ! Thy worshippers
have surrounded me, yea thy offerings have encircled me. Blessed be the Babe who
made His Mother a harp for His words :

''And as the harp waiteth for its master, my mouth waiteth for Thee. May the
tongue of Thy Mother bring what pleases Thee ; and since I have learnt a new Con-
ception by Thee, let my mouth learn in Thee, O new born Son, a new song of praise.

"And if hindrances are no hindrances to Thee, since difficulties are easy to Thee,
as a womb without marriage conceived Thee, and a belly without seed brought Thee
forth, it is easy for a little mouth to multiply Thy great glory.

" Lo ! I am oppressed and despised, and yet cheerful: mine ears are filled with
reproof and scorn ; and it is a small thing to me to bear, for ten thousand troubles can
a single comfort of Thine chase away.

" And since I am not despised by Thee, O Son, my countenance is bright ; and I
am slandered for having conceived, and yet have brought forth the Truth who justifies
me. For if Tamar was justified by Judah, how much more shall I be justified by Thee ! "

David Thy father sung in a psalm of Thee before Thou hadst come, that to Thee
should be given the gold of Sheba." This psalm that he sung of Thee, lo ! it, whilst
Thou art yet a child;, in reality heaps before thee myrrh and gold.

8 I.e. the Jewish Church. 9 Kev. iii. 14. ' Ps. Ixxxi. 10.

2 Heb. vi, 7. ^ The Virgin Mother here speaks. ^ pg ixxii, 15.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 245

And the hundred and fifty Psalms that he wrote, in Thee were seasoned, because all
the sayings of prophecy stood in need of Thy sweetness, for without Thy salt all
manner of wisdom were tasteless/

HYMN XI.

(the virgin mother to her child.)

I SHALL not be jealous, my Son, that Thou art with me, and also with all men. Be
Thou God to him that confesses Thee, and be thou Lord to him that serves Thee, and
be Brother to him that loves Thee, that Thou mayest gain all !

When Thou didst dwell in me. Thou didst also dwell out of me, and when I brought
Thee forth openly, Thy hidden might was not removed from me. Thou art within me,
and Thou art without me, O Thou that makest Thy Mother amazed.

For [when] 1 see that outward form of Thine before mine eyes, the hidden Form is
shadowed forth "in my mind," O holy One. In Thy visible form I see Adam, and in
Thy hidden form I see Thy Father, w^ho is joined with Thee.

Hast Thou then shown me alone Thy Beauty in two Forms .? Let Bread shadow
forth Thee, and also the mind ; dwell also in Bread and in the eaters thereof. In
secret, and openly too, may Thy Church see Thee, as well as Thy Mother.

He that hates Thy Bread is like unto him that hates Thy Body. He that is far off
that desires Thy Bread, and he that is near that loves Thy Image, are alike. In the
Bread and in the Body, the first and also the last have seen Thee.

Yet Thy visible Bread is far more precious than Thy Body ; for Thy Body even un-
believers have seen, but they have not seen Thy living Bread. They that were far off
rejoiced ! their portion utterly scorns that of those that are near.

Lo ! Thy Image is shadowed forth in the blood of the grapes ^ on the Bread ; and it
is shadowed forth on the heart with the finger of love, with the colors of faith. Blessed
be He that by the Image of His Truth caused the graven images to pass away.

Thou art not [so] the Son of Man that I should sing unto Thee a common lullaby ;
for Thy Conception is new, and Thy Birth marvellous. Without the Spirit who shall
sing to Thee.? A new muttering of prophecy is hot within me.

How shall I call Thee a stranger to us, Who art from us ? Should I call Thee Son ?
Should I call Thee Brother.? \ Husband should I call Thee.? Lord should I call Thee,
O Child that didst give Thy Mother a second birth from the waters.?

For I am Thy sister, of the house of David the father of us Both. Again, I am Thy
Mother because of Thy Conception, and Thy Bride am I because of Thy sanctification,
Thy handmaid and Thy daughter, from the Blood and Water wherewith Thou hast pur-
chased me and baptised me.

The Son of the Most High came and dwelt in me, and I became His Mother ; and
as by a second birth I brought Him forth, so did He bring me forth by the second birth,
because He put His Mother's garments on, she clothed her body with His glory.

Tamar, who was of the house of David, Amnon put to shame ; and virginity fell
and perished from them both. My pearl is not lost : in Thy treasury it is stored, be-
cause Thou hast put it on.
. The scent of her brother-in-law stank from Tamar, whose perfume she had stolen.


^ Job. vi. 6.

^ The Roman Editor points out that this alludes to a rite in the Syrian Liturgy, in which the officiating
Priest is instructed to dip one portion of the consecrated bread into the cup and s'prinkle the rest with it.
■^ Mat. xii. 50.


246 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


As for Joseph's Bride, not even his breath exhaled from her garments, since she con-
ceiv^ed Cinnamon/ A wall of fire was Thy Conception unto me, O holy Son.

The little flower was faint, because the smell of the Lily ^ of Glory was great. The
Treasure-house of spices stood in no need of flower or its smells ! Flesh stood aloof be-
cause it perceived in the womb a Conception from the Spirit.

The woman ministers before the man, because he is her head. Joseph rose to
minister before his Lord, Who was in Mary. The priest ministered before Thy ark by
reason of Thy holiness.

Moses carried the tables of stone which the Lord wrote, and Joseph bare about the
pure Tablet in whom the Son of the Creator was dwelling. The tables had ceased, be-
cause the world was filled with Thy doctrine.

HYMNXIL

The Babe that I carry carries me, saith Mary, and He has lowered His wings, and
taken and placed me between His pinions, and mounted into the air ; and a promise
has been given me that height and depth shall be my Son's.

I have seen Gabriel that called him Lord, and the high priest the aged servant, that
carried Him and bare Him. I have seen the Magi when they bowed down, and Herod
when he was troubled because the King had come.

Satan also w^ho strangled the little ones that Moses might perish,^ murdered the little
ones that the Living One might die. To Egypt He fied. Who came to Judea that He
might labour and wander there : he sought to catch the man that would catch himself.

Li her virginity Eve put on the leaves of shame : Thy Mother put on in her Vir-
ginity the garment of Glory that suffices for all. She gave the little vest of the Body to
Him that covers all.

Blessed is she in whose heart and mind Thou wast ! A King's palace she was by
Thee, O Son of the King, and a Holy of Holies by Thee, O High Priest ! She had not
the trouble nor vexation of a family, or a husband !

Eve, again, w^as a nest and a den for the accursed serpent, that entered in and dwelt
in her. His evil counsel became bread to her that she might become dust. Thou art
our Bread, and Thou art also [of] our race and our garment of glory.

He that has sanctity, if he be in danger, lo ! here is his Guardian ! He that has
iniquity, lo ! here is his Pardoner ! He that has a devil, here is the Pursuer thereof !
They that have pains, lo ! here is the Binder up of their breaches.

He that has a child, let him come and become a brother to my Well-beloved ! ^ He
that has a daughter or a young woman of his race, let her come and become the bride
of my Glorious One ! He that has a servant, let him set him free, that he may come
and serve his Lord.

The son of free men that bears Thy yoke, my Son, shall have one reward; and the
slave that bears the burden of the yoke of two masters, of Him above and of Him
below, there are two blessings for him, and two rewards of the two burdens.^

The free woman, my Son, is Thy handmaid : also if she who is in bondage serve
Thee, in Thee she is free : in Thee she shall be comforted, because she is freed ; hidden
apples in her bosom are stored up,'* if she love Tliee !

8 Cant. iv. 14. ^ Cant. ii. i. 1 Ex. i. 16. 2 Mat. xii. 15.

•* This passai^e is to be observed as one of the many in which the Fathers encourage masters to set
slaves free, although they pretty uniformly held (as St. E.'here seems to do also) that slaves, if they had the
choice, should use slavery rather. 4 Cant. ii. 3.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 247

O chaste woman, long ye for my Well-beloved, that He may dwell in you ; and ye
also that are impure that He may sanctify you ! ye Churches also, that the Son of the
Creator Who came to renew all creatures, may adorn you !

He received the foolish who worshipped and served all the stars ; He renewed the
earth which was worn out through Adam, who sinned and waxed old. The new forma-
tion was the creature of its Renewer, and the all-sufficient One repaired the bodies
along with their wills.

Come ye blind, and without money receive lights I Come ye lame, and receive
your feet ! ye deaf and dumb, receive your voice ! come thou also whose hand is cut
off ; the maimed also shall receive his hands.

It is the Son of the Creator Whose treasure-houses are filled with all manner of
helps. Let him that is without eyeballs come to Him that makes clay and changes it,
that makes flesh, that enlightens eyes.

By the small portion of clay He shows that it was with His hand that Adam was
formed : the soul of the dead also bears Him witness, that by Him it was that the
breath of man was breathed in ; by the last witnesses He was accredited to be the Son
of Him Who is the First.

Gather ye together and come, O ye lepers, and receive purification without labour.
For He will not wash you as Elisha, who baptized seven times in the river : neither
will He trouble you as the priests did with their sprinklings. Foreigners and also
strangers have betaken themselves to the Great Physician.

The rank of strangers hath no place with the King's Son ; the Lord makes not Him-
self strange to His servants, [or conceal] that He is Lord of all. For if the Just makes
the body leprous, and Thou purifiest it ; then, the Former of the body hateth the body ;
but Thou lovest it.

And if it be not Thy forming, being Just, Thou wouldest not have healed it ; ^ and if
it were not Thy creature, when in health. Thou wouldest not have afflicted it. The
punishments that Thou has cast upon it, and the pains which Thou hast healed, pro-
claim that Thou art the Creator's Son.


HYMN XIIL

(Compare Hymn II. For the Epiphany^

1. In the days of the King whom they called by the name of Semha,^ our Lord
sprang up among the Hebrews : and Semha and Denha ' ruled, and came, King upon
earth, and Son in Heaven ; blessed be His rule !

2. In the days of the king who enrolled men in the book of the dead, our Redeemer
came down and enrolled men in the book of the living. He enrolled, and they also :
on high He enrolled us, on earth they enrolled Him. Glory to His Name !

3. In the days of the king whose name was Semha, the type and the Reality met
together, the king and the King, Semha and Denha. His Cross upon His shoulders,
was the sign of His Kingdom. Blessed be He Who bare it.

4. Thirty years He went in poverty upon the earth ! The sounds of praise in
all their measures let us twine, my brethren, to the years of the Lord, as thirty crowns
to the thirty years. Blessed be His Birth !

5. In the first year, that is chieftain over the treasures and Dispenser of abundant


6 Deut. xxxii. 39. 6 /.^.^ August. 7 i^c., Dayspring.


248 ' EPHRAIM SYRUS.


blessings, let the Cherubim who bare up the Son in glory,® praise Him with us ! He left
His glory, and toiled and found the sheep that was lost. To Him be thanksgiving !

6. In the second year, let the Seraphim praise Him yet more with us. They that
had proclaimed the Son Holy,^ by and by saw Him when He was reviled among the
gainsayers ; He bore the contempt and taught praise. To Him be Glory !

7. In the third year, let Michael and his followers, that ministered to the Son in the
highest, praise Him with us. They saw Him on the earth when He was ministering,
washing feet, cleansing souls. Blessed be His lowliness !

8. In the fourth year, let the whole earth praise Him with us. It is but small for
the Son, and it marvelled because it saw that it entertained Him in its bed that is so
very mean. He filled the bed, and filled the Heaven. To Him be Majesty !

9. In the fifth year, the Sun shone unto the earth. With its breath let it praise our
Sun Who brought His breadth down low, and humbled His mightiness, that the subtle
eye of the unseen soul might be able to look upon Him. Blessed be His brightness !

10. In the sixth year again, let the whole air praise Him with us, in whose wide
space it is that all things are made glorious, which saw its mighty Lord that had be-
come a little Child in a little bosom. Blessed be His dignity !

11. In the seventh year, the clouds and winds rejoiced with us and sprinkled the
dews over the flowers, for they saw the Son who enslaved His brightness and received
disgrace and foul spitting. Blessed be His Redemption !

12. In the year also that is eighth, let the fields give praise, that suckle their fruits
from His fountains. They worshipped because they saw the Son in arms and the pure
One sucking pure milk. Blessed be His good pleasure !

13. In the ninth year, let the earth glorify the might of her Creator, Who laid seed
in her in the beginning that she might bring forth all her produce ; for it saw Mary, a
thirsty land, who yielded the fruit of a Child that was a wonder, yea, a marvel. [Then]
it praised Him more exceedingly, for that He was a great Sea of all good things. To
Him be exaltation !

14. In the tenth year, let the mount Sinai glorify Him, it which trembled before its
Lord. It saw that they took up stones against its Lord ; He received stones, Who
^ould build His Church upon a Stone. ^ Blessed be His building !

15. In the eleventh year, let the great sea praise the fists of the Son that measured
it,^ and it was astonished and saw that He came down, was baptized in a small water,
and cleansed the creatures. Blessed be His noble act !

16. In the twelfth year, let the holy Temple praise Him, that saw the Child when
He sat amongst the old men : the priests were silent when the Lamb of the Feast bleated
in His feast. Blessed be His propitiation !

17. In the thirteenth year, let the crowns praise with us the King who conquered,
that died and was crowned with a crown of thorns, and bound upon Adam a great
crown at His right hand. Blessed be His Apostleship !

18. In the fourteenth year, let the passover in Egypt praise the Passover that came
and passed over all, and instead of Pharaoh sunk Legion,^ instead of horses choked the
devil. Blessed be His vengeance I

19. In the fifteenth year, let the lamb of the gluttons praise Him : since our Lord
was so far from slaughtering it as Moses did, that He even redeemed mankind with
His own Blood. He that feeds all, died for all. Blessed be His Father !

20. In the sixteenth year, let the wheat praise by its type that Husbandman," Who

s Ps. xcix. I. 9 Is. vi. 2 ; Mat. xxvi. 53 ; i Tim. iii. 16. ^ Cephas — Peiros— stone.

2 Is. xl. 12, 3 Mark v. 9 ; Luke viii. 30. * John xii. 24.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 249


sowed His Body in the barren earth, since it covers all, spreads itself out and yields
new Bread. Blessed be the Pure One !

21. In the seventeenth year, let the Vine praise the Lord that garnished it. He
planted a vineyard, souls were as vineplants. He gave peace to the vineyard, but de-
stroyed the vineyard that brought forth wild grapes. Blessed be its Uprooter !

22. In the eighteenth year, let the Vine which the wild boar out of the wood had
eaten, praise the True Vine which trimmed Himself, and kept His fruit, and brought
the fruits to the Lord of the Vineyard.^ Blessed be His Vintage !

23. In the nineteenth year, let our leaven praise the true leaven which worked itself
in among those that were in error, and drove them all together, and made them one
mind by one Doctrine. Blessed be thy doctrine !

24. In the twentieth year, let salt praise Thy living Body, wherewith are salted the
bodies and the souls of all the faithful, and faith is the salt of men wherewith they are
preserved." Blessed be Thy preserving !

25. In the twenty-first year, let the waters of the desert praise Thee. They are
sweet to them afar off, they are bitter to them ^ that are near, who did not minister to
Him. The [chosen] people and the nations were bitter in the desert, and He destroyed
them. They were sweetened by the Cross which redeemed them. Blessed be Thy
pleasantness !

26. In the twenty-second year, let arms and the sword praise Thee : they sufficed
not to kill our adversary. It was Thou that killed him, even Thou who didst fix the
ear on, which Simon's sword cut off. Blessed be Thy healing !

27. In the twenty-third year, let the ass praise Him, that gave its foal for Him to
ride on, that loosed the bonds, that opened the mouth of the dumb, that opened also
the mouth of the wild asses ^ when the race of Hagar gave a shout of praise. ^ Blessed
be the praise of Thee !

28. In the twenty-fourth year, let the Treasury praise the Son. The treasures mar-
velled at the Lord of treasures, when in the house of the poor He was increasing. Who
made Himself poor that He might enrich all.' Blessed be Thy rule !

29. In the twenty-fifth year, let Isaac praise the Son, for by His goodness he was
rescued upon the Mount from the knife, and in his stead there was the victim, the type
of the Lamb for the slaughter.^ The mortal escaped, and He that quickens all died.^
Blessed be His offering !

30. In the twenty-sixth year, let Moses praise Him with us, for that he was afraid
and fled from his murderers. Let him praise the Lord that bore the spear and that re-
ceived the nails in His hands, in His feet. He entered into hell and spoiled it,"* and
came forth. Blessed be Thy Resurrection !

31. In the year which is the twenty-seventh, let the eloquent speakers praise the
Son, for they found no cloke to save our cause. He was silent in the judgment-hall,
and He carried our cause. Honour be to Him I

32. And in this year let all judges praise Him, who, as being just men, killed the un-
godly ; let them praise the Son who died for the wicked, as being good. Though Son
of the Just One, He gave them all manner of good things in abundance. Blessed be
His bowels of mercy !

33. In the eight and twentieth year, let all mighty men of valour praise the Son,
because they delivered not from him who took us captive. He only is to be praised,
who being slain showed us life. ^ Blessed be His delivery !


5 John xviii. g. « Mark ix. 49. 1 Exod. xv. 25. s Gen. xvi. 12. » Acts ii. 11.

1 2 Cor. viii. 9. 2 pjeb. xi. 19. 3 ig. ijij. ' 4 jg. xlix. 24. ^ Rev. v. g.


250 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


34. In the twenty-ninth year, let Job praise Him with us, who bore sufferings for
himself, and our Lord bore for us the spitting and the spear, and the crown of thorns,
and scourges, contempt and reproach, yea mocking. Blessed be His mercy !

35. In the year that is thirteenth, let the dead praise Him with us, because they are
quickened, and the living, because they have turned to repentance,^ because height and
depth were set at one by Him. Blessed be He and His Father !

HYMN XIV.

(Resp. — Blessed he he who beca?ne beyond measure low^ that he might ??iake us beyond
measure great)

1. Of the Birth of the Firstborn, let us tell on His Feast-day/ — He gives on His day,
secret comforts. — If the unclean Ki?ig at his feast, in memory of his day, — gave the
gift of wrath, the head in a charger, — how much more shall the Blessed, give blessings
to him — who sings praise at His Feast !

2. Let us not count our vigil like vigils of every day. — His feast, its reward, exceeds
an hundredfold. — For this feast makes war, on sleep by its vigil ; — speaking it makes
war, on silence by its voice; — clad with all blessings, it is chief of feasts, — and of
every joy.

3. To-day the angels, and the archangels, — descended to sing — a new song on earth.
— In this mystery they descend, and rejoice with the vigil-keepers. — At the time when
they gave praise, blasphemy abounded. — Blessed be the Birth by which, lo ! the world
resounds — with anthems of praise.

4. For this is the night that joined, tlie Watchers on high with the vigil-keepers. —
The Watcher came to make watchers in the midst of creation. — Lo ! the vigil-keepers
are made comrades with the Watchers : — the singers of praise are made, companions
of the Seraphs. — Blessed be he who becomes, the harp of Thy praise ! — and Thy grace
becomes his reward.

5. The Birth then of the Firstborn, I will sing and tell how — the Godhead in the
w^omb wove itself a vesture. — He put it on and came forth in birth, in death again put
it off; — once he put it off, twice He put it on. — On the left He wore it, then took it off
thence, — and laid it at the right.

6. He dwelt in a narrow bosom, the Might that rules all. — While He was dwelling
there. He held the reins of the whole : — to His Father He made offering, that He might
fulfil His Will : — Heaven was filled by Him, and every creature. — The Sun entered the
womb, and in the height and the depth — his splendour abode.

7. He dwelt in the wide bosoms, of all the creatures ; — too narrow to hold, the
greatness of the Firstborn. — How then sufficed for it, that bosom of Mary } — Marvellous
if it sufficed, bewilderment if it sufficed not. — Of all bosoms that held Him, one bosom
sufficed for Him, — His, the Supreme Who begat Him.

8. The bosom that held Him, if it held Him Wholly, — equals the w^ondrous bosom,
of the Supreme Who begat Him. — But who dare say the bosom, that is narrow weak
and lowly, — is equal to His, Who is the Supreme Being.? — He dwelt there of His mercy,
though so great is His Nature : — it is without bound.

9. Reconciling Peace, sent to the nations ! — gladdening Brightness, that camest to the
sad! — Mighty Leaven in silence, overcoming all! — Patient One that hast taken, man
after man in Thy net ! — Happy he who has welcomed, thy joy in his heart, — and
forgot his groans in Thee !

^ Mai. iv. 6. - '' See p- 1/7 n.


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 251

10. They sounded forth peace, the Watchers to the vigil-keepers. — Among the vigil-
keepers the good tidings, were announced by the Watchers. — Who would sleep on that
night, v/hich has waked all creatures ? — For they bear good tidings of peace, where
warfare had been. — Blessed is he who has pleased, the Bmne Maiesiy by his silence, —
when speaking moved His wrath !

11. Watchers mixed with watchers, they rejoiced that the world came to life. — The
Evil One was shamed who was king, and had woven a crown of lies ; — and set up his
throne, as God in the world. — The Babe laid in the manger, cast him from his dominion.
— The Sun rendered worship, doing Him homage by his Magi ; — in his worshippers he
worshipped Him.

12. God saw that mankind, worship things created: — He put on a created body,
that in our custom He might capture us. — Lo ! in this our form. He that formed us
healed us ; — and in this created shape, our Creator gave us life. — He drew us not by
force : blessed be He Who came in ours, — and joined us in His !

13. Who would not marvel, at Mary, David's daughter, — bearing an infant, and her
virginity kept ! — She lays Him on her breast, and lulls Him with song and He rejoices.
— The Angels raise hymns, the Seraphs cry ''Holy," — the Magi offer, acceptable gifts, —
to the Son Who is born.

14. O great above measure, immeasurably made low, — praised beyond praises,
debased to humiliation ! — the tender mercies laid on Thee, bowed Thee down to all
this ; — let Thy grace bow me down, though evil to give praise ! — Happy he who
becomes, a fountain of voices, — all praising Thee in all !

15. He was servant on earth ; He is Lord in Heaven. — Heir of height and depth.
He became a stranger : — Whom men judged in guile, He is judge in truth : — He Whose
face they spat on, breathes His Spirit on theirs : — He Who held the frail reed, is become
the staff of the world, — which grows old and leans on Him.

16. He Who rose to wait on His servants, now sits to be worshipped. — Whom the
scribes despised, before Him Seraphs cry " Holy." — This praise Adam desired, to steal
privily. — The serpent which made him fall, saw to what height he was raised : — he
crushed it because it deceived him ; the feet of Eve trod it down, — which had sent
venom into her ears.

17. The wife proved barren, and withheld her fruit ; — but the bosom of Mary,
holily conceived. — To wonder at fields, and to admire plants — she needed not who
received, and rendered what she borrowed not. — Nature confessed its defeat ; the womb
w^as aware of it, — and restored what Nature gave not.

18. Mary was defeated, in the judgment by Elizabeth. — She that was barren pleaded,
that the Will which prevailed — to close the open door, has opened the closed. — He has
made childless the married womb ; He has made fruitful the virgin womb. — Because the
People were accurst faithless. He made her that was married, — held from bearing before
the face of the maiden.

19. He Who could give moisture, to breasts barren and dead, — caused them to fail
in youth, made them to flow in age ; — forced and changed nature, in its season and out
of its season. — The Lord of natures changed, the Virgin's nature. — Because the People
were barren. He made her that was aged, — a mouth on behalf of the damsel.

20. And as He began at birth, He went on and fulfilled in death. — His Birth received
worship ; His Death paid the debt. — As He came to His Birth, the Magi worshipped
Him ; — again He came to His Passion, and the thief sought refuge in Him — Between
His Birth and Death, midway He set the world : — in birth and Death he gave it life.

21. Thousand thousands stand, and ten thousand thousands haste. — The thousands


252 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


and ten thousands, cannot search out the One : — for all of them stand, in silence to
serve. — He has no heir of His Throne, save the Son Who is of Him. — In the midst of
silence is the enquiry into Him, when the watchers come to search Him out, — they
attain to silence and are stayed.

2 2. The Firstborn entered the womb, and the pure Virgin was not harmed.- — He
stirred and came forth in her travail, and the fair Mother was troubled by Him. —
Glorious and unseen in entering, humble and manifest in issuing ; — for He was God in
entering, and He was man in issuing. — A marvel and bewilderment to hear : fire entered
the womb ; put on a body and came forth !

23. Gabrielchief of Angels, called Him " My Lord ":— he called Him ''My Lord," to
teach that He was his Lord, not his fellow. — Gabriel had with him, Michael as fellow :
— the Son is Lord of the servants ; exalted z's His Nature as His Name. — A'b servant can
search Him out ; for the greater the servant, — He is great above His servant.

24. When they stand before Thee, the watchers with songs of praise, — they know
not in what part, they shall discern Thee. — They have sought Thee above in the height ;
they have seen Thee below in the depth : — they have searched for Thee in the midst of
heaven ; they have seen Thee in the midst of the abyss : — they have discerned Thee
beside Him that is worshipped ; they have found Thee in the midst of the creatures :
— they have come down to Thee and sung Glory to Thee.

25. Thou art all wonderful, in all parts where we seek Thee. — Near art Thou, — and
far, and who may attain to Thee.? — No seeking avails, that its stretch should reach
unto Thee. — Whereon it stretches to reach Thee, it is checked and stops, — it falls short
of Thy mountain ; Faith reaches thither, — and Love with prayer.

26. The Magi also sought Him, and in the manger when they found Him, — instead
of scrutiny worship, they offered Him in silence ; — for empty strivings, oblations gave
they Him. — Seek thou too the Firstborn, and if thou find Him in the height, — instead
of troubled questionings, open thy treasures before Him, — and offer Him thy works.

XV.

Resp. — Blessed is He above all in His Birth I (bis).

1. Celebrate, O nations, this feast, first fruits of all feasts ;: — recount the sufferings
that were, and the wounds and pains, — that we may know what plagues, He healed,
the Son Who was sent. R., Blessed he He Who sufficed to heal our pains !

2. Celebrate, O saved nations, Him Who saves all in His Birth. — Even my feeble
tongue, has become a harp through His mercy. — The excellency of the Firstborn, in
His Festival let us sing. R., Blessed is He Who has made us meet for His Feast !

3. How then can any one, admire a physician, — until he hear and learn, what were
the pains he healed .? — And when our plagues are proclaimed, then is our Healer mag-
nified. R., Blessed be He Who is exalted in our pains I

4. Created things were worshipped : because the worshipper was foolish, — he used
to worship all things ; but One they worshipped not. — He came down therefore in mercy
and broke, the yoke that enslaved all. i?. , Blessed is He Who loosed our pains •'

5. The mercies of the Highest were revealed ; He came down and set free His crea-
ture.— In this blessed month, wherein are made releases oi slaves, — the Lord underwent
bondage, to call the bond to freedom. R., Blessed is He Who brought freedom !

6. The Lord of the months chose Him, two months for His doings. — His Conception
was in Nisan, and His Birth in Conun. — In Nisan He sanctified them that were con-


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 253


ceived ; and them that were born He set free in Conun. R., Blessed be He Who makes
glad His months !

7. The Sun revealed in silence, his worshippers to his Lord : — it was grievous to
him, a servant, to be worshipped instead of his Lord. — Lo ! creation is glad, that the
Creator is worshipped. R. , Blessed is the Child that is worshipped.

8. The months wore three crowns, and crowned Him in His triumphs. — Blessed is
the Sun for His Birth, and for His Resurrection desired, — and for His Ascension blessed ;
the months have borne Him crowns. R., Blessed he He Who has triumphed in His
months !

9. Unveil and make glad thy face, O Creature, in our feast. — Let the Church sing
with voice ; Heaven and earth in silence ! — Sing and praise the Child, who has brought
release for all ! R., Blessed he He Who has annulled the honds f

10. When fools did reverence to the Sun, in reverence to him they disgraced him. —
But now when all know he is a servant, in his course his Lord is worshipped ; — all
servants rejoice, that as servants they are reckoned. R., Blessed he He Who ordered
their natures !

11. We have done perverse things, who have become servants of servants. — Lo !
our freedom compelled him, a servant, to become lord to us : — the Sun, the servant for
all, we have made Lord for all. R., Blessed is He Who to Himself has turned us !

12. And the Moon too which was worshipped, has been set free by His Birth. — For
'tis strange that by her light, which enlightens the eyes, — by it the eyes were darkened,
that they gazed on her as a God. R., Blessed be the beam that has enlightened us !

13. Fire commended Thy Birth, which drew away worship from it. — The magi
used to worship it : they who have worshipped before Thee. — They left it and wor-
shipped its Lord ; they exchanged fire for the Fire. R. , Blessed is He Who has bathed
us in His light I

14. In place of the senseless fire that eats up its own body of itself, — the magi
adored the Fire Who gave His Body to be eaten. — The live coal drew near and sanc-
tified, the lips that were unclean. R., Blessed is He Who has mixed His Fire in us !

15. Delusion blinded men, to worship created things : — fellow servants were wor-
shipped, and the God of all was wronged. — He Who is to be worshipped came down /6>
His birth, and gathered to himself worship. R. , Blessed is He Who by all is wor-
shipped f

16. The All-knowing saw, that men worship things that were made : — He put on a
body that was made, that in our custom He might take us captive, — and by a body
that was made, drew us to the Creator. 7?., Blessed be He Who drew us with guile I

17. The Evil One knew how to harm us ; and by lights he blinded us, — by posses-
sions he hurt us, through gold he made us poor, — by the graver's graven images, he
made us a heart of stone. R., Blessed is He Who came and softened it I

18. They graved and set up stones, whereon men should stumble. — They set them
not on the highway, for the blind to stumble on : — they called them Gods, that on them
with open eyes men might stumble. R., Blessed is He Who exposed the idols which
they feared !

19. Sin had spread its wings, and covered all things, — that none could discern, of
himself or from above, the truth. — Truth came down into the womb, came forth and
rolled away error. R. , Blessed is He Who dispelled Sin by His Birth !

20. For Mercy endured not, to see the way hindered. — When He came down for
conception. He opened the way aiid made it easy : — when He came forth in birth, He
trod it and marked its miles. R., Blessed is the peace of Thy Way !


254 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


21. He chose the Prophets; they cleared the way for the people: — He sent the
Apostles ; they smoothed paths for the nations. — The snares of the Evil One were
shamed, when feeble men cleared them away. R., Blessed is HeWho made our paths

plain !

2 2. The graven images blinded, their gravers in secret : — they graved eyes on stone,
and darkened the eyes of the soul. — Praise to Thy Birth that opened, the sight that was
blinded. R., Blessed he He Who has restored sight!

23. Let women praise Her, the pure Mary, — that as in Eve their mother, — great was
their reproach, — lo ! in Mary their sister, — greatly magnified was their honour. i?.,
Blessed is He Who sprang from women I

24. Let the nations praise Thy Birth, that they have gained eyes to see, — how their
wine has made them reel ; and they have seen their own humiliation .? — They come to
know themselves, and worship Him who has rescued them. i?. , Blessed is He Who
has taught repentance I

25. Its worship mankind — had spread everywhere : — Him Who is to he worshipped
it sought not, that worship should be paid Him. — But He endured not — worshippers
that err. R. , Blessed is He Who came down and is worshipped !

26. The gold of the idols worshipped Thee, that Thou didst treat it as alms ; which
availed not apart, for the uses of life. — It hasted to Thy purse, as it had hasted to the
manger. R., Blessed be He Whom Creation has loved !

27. The frankincense worshipped Thy Birth, which had served demons. — It sor-
rowed then in its vapour : it exulted when it saw its Lord. — Instead of ^^/w^ the incense
of delusion, it v/as an oblation before God ! R. , Blessed is Thy Birth which is wor-
shipped I

28. The myrrh worshipped Thee for itself, and for its kindred ointments. — The
hands that bore its ointment, had anointed abominable graven images. — To Thee the
perfume was sweet, from the anointing wherewith Mary anointed Thee. i?.. Blessed
is Thy savour which is sweet to us I

29. The gold that had been worshipped worshipped thee, when the magi offered it.
— That which had been worshipped in molten images, gave worship to Thee. — With
its worshippers it worshipped Thee, it confessed that Thou art He that is to be wor-
shipped. R. , Blessed is He Who claimed worship for Himself !

30. The Evil One fled and his hosts, he that used to exult in the world. — In the
high places they sacrificed heifers to him, in the gardens they slew bulls for him. — He
swallowed up all creation, he filled his belly with prey. R., Blessed he He Who came
and made him disgorge !

31. Of him the Lord said, that he had fallen from Heaven. — The Abhorred One had
exalted himself; from his uplifting he has fallen. The foot of Mary has trod him down,
who bruised Eve with his heel. R., Blessed he He Who hy His Birth laid him low !

32. Chaldeans went about, in all places and led astray : — the preachers of delusion,
were shamed through the world, — they were shamed and overcome, — by the preachers
of truth. R., Blessed he the Bahe Whom they preached !

2i'i,. Sin had spread out, her nets for the draught. — Praise he to Thy Birth that cap-
tured, the nets of delusion. — The soul took flight on high, which had been taken in the
deep. R., Blessed is He Who prepared for us wings !

34. His Will was able, even by force to rescue us. — ^/// since it was not force that
made us guilty, it was not by force He purged us. — The Evil One by enticement en-
slaved us : Thy Birth enticed to give us life. 7?., Blessed he He Who planned and
gave us life f


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 255

35. The creatures complained that they were worshipped ; in silence they sought
release. — The All-Releaser heard, and because He endured it not He came down, — put
on the for 771 of a servant in the womb, came forth, set free Creation. 7?., Blessed he
He Who made his Creation his gain !

36. Mercy was kindled on high, at the voice of Creation that cried out : — Gabriel
was sent; he came and gave tidings of Thy Conception. — When Thou camest to the
Birth, Watchers gave tidings of thy coming forth. R., Blessed he hy Thy Worship
above all f

^j. For greater is the joy of the Birth than the Conception. — Yea it was one angel,
that brought us tidings of Thy Conception : — but in the joy of Thy Birth, a multitude
of Watchers brought tidings. R., Blessed be Thy tidi7igs i7i Thy day I

38. Glory to Thee I too in Thy day, will offer, O Thou that art worshipped I — Take
of the fruit that is mine ; and give me mercy which is Thine ! — For if the evil that is in
me gives gifts, how much more shalt Thou give Who art good ! i?. , Blessed is Thy
wealth i7i Thy servant/

39. The two things Thou soughtest, in Thy Birth have been done for us.— Our visible
body Thou hast put on ; Thy invisible might we have put on : — our body has become
Thy clothing ; Thy Spirit has become our robe. R. , Blessed be He Who has been
adorned a7id has adorned us /

40. Height and depth were amazed, that Thy Birth subdued the rebels. — For that
we gave Thee hostages, Thou gavest us the Paraclete : — when the hostages went up
from us, the Captain of the host came down to us. R., Blessed be He Who took away
and sent dow7i /

41. Come ye mouths of all and pour forth, and be in the likeness of waters, and wells
of voices ! May the Holy Spirit come, — and sing glory through us all, to the Father
Who has redeemed us through His Son ! R., Blessed is He above all in His Birth I


XVI.

(Resp. — Glory to all of Thee from all of us ! (bis.)

1. Who then that is mortal man, can declare concerning the All-Life giver, — Who
quitted the height of His Majesty, and abased Himself to humility .? — Thou Who ex-
altest all in Thy Birth, exalt my weak mind, — to declare of Thy Birth ; not that I
should search out Thy Majesty, — but that I should proclaim Thy grace. R., Blessed
he He Who conceals and reveals in His discourses I

2. It is a great marvel that the Son, dwelt wholly in a body; — abode therein wholly
and it sufficed for Him ; dwelt therein though not hoxvciAo,^ thereby. — His Will was
wholly therein ; His bounds reached wholly to His Father. — Who is sufficient to tell,
how though He dwelt wholly in a body. — He likewise dwelt wholly in all.? R.,
Blessed is He Who though without bounds was bounded !

3. Thy Majesty is concealed from us ; Thy Grace is revealed before us. — I will be
silent, O Lord of Thy Majesty ; and I will tell of Thy grace. — Thy grace clove to Thee,
and bowed Thee down to our vileness : — Thy grace made Thee a babe ; Thy grace
made Thee man : — it straitened, it enlarged. Thy Majesty. R., Blessed be the might
that became little and became great /

4. Glory to Him Who became lowly, though lofty He was by His nature ! — He be-
came in His love the firstborn of Mary, Firstborn though Hebe of Godhead. — He
became in name the offspring of Joseph, offspring though He be of the Most High. —


256 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


He became by His own Will man, God though He be by His Nature.- Glorified be Thy
Will and Thy Nature ! 7?., Blessed he Thy GIo?y which put on our image I

5. Yea, O Lord, Thy Birth, has become mother oiall creatures ; for it travailed anew
and gave birth, to mankind which gave birth to Thee. Thou wast born of it bodily ;
it was born of Thee spiritually. — All that Thou camest/6?r to birth, was that man might
be born in Thy likeness. — Thy Birth became the author of birth to all. R., Blessed
he He Who hecame ayouth and io all gave youth I

6. When man's hope had broken down, hope was increased by Thy Birth. — Good tid-
ings of hope they bore, the Heavenly Ones to men. — Satan who cut off our hope, his
own hope by his own hands had cut off, — when he saw that hope was increased : Thy
Birth became to the hopeless, — a fountain teaming with hope. R., Blessed he He
Who hore the tidings of hope I

7. The day of Thy Birth is like Thee, for it is desired and loved as Thou. — We who
saw not Thy Birth, and its flame as in its own time, — in this Thy day we see Thee,
even as Thou wast a babe ; — beloved by all men, lo ! in Thee the Churches rejoice ; —
Thy day adorns and is adorned. R., Blessed he Thy day which was ordained for us !

8. Thy day has given us a gift, to which the Father has none other like ; — It was
not Seraphim He sent us, nor yet did Cherubim come down among us ; — there came
not Watchers or Ministers, but the Firstborn to Whom they minister. — Who can suffice
to give thanks, that the Majesty which is beyond measure — is laid in the lowly man-
ger ! R., Blessed he He Who gave us what He had won /

9. That generation Thy Birth made glad, and our generation Thy day makes glad :
twofold was the happiness of that generation, for they saw Thy Birth and also Thy day :
— less is the happiness of them that come after, for the day of Thy Birth they see only.
— Yet because they that then were, doubted, greater is the happiness of them that come
after, — who though they have not seen Thee have believed in Thee. R., Blessed he
Thy happiness that is added to us I

10. The Magi exalted from afar ; the Scribes murmured near at hand ; — the prophet
showed his message, and Herod his wrath ; — the scribes showed their doctrine, the
Magi showed their offerings. It is a marvel that to Him, the Babe, they of His own
house hasted with their swords, and they that were strangers with their offerings. R,,
Blessed he Thy Birth which has stirred up all /

11. The bosom of Mary amazes me, that it sufficed for Thee, Lord, and embraced
Thee. — All creation were too small, to conceal Thy Majesty ; — Heaven and earth too
narrow, to be in the likeness of wings, ^ to cover Thy Godhead. — Too small for Thee
was the bosom of earth ; great enough for Thee was the bosom of Mary. — He dwelt in
the bosom and healed in her bosom. R.,

12. He was wrapped meanly in swaddling clothes, and offerings were offered Him.
— He put on garments in youth, and from them there came forth helps : He put on the
waters of baptism, and from them there shone forth beams : — He put on linen cloths in
death, and in them were shown forth triumphs ; with His humiliations. His exalta-
tions. R., Blessed be He Who joined His Glory to His Passion !

13. All these ^r^ the changes of raiment, w^hich Mercy put off and put on, — when
He strove to put on Adam, the glory which he had put off. — He was wrapped in
swaddling-clothes as Adam with leaves ; and clad in garments instead of skins. — He
was baptized for Adam's sin, and buried for Adam's death : — He rose and raised Adam
into Glory. R., Blessed he He Who came down and clothed him and went up !

i The word used for " bosom " in this stanza, also means " wing."


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 257

14. Though Thy Birth had sufficed, for Adam's sons as for Adam ; — O Mighty One
Who didst become a babe, in Thy Birth anew hast Thou begotten me ! — O pure One
Who wast baptized, let Thy Washing wash away our filth — O Living One who wast
buried, may we gain life in Thy death ! — I will praise all of Thee in Him that fills all.
i?. , Glory to all of Thee from all of us /

XVII.

(Resp. , Praise to Thee from every mouth on this Day of Thy Birth!)

1. Infants were slain because of Thy Birth, Thou Giver of life to all — But because
He Who was slain was a King, our Lord the Lord of Kingdoms, — the tyrant in subtlety,
gave for Him slain hostages, — clad in the mysteries of His slaying : the ranks of
heaven received, — the hostages that they of earth offered. R., Blessed be the King
who magfiified Him !

2. All the Kings of the house of David, transmitted and hauled on each to each, —
the throne and crown of the Son of David, as guardian of a deposit. — In one they
reached their bound and limit, when He came, the Lord of all things, — and took away
from them all things, and cut off the transmission of all things. ... R., Blessed he
He Who is clad in tliat which is His !

3. The doves moaned in Bethlehem, that the serpent destroyed their offspring. —
The eagle betook himself to Egypt, to go down and receive the promises. — Egypt re-
joiced in Him that there came, abundance for payment of debts, — which had failed the
sons of Joseph. Among the sons of Joseph He laboured and paid — the debts of the
sons of Joseph. R., Blessed is He Who called Him out of Egypt !

4. The Scribes read daily, that the Star arises out of Jacob. — For the People were the
Voice and the reading, for the nations the rising of the Star and the interpretation : —
for them were the Books and for us the facts ; for them boughs and for us fruits. — The
Scribes read in things written ; the Magi saw in things done, the outshining of that
which was read. R., Blessed be He Who added to us their books /

5. Who is able to tell, of the withdrawal and the appearings, — of the shining star
that went, before the bearers of the offerings } — It appeared and proclaimed the crown ;
it was hid and concealed ZT/s Body. — It was for the Son in twofold wise, herald and
guardian ; — it guarded His Body, it proclaimed His Crown. R., Blessed is He Who
has given wisdojji to tliem that proclaim Him !

6. The tyrant gazed on the Magi, as they asked ''Where is the son of the King.? " —
While his heart was gloomy, he sought for himself a cheerful countenance. — With the
■sheep he sent wolves, that should kill the Lamb of God. — The Lamb went down to
Egypt, that thence He might judge them, — whence He had saved them. R., Blessed
he He Who yet again subdued them.

7. The Magi declared to the tyrant, *' When thy servants joined us, — the bright star
withdrew itself, yea the paths hid themselves." — The blessed ones knew not, that the
king had sent bitter /bes, — murderers as if worshippers, to destroy the sweet fruit, —
v\^hereof the bitter eat and are made sweet. R., To Thee he glory, Medicine of life !

8. When there the Magi received, commandment to go and seek Him. — it is written
of them that they saw, that bright star and rejoiced. — Tlius it is known that it had been
withdrawn ; therefore rejoiced they at its aspect. — It was hid and hindered the mur-
derers, it arose and called the worshippers ; — it overthrew a part and it called a part.
R. , Blessed be He Who has triu??iphed in both parts !

9. The abhorred one who slew the children, how did he overlook the Child } — Justice
VOL. XIII. — 17


258 EPHRAIM SYRUS. '


hindered him that he thought, the Magi would return to him. — While he stayed waiting
to seize, the Worshipped and His worshippers, — everything escaped his hands, the
offerings and the worshippers took flight, — from the tyrant to the Son of the King.
R., Glory to Hhn who knows all counsels /

10. The blameless Magi as they slept, meditated on their beds : — sleep became a
mirror, and a dream rose on if as light. — The murderer they saw and trembled, as his
guile and his sword flashed forth. — He taught the men guile, he sharpened the sword
to sharpness : — the Watcher taught the sleepers. R. , Blessed is He who gives prudence
to the simple I

11. The simple who believe have known, two Comings of Christ : — but the foolish
scribes have not even perceived one Coming. — Yet the nations have life in the first, and
shall rise again there in the second. — The People whose mind is blinded, the first
Coming has dispersed ; — the second shall blot out their memory. R., Blessed he the
Ki?ig Who is come and is to comet

12. When the Saviour arose as the blind, the Sun showed forth his beams, — and they
were clothed in darkness : the Brightness sent forth his light, — and He brought the
sons of the stars, to make manifest the sons of darkness. — For lo ! among you is the
star, but on your eyes the veil. R. , To Thee he glory, newhorn Sun t

13. Prophets declared concerning His Birth, but they made not plain the time thereof.
— He sent the Magi, and they came and showed of its time. — Yet the Magi who made
known the time, made not plain who the Child should he. — A star of splendid light, in
its course showed who the Child was, — how splendid was His lineage. R., Blessed he
He Who hy them all was pointed out /

14. They scorned the trumpet of Isaiah, which sounded forth His pure Conception, —
they silenced the lute of the Psalms, which sang of His Priesthood ; — the harp of the
Spirit they hushed, which sang again of His Kingdom; — under deep silence they
closed up, the great Birth that joined the cry — of them above with them below.
R.y Blessed be He Who appeared in the midst of silence !

15. His voice was the secret key that opened the mouths of the Magi. — Whereas
preachers were silent in Judah, they made their voice sound through creation ; — and
the Gospel which those had scorned, these who came from far took and departed. — The
scorners began to hear their own orders from strangers, who cried out the name of the
Son of David. R. , Blessed he He Who hy our voice has put them to sile?ice I

16. Whereas the People scorned offerings, and brought them not to Him the Son of
the King, — He sent His herald to the nations, and caused them to come with their
offerings : — yet not all of them caused He to come, for it could not suffice for them, —
the narrow bosom of Bethlehem ; but the bosom of Holy Church, — enlarged itself and
contained her children. R., Blessed he He Who has made the harreji fruitful !

17. The slayers of Bethlehem mowed down the tender flowers that among them —
should perish the tender seedling, wherein was hidden the Bread of life. — But the ear of
corn that has life had escaped, that it should come to the sheaves in harvest : — the grape
that escaped when young, gave itself to the treading, — that its wine might give life to
souls. R., Glory to Thee, Treasury of life I

18. The murderers went into a paradise, full of tender fruits : — they shook off the
flowers from the bough, blossoms and buds they destroyed, — unblemished oblations he
offered, the persecutor unwittingly. — To him woe, but to them blessing! Bethlehem
was first to give, virgin fruits to the Holy One. R., Blessed is He Who receives the
first fruits !

19. The Scribes were silenced in envy, the Pharisees in jealousy. — Men of stone


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 259

cried out and gave praise, who had a heart of stone. — They applauded in presence of
the Stone, the rejected that has become the Head. — Stones were made flesh by that
Stone, and obtained mouths to speak; stones cried out through that Stone. R.,

Blessed be Thy Birth thai has caused stones to cry out I

20. The Star that is written in Scripture, the nations beheld from afar, — that the
People might be shamed which is near ; O People instructed and puffed up ! which by
the nations hast been in turn instructed, how and where they saw, — that vision whereof
Balaam spake; a stranger he who spread abroad concerning it, — strangers they who
saw it. R., Blessed is He Who has provoked to Jealousy them of His own house /

21. Let my supplication draw nigh to Thy Door, yea my poverty to Thy Treasury !
— Give to me my Lord without measure, as God unto man ! — And though Thou increase
gifts as Son of the Blessed, and though Thou add to them as Son of the King ; — though
I be thankless as are all creatures of dust, as Adam so is the son of Adam, — and as the
Blessed so too is the Son of the Blessed. R. , Praise he to Thee Who art like unto Thy
Father I

XVIII. .
Resp. — Praise he to Him Who sent Him ! (bis )

1. Blessed art thou, O Church, for lo ! in thee is the sound, — of the great feast the
festival of the King ! — Sion is deserted, her gates are sore athirst, — and forsaken of
festivals. — Blessed thy gates that are open yet not filled, — and thy halls that are en-
larged yet suffice not ! — In the midst of thee lo ! is the sound, of the nations that cry
out, and have put to silence the People.

2. Blessed «r/ thou, O Church, that in thy festivals, — the Watchers rejoice amid thy
festivity ! — for one night the Watchers gave praise, — on the earth which withheld and
refused praise. — Blessed thy voices that have been sown and reaped, — and in Heaven
stored up in garners ! — Thy mouth is a censer, and thy voices as perfumes, breathing
vapour in thy festivals.

3. Blessed art thou, O Church, that all oblations, — are brought unto thee in this feast.
— The Magi once among traitors, offered them to the Truth. — Blessed ihy abode that
He bowed Himself and dwelt therein. Son of the King Who is worshipped with gifts !
— Gold from the West, and spices from the East, — are offered in Thy Festivals.

4. Blessed art thou, O Church, that there is not with thee, — a tyrant King slayer of
babes ! for he killed in Bethlehem the little ones at random, — that he might put to
death the Child that gives life to all. — Blessed thy children that are envied and wor-
shipped,— by Kings, for those are promised for Thy worship, — the crowns of the East :
— he who trod down thy dear ones, shall be trodden down by thy beloved.

5. Blessed art ihou, O Church, forlo ! over thee, — Isaiah too exults in his prophecy,—
'' Lo a Virgin shall conceive and bear, — a Son " Whose name is great mystery ! — O in-
terpretation revealed in the Church ! — two names that were joined and became one ; —
" Emmanuel," — God be with thee ever, Who joined thee with His members !

6. Blessed art ihou, O Church, in Micah who cried out, — "A Shepherd shall come
forth from Ephrata " : — for He came to Bethlehem to take — from thence the rod of Jesse
and to. rule the nations. — Blessed thy lambs that are sealed with His seal, — and thy
sheep that are kept by His sword ! — Thou art, O Church, — the abiding Bethlehem, — for
in thee is the Bread of Life ! ^

7. Blessed art thou, O Church, for lo I in thee rejoices, — Daniel also the man beloved,

^ Bethlehem = House of Bread.


26o EPHRAIM SYRUS.


— who foretold that the glorious Messiah shall be killed, — and the city of holiness be
laid desolate at His killing ! — Woe to the People that was rejected and is not converted !
— Blessed the nations that were called and turned not away ! — The bidden guests
refused, — and others in their stead enjoyed their banquet.

8. Blessed art thou, O Church, for on thy lute, lo ! King David sings psalms in
thee ! In the Spirit he sings of Him '* Thou art My Son and I — this day have begotten
Thee " in the glories of holiness. — Blessed thy ears that have been purged to hear ! — On
His day watch thou as His Body and call on Him ; — be taught by Sion, — which sad-
dened His Feast ; make Him glad Who has gladdened thee.

9. Blessed art thou, O Church, that all festivals — have taken flight from Sion and
sheltered with thee ! — In the midst of thee the w^earied Prophets have found rest, —
from the labour and the reproach they bore in Judah. — Blessed the books unrolled in thy
temples, — and the festivals celebrated in thy shrines! — Sion is forsaken, — and lo ! to-
day the nations shout in thy festivals.

10. Blessed art thou, O Church, in ten blessings, — which our Lord has given as a
mystery complete : — for on ten all the numbers hang, therefore art thou perfect by ten
blessings. — Blessed thy crowns that are twined — with all blessings mixed in every
crown ! — O blessed one, — with every blessing crowned, on me too send thy blessing!

11. Blessed art thou, Ephrata, mother of Kings, that from thee sprang the Lord of
diadems ! — Micah gave thee tidings that He is from everlasting, and the span of His
times is not comprehended. — Blessed thine eyes w^hich first of all discerned Him ! — thee
He deemed worthy to see Him when He appeared, — Chief of benediction, — and Be-
ginning of gladness, thou didst receive first of all.

12. Blessed art thou, Bethlehem, that the towns envy thee, — and the fortified cities !
— As they e7ivy thee, so the w^omen envy Mary, — and the virgins daughters of princes.
— Blessed the maiden in whom He deigned to abide, — and the city wherein He deigned
to sojourn ; — a poor maiden, — and a small city, He chose Him to humble Himself

13. Blessed ar/ thou, Bethlehem, that in thee was the beginning, — for Him the Son
Who from everlasting is in the Father ! — It is hard to comprehend, that before Time He
is, — Who in thee made Himself subject to Time. — Blessed thine ears, for in thee first
was heard the cry — of the Lamb of God who exulted in thee ! — Narrow though thy
manger, — He spread Himself on all sides, and was worshipped of every creature.

14. Blessed art ih.o\x too, Mary, that thy name — is great and exalted because of thy
child ! — Thou canst tell then how and how long — and w^here He dwelt in thee, the great
One in small room. — Blessed thy mouth that praised and enquired not, — and thy
tongue that glorified and questioned not ! — For His Mother was uncertain concerning
Him, — even while she carried Him m the womb ; who then shall suffice to comprehend
Him.?

15. O Woman, thou whom no man knew, — how can we behold the Son thou hast
borne? — For no eyes suffice to stand — before the transfigurations of the glory, that is
on Him. — For tongues of fire abide in Him — Who sent tongues by His Ascension. — Be
every tongue warned, — that our questioning is as stubble, and as fire our scrutiny.

16. Blessed is he the priest who in the sanctuary, — offers to the Father the Son of
the Father, — the fruit that is plucked from our tree, though it be wholly of the Divi^ie
Majesty ! — Blessed the hands that are hallowed and offer Him I — and the lips that are
spent in kissing Him ! — The Spirit in the Temple — longed for His embrace ; and at His
Crucifixion rent the veil and went forth.

17. The Archangel gave thee greeting, — as the earnest of holiness — Earth became
to him new Heavens, — when the Watcher came down and sang glory on it. — The sons


HYMNS ON THE NATIVITY. 261

of the Highest encompassed thy habitation — because of the Son of the King that dwelt
in thee. — Thy abode below, — to the Heaven above was made like by the host of
Watchers.

XIX.

(Resp. — Blessed he thy Birth that gladdens all creatures !)

I. The first year wherein, our Saviour was born, — is source of blessing, and ground
of life ; — for by it are borne, — manifold triumphs, the sum of all help : — as the first day
of "the beginning," — the great pillar of all creatures, — bears the building of Creation ;
— so the year of the Firstborn hears help for man.

2. In the second year, of our Saviour's Birth, — the Magi exult, the Pharisees mourn :
— treasures are opened, — kings are hastening, and infants are slain. — For in it are
offered in Bethlehem, — oblations precious and terrible ; — for while love made offering
of gold, — hatred offered infants by the sw^ord.

3. The day of the All-Lightening, exults in His birth ; — a pillar of radiance, which
drives away, by its beams — the works of darkness. After the type of that day, wherein
light was created, — and sundered the darkness that spread — over the fair beauty of
Creation ; — the radiance of our Saviour's birth — came in to sunder the darkness thatz£/«s
on the heart.

4. The first day the source and the beginning, — orders the roots, to make all things
grow. — Our Saviour's day — is praised far above it, a tree planted in the world. — For His
Death is as the root in the earth ; His Resurrection as the head in heaven ; on all sides
His words reach as boughs ; likewise His Body as fruit for the eaters.

5. Let the second day, sing praise to the Birth — of the second Son, and His voice
which first — commanded the firmament and it was made, — divided the waters that
were above, and gathered the seas that were under. — He Who divided waters from
waters, divided Himself from the Watchers and came down to man. — For the waters
which at His command were gathered. — He cleft the fountain of life and gave drink.

6. Let the third day weave with divers hymns — the crown of psalms and with one
voice present it — for His Birth w^ho gave growth — of buds and flowers, on the third
day. — But now He the All-giver of growth, — has come down and become the All-holy
Flower ; from the thirsting earth has sprang forth and gone up, — that he may decorate
and crown the conquerors.

7. Let the fourth day praise, first among the four, — His Birth Who created as the
fourth day — the two lightgivers, — which fools worship, and are sightless and blind. — The
Lord of Lightgivers has come down, — and from the womb has shone on us as the Sun.
— His splendours have opened the eyes of the blind : — His rays have given light to the
wandering.

8. Let the fifth day laud Him Who created — on the fifth day creeping things and
Dragons — of whose kind is the serpent. — He deceived with guile our mother, a maid
void of counsel. — The deceiver who had mocked the maid, — by the Dove was exposed
as false, — which from a virgin bosom sprang, and came forth — the Wise that trod down
the crafty.

9. Let the sixth day laud Him who created — on Vesper-day Adam, whom Satan
envied ; as a feigned friend — cheered him in offering poison in his food. — The medicine
of life reached them both, — put on a body and came near to both. — The mortal tasted
Him and lived through Him ; — the devourer who ate Him was left void.

10. Let the seventh day hallow the Holy One,— Who halloweth the Sabbath, and
gave rest to all that live. — The Blessed One Who wearied not— has care for mankind.


262 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


and has care for the beasts. — When Freedom fell under the yoke, — He came to the
Birth and became bond to make it free: — He was smitten on the face by servants in the
judgment hall ; — He broke the yoke that was on the free, as Lord.

11. Let the eighth day, which circumcised the Hebrews, — praise Him Who com-
manded his namesake Joshua — to circumcise with a flint — the people circumcised in
body, while the heart was profane within. — Lo ! as the eighth day, as a Babe, — to cir-
cumcision He came Who circumcises all. — Though the sign of Abraham /s on His Flesh,
— the blind daughter of Sion had defiled it.

12. Let the tenth day sing, praises in its turn. — For God the Jirsf letter of Jesus
(goodly name ! ), is ten in numbering. — He Who is as a lamb, turns back the numbers. —
For when the number goes up to ten, it is turned back to begin again from one. O
great mystery of that which is in Jesus, Whose might turns all creation back again !

13. The All-Purifier Firstborn in the day of His purifying, — purified the purification
of the firstborn and was offered ^ in the Temple : — the Lord of offering needed offerings,
— to make offering of birds. — In His Birth were fulfilled the types, — in His purification
and circumcision the allegories. — He came and paid over debts in His coming down ; —
in His Resurrection He went up and sent down treasures.

1 Sc, in the Presentation, St. Luke ii. 22.


FIFTEEN HYMNS

FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY.


(Translated by Rev. A. Edward Johnston, B.A.)


HYMNS

FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY.


I.

Resp. — To Thee he praise from Thy flock in the day of TJiy Epiphany !

1. The heavens He has renewed, for that fools worshipped all the luminaries : — He
has renewed the earth, for that in Adam it was wasted.' — That which He fashioned
has become new by His spittle : — and the All-Sufficing has restored bodies with souls.

2. Gather yourselves again ye — sheep and without labour receive cleansing ! — for
one needs not as Elisha — to bathe seven times in the river, nor again to be wearied as
the priests are wearied with sprinklings.

3. Seven times Elisha purified himself in a mystery of the seven spirits ; — and the
hyssop and blood are a mighty symbol. — There is no room for division ; — He is not
divided from the Lord of all Who is Son of the Lord of all.

4. Moses sweetened in Marah the waters that were bitter, — because the People
complained and murmured : — Thus he gave .a sign of baptism, — wherein the Lord of
life makes sweet them that were bitter.

5. The cloud overshadowed and kept off the burning heat from the camp ; — it
showed a symbol of the Holy Spirit, which overshadows you in baptism — tempering
the flaming fire /hat it harm not your bodies.

6. Through the sea the People then passed, and showed a symbol — of the baptism
wherein ye were washed. The People passed through that and believed not : — the
Gentiles were baptized in this and believed and received the Holy Ghost.

7. The Word sent the Voice to proclaim before His Coming, — to prepare for Him
the way by which He came,— and to betroth the Bride till He should come, — that she
might be ready when He should come and take her from the water.

8. The voice of prophecy stirred the son of the barren woman, — and he went forth
wandering in the desert and crying, — '' Lo ! the Son of the Kingdom comes ! — prepare
ye the way that He may enter and abide in your dwellings ! "

9. John cried, ''Who comes after me. He is before me : — I am the Voice but not
the Word ; — I am the torch but not the Light ; — the Star that rises before the Sun of
Righteousness."

10. \\\ the wilderness this John had cried and had said, — "Repent ye sinners of
your evils, — and offer the fruits of repentance ; — for lo ! He comes that winnows the
wheat from the tares."

1 1. The Lightgiver has prevailed and marked a mystery, by the degrees he ascended :
— Lo ! there are twelve days since he ascended, — and to-day this is the thirteenth : — a
perfect mystery of Him, the Son, and His twelve !

1 See p. 177.

265


266 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


12. Darkness was overcome to make it manifest that Satan was overcome ; — and the
Light prevailed that he should proclaim — that the Firstborn triumphs : darkness was
overcome — with the Dark Spirit, and our Light prevailed with the Lightgiver.

13. Li the Height and the Depth the Son had two heralds. — The star of light pro-
claimed Him from above ; — John likewise preached Him from beneath : — two heralds,
the earthly and the heavenly.

14. The star of light, contrary to nature, shone forth of a sudden ; — less than the
sun yet greater than the sun. — Less was it than he in manifest light ; — and greater than
he in secret might because of its mystery.

15. The star of light shed its rays among them that were in darkness, — and guided
them as though they were blind ; — so that they came and met the great Light : — they
gave offerings and received life and adored and departed.

16. The herald from above showed His Nature to be from the Most High ; — likewise
he that was from beneath showed His Body to be from humankind, mighty marvel ! —
that His Godhead and His Manhood by them were proclaimed !

17. Thus whoso reckons Him as of earth, the star of light — will convince him that He
is of Heaven ; and whoso reckons Him as of spirit, — this John will convince him that
He is also bodily.

18. John drew near w^ith his parents and worshipped the Sun, — and brightness rested
on His Face. — He was not moved as when in the womb. — Mighty marvel! that here
he worships and there he leaped !

19. The whole creation became for Him as one mouth and cried out concerning
Him. — The Magi cry out in their gifts ; — the barren cry out with their children ; — the
star of light, lo ! it cries out in the air, ".Behold the Son of the King ! "

20. The heavens are opened, the waters break forth, the dove is in glory ! — The
voice of the Father is stronger than thunder, — as it utters the word, "This is My Be-
loved " ; — the Watchers brought the tidings, the children acclaimed Him in their
Hosannas.

II.

(Nearly identical with Hymn XIII, On the Nativity^
(Resp. — To Thee he praise Who in this feast makest all to exult!)

1. In the time of the King whom they called by the narr^e Semha ^ — our Lord was
manifested among the Hebrews. — Thus Semha and Denha ^ reigned together, — the
King on earth and the Son on high — blessed be His power !

2. In the days of the King who wrote down men in the taxing, — our Saviour came
down and wrote down men in the Book of Life ; He wrote and was written ; — on high
He wrote us, on earth He was written ; glory to His Name !

3. His Birth was in the days of the King whose name was Semha. — Symbol and
truth met one another; — King and King, Semha and Denha. — That kingdom bore His
Cross ; blessed he He Who took it up !

4. Thirty years abode Pie on earth in poverty. — Voices of praise in all measures,
— let us weave my brethren for our Lord's years ; — thirty crowns for thirty years ;
Blessed be His number !

5. In the first year, mistress of treasure and filled with blessings, — let the Cherubin
give thanks with us, they who bear — the Son in glory Who gave up His glorious state,
— and toiled and found the sheep that was lost ; — to Him he thanksgiving !


Equivalent to Augustus. 2 / ^^ Dayspring.


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 267

6. In the second year let the Seraphin multiply thanksgiving with us ; — they who
cried " Holy " to the Son, and turned and saw Him — among unbelievers put to shame.
— He endured scorn and taught us glory ; to Him be glory given !

7. In the third year let Michael and his hosts give thanks with us ; — they who were
wont to serve the Son on high, — and saw Him on earth doing service. — He washed
mens feet and cleansed mens souls ; blessed he His meekness !

8. In the fourth year let all the heavens give thanks with us ! Too narrow for the
Son it shall burst to see — how He lay on the couch of despised Zaccheus. — He filled
the couch and had filled the heavens ; — to Him he thanksgiving !

9. In the fifth year let the Sun that burns the earth with its heat — give thanks to our
Sun that He straitened His largeness, — and tempered His force that the eye might endure
to see Him ; — the inward eye of a pure soul ; blessed he His radiance !

10. In the sixth year again let all the air give thanks with us, — in the vastness
whereof all things exult. — It saw its great Lord that He became — a little babe in a
lowly bosom ; blessed be His honour !

11. In the seventh year let the clouds and winds sound the trumpet with us, — they
whose dew sprinkles the faces of the flowers, — yet saw they the Son that He subdued
His brightness, — and endured scorn and shameful spitting; — blessed he His salvation !

12. Yet again in the eighth year let Creation give glory, — from whose fountain the
fruits draw nurture. — She adored when she saw the Son at the breast, — pure hahe nur-
tured by pure milk ; blessed he His good pleasure !

13. In the ninth year let the earth give glory, which when her lap is watered then
brings forth the root. — She saw Mary an un watered soil — whose fruit that she yielded is
a mighty sea ; to Him he exultation ! R. , To Thee he glory, Son of the Lord of all,
Who gives t Ife to all /

14. In the tenth year let Mount Sinai give glory, which melted — before its Lord !
It saw against its Lord — stones taken up : but He took stones — to build the Church
upon the Rock ; blessed he His building !

15. In the eleventh year let the great sea give thanks — to the hand of the Son Who
measured it ! And it wondered to see how He came down and was washed — in humble
waters. He that cleanses Creation ; blessed he His triumph !

16. In the twelfth year let the holy Temple give thanks — which beheld the Child
as He sat — among the elders : the doctors were silenced — as the Lamb of the feast
bleated in the feast ; blessed he His atonement !

17. In the thirteenth year let diadems with us give thanks — to the King Who tri-
umphed and was crowned — with a crown of thorns : He wove for man — a mighty diadem
at His right hand ; blessed he He That sent Him !

18. In the fourteenth year let the Passover of Egypt give thanks — to the Passover
that came and made passover for all, — and instead of Pharaoh overwhelmed Legion, —
and instead of horsemen drowned demons ; blessed be His retribution !

19. In the fifteenth year let the lamb of the flock give thanks, — that our Lord slew
it not as did Moses, — but redeemed by His Blood mankind. — He the Shepherd of all
died for all ; blessed he He That begat Him !

20. In the sixteenth year let the seed-corn in mystery give thanks — to that Husband-
man Who gave His Body for seed — in a barren soil that corrupts all things. — It proved
fertile and yielded new bread ; blessed he He that is pure !

21. In the seventeenth year let the Vine give thanks to our Lord, — the Vineyard of
truth, wherein souls were— as the scions. He gave peace to this vineyard, but laid
waste that vineyard which bare wild grapes ; blessed he the Uprooter !


268 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


2 2. In the eighteenth year let our leaven give thanks — to the leaven of truth that
penetrates and draws — all minds and makes them to become — one mind in one doctrine ;
blessed be His doctrine !

23. In the nineteenth year let the Salt give thanks for Thy Body. — O blessed Babe
it is the soul — that is the salt of the Body, and Faith — the salt of the soul whereby it is
preserved ; blessed be Thy preservation ! R., Glory to Thy Epiphany, 0 God and
Man !

24. In the twentieth year let temporal wealth with us give thanks, — which men
that are perfect have cast off and abandoned — because of the *' Woe" ; and have gone
and loved — poverty because of its beatitude ; blessed be He Who desired it !

25. In the one-and-twentieth year let the waters give thanks that were sweetened —
in a mystery of the Son. In the honey of Samson — the nations tasted bitterness therein
that destroyed them : — they had life in the Cross that redeemed them ; blessed be its
pleasantness !

2(i. In the two-and-twentieth year let arms and the sword give thanks, — for they
could not slay our Adversary. — Thou art He Who slew him as Thou art He Who
restored — the ear that Simon's sword cut off; blessed be Thy healing !

27. In the three-and-twentieth year let the ass likewise give thanks, — that gave the
colt whereon He should ride; — He opens likewise the mouth of wild asses, — the off-
spring gave Him praise ; blessed be the praise of Thee !

28. In the four-and-twentieth year let wealth give thanks to the Son ! — Treasures
were amazed at the Lord of treasures, — how He grew up among the poor. — He made
Himself poor that He might make all rich ; blessed be His participation !

29. In the five-and-twentieth year let Isaac give thanks to the Son — Who in the
mount saved him from the knife, — and became in his stead the lamb to be slain. — The
mortal escaped, and He died Who gives life to all ; blessed be His offering !

30. In the six-and-twentieth year let Moses with us give thanks, — who feared and
fled from the slayers ; — let him give thanks to the Son, for He it was Who on His feet
— entered Sheol and spoiled it and came forth ; blessed be His Resurrection !

[31. In the seven- and-twentieth year let the eloquent Orators — give thanks to the
Son, for they could not find — means whereby we should prevail in our judgment : — He
was silent in judgment and made our judgment prevail ; to Him be applause !]

32. In the seven and twentieth year let all Judges give thanks, — who as being just
have put to death illdoers ; — let them give thanks to the Son Who instead of the evil
— died as being good, though He was Son of the Just One ; blessed be His mercies !

'^^. In the eight-and-twentieth year let them give thanks to the Son, — all the mighty
men who saved us not — from the captors. One is to be worshipped, — Who was slain
and laid hold and saved us ; blessed be His deliverance !

34. In the nine-and-twentieth year let Job with us give thanks, — who bare sufferings
in his own behalf : — but our Lord bare on our behalf — the spitting and the stripes, the
thorns and the nails ; blessed is His compassion !

35. In the year that is the thirtieth let them give thanks with us ; — the dead that
have lived through His dying, — the living that were converted in His Crucifixion, — ■
and the height and the depth that have been reconciled in Him ! Blessed be He and
His Father !


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 269


III.

(Resp. — Christ with chrism, lo ! He is seali?ig the newborn iambs in His flock /)

1. Christ and chrism are conjoined; the secret with the visible is mingled: the
chrism anoints visibly, — Christ seals secretly, the lambs newborn and spiritual, the
prize of His twofold victory ; for He engendered it of the chrism, and He gave it birth
of the water.

2. How exalted are your Orders ! For she that was a sinner anointed, as a hand-
maid, the feet of her Lord. But for you, as though His minister, Christ by the hand of
His servants, seals and anoints your bodies. It befits Him the Lord of the flock, that
in His own person He seal His sheep.

3. Since then she, that sinner, stood in need of forgiveness, the anointing was for
her an offering, and by it her love reconciled her Lord. But you who are the flock,
among the profane and unbelievers, the Truth by the chrism is your seal, to separate
you from the strayed.

4. From the peoples he separated the People, by the former seal of circumcision ;
but by the seal of anointing, the peoples He separates from the People. When the
peoples were in error, the People He separated from the peoples ; now when the People
has erred from Him, He separates the peoples from thence.

5. Of the dust of the pure soil, Naaman bore away and returned to his place ; that
he by this holy dust, might be separated and known from the unclean. The chrism of
Christ separates, the sons of the mystery from strangers : and by it they that are within
are separated, and known from them that are without.

6. The oil which Elijah multiplied, might be tasted with the mouth ; for the cruse
was that of the widow, it was not that of the chrism. The oil of our Lord that is in
the cruse, it is not food for the mouth : the sinner that was a wolf without, it makes
him a lamb in the flock.

7. The chrism of the meek and lowly One, changes the stubborn to be like its Lord.
The Gentiles were wolves and feared, the severe rod of Moses. Lo ! the chrism seals
them and makes, a flock of sheep out of the wolves ! And the wolves that had fled
from the rod, lo ! they have taken refuge in the Cross !

8. The leaf of olive arrived, brought as a figure of the anointing ; the sons of the
Ark rejoiced to greet it, for it bore good tidings of deliverance. Thus also ye rejoiced
to greet it, even this holy anointing. The bodies of sinners were glad in it, for it brought
good tidings of deliverance.

9. The oil again that Jacob poured, upon the stone when he sealed it, that it should
be between him and God, and that he might offer there his tithes ; lo ! in it is a symbol
of your bodies, howhy chrism they are sealed as holy, and become temples for God,
where He shall be served by your sacrifices.

10. When Moses had sealed and anointed, the sons of Aaron the Levite, the fire
consumed their bodies ; the fire spared their vestments. But ye my brethren blessed
are ye, for the fire of grace has come down, has consumed utterly your offences, and
cleansed and hallowed your bodies !

11. As for the anointing of Aaron my brethren, it was the vile blood of beasts, that
it sprinkled in the horns of the altar. The anointing of truth is this ; wherein the living
and all-lifegiving Blood, is sprinkled inwardly in your bodies, is mingled in your under-
standings, is infused through your inmost chambers.

12. The anointed priests used to offer, the slain bodies of beasts ; Ye, O anointed


270 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


and excelling, your offering-s are your own bodies. The anointed Levites offered, the
inward parts taken, from beasts : ye have excelled the Levites, for your hearts ye have
Consecrated.

13. The anointing of the People was — a foreshadowing of Christ ; their rod a
mystery of the Cross ; their lamb a type of the Only begotten ; their tabernacle a
mystery of your Churches ; their circumcision a sign of your sealing. Under the
shadow of your goodly thing, sat the People of old.

14. Thus the truth is likened, to a great shadowing tree : it cast its shade on the
People ; it struck its root among the peoples. The People abode under its shadows,
whose shadows were its mysteries ; but the Gentiles lodged on its bough, and plucked
and ate of its fruits.

15. As for the anointing of Saul to be king; the sweeter was its savour, so much
fouler was the savour of his heart. The Spirit struck him and fled. Your anointing
which ye have is greater; for your minds are censers, in your temples the Spirit exults^
a chamber forever shall ye be unto Him.

16. ^5 for the anointing of David my brethren ; the Spirit came down and made
sweet savour, in the heart of the man wherein He delighted ; the savour of his heart
was as the savour of his action. The Spirit dwelt in him and made song in him.
Your anointing which ye have is greater, for Father and Son and Holy Ghost, have
moved and come down to dwell in you.

17. When the leper of old was cleansed, the priest used to seal him with' oil, and to
lead him to the waterspring. The type has passed and the truth is come ; lo ! with
chrism have ye been sealed, in baptism ye are perfected, in the flock ye are intermixed,
from the Body ye are nourished.

18. What leper when he has been cleansed, turns again and desires his leprosy?
Ye have put off transgressions — forsake it ! None puts on the leprosy he had put off.
It has fallen and sunk — let it not be drawn out ! It is wasted and worn — let it not be
renewed ! Let not corruption come out upon you, whom the chrism of Christ has
anointed !

19. The vessel moulded of clay, gains beauty from the water, receives strength
from the fire ; hut if it slips it is ruined, it cannot be afresh renewed. Ye are vessels,
of grace ; be ye ware of it, even of justice, for it grants not two renewals.

20. How like are ye in comparison, with the Prophet whom the fish yielded up !'
The Devourer has given you back for he was constrained, by the Power Which con-
strained the fish. Jonah was for you as a mirror, since not again did the fish swallov/
him, let not again the Devourer swallow you : being yielded up be ye like Jonah !

21. Goodly ointment on the head of our Lord did Mary pour; its savour was fra-
grant through all- the house. Likewise the savour of your anointing, has been fragrant
and perfumed the heavens, to the Watchers on high ; doing pleasure to Satan its savour
is overpowering ; to God its odour is sweet.

22. The crowds in the desert were like unto sheep that have no shepherd. The
Merciful became their shepherd, and multiplied to them the pasture of bread. Yea,
blessed are ye that are perfect, that are sealed <2S lambs of Christ, that of His Body and
Blood are made worthy ; the Pastor Himself is become pasture for you !

23. Out of water He made the wine. He gave it for drink to the youths in the feast.
For you who are keeping the fast, better is the unction than drink. In His wine the
betrothed are wedded, by His oil the wedded are sanctified. By His wine is union ;
by His oil sanctification.

24. The sheep of Christ leaped for joy, to receive the seal of life, that ensign of


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 271

kings which has ever put sin to flight. The Wicked by Thy ensign is routed, iniquities
by Thy sign are scattered. Come, ye sheep, receive your seal, which puts to flight them
that devour you !

25. Come, ye lambs, receive your seal, for it is truth that is your seal ! This is the
seal that separates, them of the household from strangers. The steel circumcised alike,
the gainsayers and the sons of Hagar. If circumcision he the sign of the sheep, lo !
by it the goats are signed.

26. But ye, who are the new flock, have put off the doings of wolves, and as lambs
are made like to the Lamb. One by changing has changed all ; the Lamb to the
wolves gave Himself to be slain ; the wolves rushed and devoured Him and became
lambs ; for the Shepherd was changed into a Lamb ; likewise the wolf forgot his
nature.

27. Look on me also in Thy mercy ! be not branded on me the seal, of the goats
the sons of the left hand! let not Thy sheep become a goat! For though to justify
myself I sufficed not, yet to be a sinner I willed not. Turn thine eyes, O my Lord, from
what I have done, and seek not only what I have willed.

28. From them that write and them that preach, from them that hear and them that
are sealed, let glory go up to Christ, and through ffim to His Father he exaltation ! He
Who gives words to them that speak, and gives voice to them that preach, has given
understanding to them that hear, and consecrates chrism for him that is sealed.

IV.

(Resp. — Blessed he He that hlots out in water misdeeds that are without measure !)

1. Descend my sealed brethren, put ye on our Lord, — and be rejoined to His lineage,
for He is son of a great lineage, — as He has said in His Word.

2. From on high is His Nature, and from beneath His Vesture. — Each that puts off
his vesture, commingled is that vesture, with His Vesture forever.

3. Ye too in the water, receive from him the vesture, — that wastes not or is lost
for it is the vesture that vests — them that are vested in it forcA^er.

4. But the blessed Priest, is daysman between two : — the covenant shall be made
before Him, He is daysman of his Lord, — and surety on our part.

5. The Godhead in the water, lo ! has mingled His leaven ; — for the creatures of
dust, that leaven raises up, — and the Godhead joins them.

6. For it is the leaven of the Lord, that can glide into the bondman, — and raise him
to freedom ; it has joined the bondman to the lineage, — of Him the Lord of all.

7. For the bondman who has put on Him, Who makes all free in the waters, —
though bondman he be on earth, is son of the free on high, — for freedom he has put on.

8. The freeman who has put on, that Angel in the waters, — is as the fellow of serv-
ants, that he may be made like to the Lord, — Who became bondman unto bondmen.

9. He Who enriches all came down, and put on poverty, — that He might divide to
the poor, the stores that were hidden, — out of the treasure-house of the water.

10. The lowly one again that has put on, the Giver of all greatness, in the water,
— even though he be base in the sight of fools, yet is great in the sight of the Watchers,
— for that he is clad in greatness.

11. For like as He Who is great, Who became lowly in His love, — by the unbelievers
was persecuted, and by the Watchers was worshipped, — was made lowly and makes
the lowly great.

12. Thus let him be lowly who is great, that in him the lowly may be great : — Let


272 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


us be like to Him Who is greater than all, Who became less than all : — He was made
lowly, and makes all men great.

13. The meek man who has put on Him Who is great, in the water, — though humble
he his countenance, very great is his discernment, — for He Who is exalted above all
dwells in him.

14. For who could be found to despise the bush of thorn, — the despised and humble,
wherein the Majesty in fire, — made its dwelling w^ithin ?

15. Who again could be found, to despise Moses, — the meek and slow of speech, —
when that excelling glory — dwelt upon his meekness ?

16. They that despised him despised his Lord ; the wicked that despised him — the
earth swallowed up in anger; the Levites who scorned Him, — the fire devoured in
fur3^

17. Of Him Christ commanded, ''Thou shalt not call him Raca, " who is baptized
and has put Him on ; for whoso despises the despised, despises with him the Mighty.

18. In Eden and in the world, are parables of our Lord; — and what tongue can
gather, the similitudes of His mysteries '^. — for He is figured all of Him in all things.

19. In the Scriptures He is written of; on Nature He is impressed ; — His crown is
figured in kings, in prophets His truth, His atonement in priests.

20. In the rod was He of Moses, and in the hyssops of Aaron, — and in the crown
of David : to the prophets pertains His similitude, to the Apostles His Gospel.

21. Revelations beheld Thee, proverbs looked for Thee, — mysteries expected Thee,
similitudes saluted Thee, parables showed types of Thee.

22. The Covenant of Moses looked forward to the Gospel : — all things of old time,
flew on and alighted thereon, in the new Covenant.

23. Lo ! the prophets have poured out on Him, their glorious mysteries ; — the
priests and kings have poured out upon Him, their wonderful types: — they all have
poured them out on all of Him.

24. Christ overcame and surpassed, by His teachings the mysteries, — by His inter-
pretations the parables ; as the sea into its midst — receives all streams.

25. For Christ is the sea, and He can receive — the fountains and brooks, the rivers
and streams, that flow from the midst of the Scriptures.

V.

(Resp. — Blessed he He that ordained baptism, for the atonement of the so?is of Adam /)

1. Descend, my brethren, put on from the waters of baptism the Holy Spirit ; — be
joined with the spirits that minister to the Godhead !

2. For lo ! He is the fire that secretly, seals also His flock, — by the Three spiritual
Names, wherein the Evil One is put to flight.

3. John when he cried and said "This is the Lamb of God," — thereby showed con-
cerning the Gentiles that they are Abraham's children.

4. This is he that testified of our Saviour, that with fire and the Spirit He should
baptize. — Lo ! the fire and the Spirit, my brethren, in the baptism of truth.

5. For greater is Baptism than Jordan that little river ; — for that in streams of water
and oil, the misdeeds of all men are washed out.

6. Elisha by seven times ivashing, cleansed Naaman's leprosy : — in Baptism are
cleansed the secret misdeeds in the soul.

7. Moses baptized the People in the midst of the sea, yet availed not — to wash their
heart wuthin, that was full of the delilements of misdeeds.


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 273

8. Lo ! the priest in the likeness of Moses purges the defilements of the soul ; — and
with oil of anointing, lo ! he seals new lambs for the Kingdom.

9. Samuel anointed David to be king among the People : — but lo ! the priest anoints
you to be heirs in the Kingdom.

10. For with the armour that David put on, after the anointing he fought — and laid
low the giant who sought to subdue Israel.

11. Lo ! again in the chrism of Christ, and in the armour that is from the water
— the haughtiness of the Evil One is humbled, who sought to subdue the Gentiles.

12. By the water that flowed from the rock, the thirst of the People was quenched.
Lo I in the fountain of Christ, the thirst of the peoples is quenched.

13. The rod of Moses opened the rock, and the streams flowed forth ; and they were
refreshed by its draught, who had grown faint with thirst.

14. Lo ! from the side of Christ flowed the stream that bestowed life. — The Gen-
tiles drank that were weary, and in it forgot their pains.

15. With Thy dew besprinkle my vileness, and my crimes in Thy blood shall be
atoned ! — And I shall be, O my Lord, at Thy right hand, and with Thy Saints I shall
be joined !

' VI.

(Resp. — Blessed he He Who was baptized that He might baptize you, that ye should he
absolved from your offences.^

1. The Spirit came down from on high, — and hallowed the waters by His brood-
ing.— In the baptism of John, — He passed by the rest and abode on One: — but now
He has descended and abode, — on all that are born of the water.

2. Out of all that John baptized, — on One it was that the Spirit dwelt : — but now
He has flown and come down, — that He may dwell on the many ; — and as each after
each comes up, — He loves him and abides on him.

3. A marvel // is that surpasses all! — To the water He went down and was bap-
tized.— The seas declared it blessed, — that river wherein Thou wast baptized : — even the
waters that were in heaven envied, — because they were not worthy to be Thy bath.

4. A marvel z'/ is, O my Lord, now also, — that while the fountains are full of water,
— it is the water of baptism, — that alone is able to atone. — Mighty is the water in the
seas, — yet is it too weak for atonement.

5. Thy might, O my Lord, if it abides, — within the humble it exalts him ; — like as
royalty if it abide — within the desert gives it peace. — Water by Thy might has tri-
umphed— over sin, for Life has encompassed it.

6. The sheep exulted when they saw — the hand draw nigh to baptize them. —
Receive, O ye sheep, your sealing ; enter and be mingled in the flock ! — for more than
over all the flock, — over you rejoice the Watchers to-day.

7. The Angels and the Watchers rejoice— over that which is born of the Spirit and of
water: — they rejoice that by fire and by the Spirit,— the corporeal have become spiri-
tual.— The Seraphins who sing ''Holy" rejoice, — that they who are made holy have
been increased.

8. For lo ! the Angels rejoice— over one sinner if he repent : — how much more do
they now rejoice — that in all churches and congregations, — lo ! Baptism is bringing
forth — the heavenly from the earthly !

9. The baptized when they come up are sanctified ; — the sealed when they go
down are pardoned. — They who come up have put on glory ; — they who go down

VOL. XIII. — 18


274


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


have cast off vSin. — Adam put off his glory in a moment ; — ye have been clothed with
glory in a moment.

10. A house that is of dust w^hen it has fallen, — by means of w^atercan be renewed :
— the body of Adam that was of dust, — which had fallen by water has been renewed.
— Lo ! the priests as builders — afresh renew your bodies.

11. A great marvel is this of the wool, — that it can take every dye, — as the mind
takes every discourse. — By the name of its dye it is called; — as ye who were — bap-
tized when "Hearers," — have gained the name of " Recipients."

12. The common waters he sanctified — eve^i Elisha through the Name that is secret.
— In them washed the leper openly, — and was cleansed by the Power that is secret: — >
the leprosy was done away in the water, as transgressions in Baptism.

13. To-day, lo ! your offences are blotted out, — and your names are written down.
— The priest blots out in the water; — and Christ writes down in Heaven. — By the blot-
ting out and the writing down — lo ! doubled is your rejoicing.

14. Lo ! mercy has dawned to-day ; — and from bound to bound it stretches : — the
sun has sunk and mercy has dawned. ^ — Justice has drawn in her wrath ; Grace has
spread forth her love, — lo ! she pardons and quickens freely.

15. The sheep that beforetime were in the fold — lo ! they hasten forth to greet —
the new lambs that have been added to it. — They are white and are clad in white ; —
within and without white ai-e your bodies as your vestments.

16. From every mouth "Blessed are ye," — on every side "Blessed are ye." — Sin
from you is driven out, — and the Holy Spirit on you is dwelling. — The Evil One is
become sad of countenance ;^the Good Go^ makes glad your countenance.

17. The gift that ye have received freely, — cease not from watching over it : —
this pearl if it shall be lost — cannot again be sought out,— for it is like to virginity —
which if it be lost is not to be found.

18. May ye from all defilement — be kept by the power of your white robes! — and
he whose freedom has defiled itself — may it be able to wash itself clean by his weeping !
— For me who am servant of the community — may the supplication of the commu-
nity win pardon !

19. To the author who has toiled in words, — be reconciliation in rest! — to the
teacher who has toiled with voice, — be forgiveness through grace ! — to the priest who
has toiled in baptizing, — let there come the crown of righteousness !

20. From every mouth with one consent, — of those beneath and those above, —
Watchers, Cherubin, and Seraphin, — the baptized, the sealed, and the hearers, — let
each of us cry aloud and say, — "Glory to the Lord of our feasts ! "

VH.

(Resp. — Blessed is He Who atoned your sins, that ye might receive His Body worthily /)

1. The flock of Jacob came down — and stood round the well of water. — In the water
they put on the similitude of the wood that was covered by it. — Mysteries these and
types of the Cross, — wherein the parables are interpreted.

2. There are shown in these rods similitudes, — and in the sheep, parables. — The
Cross in the rods is figured, and in the sheep the souls of men. — His wood was a
mystery of our Wood ; — likewise his sheep a mystery of our flock.

3. The sheep of Christ rejoice, — and stand round the laver of baptism : — in the
water they put on the likeness — of the living and goodly Cross — w^hereon gaze all
things created, — and all of it is stamped on them all.


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 275

4. At the well Rebecca received — in her ears and hands the jewels. ^The Spouse of
Christ has put on — precious things that are from the water : — on her hand the living
Body, — and in her ears the promises.

5. Moses drew water and watered the sheep — of Jethro the priest ^ of sin. — But our
Shepherd has baptized His sheep — Who is the high priest of truth. — At the well the flocks
were dumb, — but here the sheep have speech.

6. The People passed through the water and were baptized : — the People came up on
dry land and became as heathen. — The Commandment was savourless in their ears ; —
the manna corrupted in their vessels. — Eat ye the living Body, — the medicine of life
that gives life to all !

7. To the sons of Lot Moses said, — "Give us water for money, — let us only pass
by through your border."— They refused the way, and the temporal water. — Lo ! the
living water freely'^ given, — and the path that leads to Eden !

8. From the water Gideon chose for himself — the men who were victorious in the
battle. — Ye have gone down to the victorious waters : — come ye up and triumph in the
fight ! — receive from the water atonement, — and from the fight the crowning !

9. Ye baptized, receive your lamps, — like the lamps of the house of Gideon ; — con-
quer the darkness by your lamps, — and the silence by your hosannas ! — Gideon like-
wise in the battle — triumphed by the shout and the flame.

10. David the King longed after — the water of the well, and they brought it him ; —
but he drank it not, for he saw that with blood of men it was bought. — In the midst of
the water ye have revelled — that was bought with the blood of God.

11. Out of Edom the prophet saw — God cof?img as one that presses the grapes. — He
made ready the winepress of wrath, — He trod down the peoples and delivered the
People. — He has turned and ordained Baptism ; — the peoples live, the People is come
to nought.

12. In the river Jeremiah buried — the linen girdle that was marred; — and [the
People] waxed old and decayed. — . . . — The peoples that were decayed and marred,
— by the waters have been clad in newness.

13. In Siloam,^ the blessed stream — the priests anointed Solomon. — His youth was
had in honour; — his old age was despised. — Through the pure waters ye have been
clad — in the purity of Heaven.

14. The fleece that was dry from the dew, — Jerusalem was figured in it : — the bason
that was filled with water, — Baptism was figured in it. — That was dry after the manner
of its type ; — this was full after the manner of its symbol.

15. The wearied body in water — washes and is refreshed from its toil. — Lo ! the
laver in which are hidden — refreshing and life and delights. — In it wearied Adam had
rest — who brought labour into the creation.

16. The fountain of sweat in the body — is set to protect against fever : — the fountain
of Baptism — is set to protect against the Flame. — This is the water that avails — for the
quenching of Gehenna.

1 7. He who journeys through the desert, — as armour takes to himself water — against
all-conquering thirst. — Go ye down to the fountain of Christ, — receive life in your mem-
bers,— as armour against death.

18. Again, the diver brings up — out of the sea the pearl. — Be baptized and bring up
from the water — purity that therein is hidden, — the pearl that is set as a jewel — in the
crown of the Godhead.

■^ Rev. xxi. 6, xxii. 17. 3 go in Peshitto, i Kin. i. 38 ; but Gihon in the Hebrew.


2^6 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


19. Sweet water in his vessel — the seaman lays up as a store ; — in the midst of the
sea he lays up and keeps it, the sweet in the midst of the bitter. — So amidst the floods
of sin, — keep ye the water of Baptism.

20. The woman of Samaria said to our Lord, — ''Lo! verily the well is deep."
— Baptism though it be high, — in its mercy has stooped down with us : — for the atone-
ment is from above — that has come down unto sinners.

21. " He that drinks the water that I shall give him, — verily never again shall he
thirst." — For this holy Baptism, — for it be ye athirst, my beloved; — never again shall
ye be athirst, — so that ye should come to another baptism.

22. In the baptism of Siloam — the blind man washed, and his eyeballs — were opened
and enlightened by the water; — he cast off the darkness that was on them. — The hid-
den darkness ye have cast off ; — from the water ye have been clad in light.

23. His hands Pilate washed — that he might not be of them that slew. — Ye have
bathed your bodies, — your hands together with your mouths. — Go in and be of them
that eat, — for this medicine of life gives life to all.

24. " Come after Me and verily I will make you — fishers of men." — For instead of a
draught of that which perishes, — they fished for the draught that is forever. — They who
had taken fishes for death, — baptized and gave life to them that were to die.

25. An hundred and fifty fishes were taken — by Simon's net from the water ; — but
there were taken by his preaching, — out of the bosom of Baptism, — ten thousands and
thousands of men, — a draught of the sons of the Kingdom.

26. Lo I our priest as a fisher — over the scanty water is standing ; — he has taken
thence a great draught — of every shape and of every kind ; — he has drawn up the
draught to bring it near — to the King of kings, most high.

27. Simon took the fishes and drew them up, — and they were brought near before
our Lord : — Our priest has taken from out of the water, — by the Hand which he received
from Simon, — virgins and chaste men who are brought near — in the festival of the
Lord of feasts.

28. Li Thy mercy I adjure Thee pardon me, — for in mercy Thou too hast sworn, —
Rabboni, "In the death of him that dieth, — I have no pleasure, but in his life." — Thou
hast sworn and I have adjured: — O Thou Who hast sworn, pardon him who has
adjured !

VHL

(Resp. — Happy are ye whose bodies have been made to shine !)

1. God in His mercy stooped and came down, — to mingle His compassion with the
water, — and to blend the nature of His majesty — with the wretched bodies of men. —
He made occasion by the water — to come down and to dwell in us : — like to the occasion
of mercy — when He came down and dwelt in the womb : — O the mercies of God — Who
seeks for Himself all occasions to dwell in us !

2. To the cave in Horeb He stooped and came down, — and on Moses He caused
His majesty to dwell; — He imparted His glorious splendour to mortals. — There was
therein a figure of Baptism : — He Who came down and dwelt in it, — tempers within the
water — the might of His majesty, — that He may dwell in the feeble. — On Moses dwelt
the Breath, — and on you the Perfecting of Christ.

3. That might then none could endure ; — not Moses chief of deliverers, — nor Elijah
chief of zealots ; — and the Seraphin too vail their faces, — for it is the might that subdues
all. — His mercy mingled gentleness — in the water and by the oil ; — that mankind in


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 277

its weakness — might be able to stand before Him — when covered by the water and
the oil.

4. The captive priests again in the well — hid and concealed the fire of the sanc-
tuary,^— a mystery of that glorified fire — which the Highpriest mingles in Baptism. —
The priests took up of the mire, — and on the altar they sprinkled it; — for its fire, the
fire of that well, — with the mire had been mingled ; — a mystery of our bodies which in
the water — with the fire of the Holy Spirit have been mingled.

5. The famous Three in Babylon — in the furnace of fire were baptized, and came
forth ; — they went in and bathed in the flood of flame, they were buffeted by the blazing
billows. — There was sprinkled on them there — the dew that /"e// from heaven; — it
loosed from off them there — the bonds of the earthly king. — Lo ! the famous Three
went in and found a fourth in the furnace.

6. That visible fire that triumphed outwardly, — pointed to the fire of the Holy
Ghost, — which is mingled, lo ! and hidden in the water. — In the flame Baptism is
figured, — in that blaze of the furnace. — Come, enter, be baptized, my brethren, — for lo !
it looses the bonds ; — for in it there dwells and is hidden — the Daysman of God, — Who
in the furnace was the fourth.

7. Two words again our Lord spake — which in one voice agree in unison : — He
said, ''I am come to send fire," — and again, ''I have a baptism to be baptized with." —
By the fire of Baptism is quenched the fire, — that which the Evil One had kindled : —
and the water of Baptism has overcome — those waters of contention — by which he
had made trial — of Joseph who conquered and was crowned.

8. Lo ! the pure fire of our Redeemer — which he kindled in mankind of His mercy !
— Through His fire He quenched that fire — which had been kindled in the defiled and
sinful. — This is the fire wherein the thorns — are burnt up and the tares. — But happy
are your bodies — that have been baptized in the fire — which has consumed your
thickets, — and by it your seeds have sprung up to heaven !

9. Jeremiah in the womb He sanctified and taught. — But if the lowly bosom of
wedlock — was, sanctified in conceiving and bringing him forth, — how much more shall
Baptism sanctify — its conception and its bringing forth — of them that are pure and
spiritual ! — For there, within the womb — is the conception of all men ; — but here, out
of the water, — is the birth whereof the spiritual are worthy.

10. For Jeremiah though sanctified in the womb, — they took up nails and cast him
into the pit. — Holy was the prophet in his befoulment, — for clean was his heart
though he was in the mire. — Be ye afraid, my brethren — for lo ! to-day is washed
away — your secret befoulment, — and the abomination of your sins. — Turn not again
to uncleanness, — for there is hut one cleansing of your bodies !

11. The presumptuous who is baptized and again sins, — is as the serpent that casts
its slough and again puts it on, that is renewed and made young, and turns again —
— putting on anew its skin of old ; — for the serpent does not — cast off its nature. — Cast
ye off the tempter — the corrupter of souls, — even the old man ; — let it not make old —
the newness ye have put on !

12. Elisha cast the wood into the water, and made the heavy float and the light
sink : — their natures were exchanged in the water. — There a new thing came to pass
not according to nature. — How much easier then, O Lord, — is this for Thy grace ; —
that in the water should sink — transgression which is heavy, — but that the soul which
is light — should be drawn forth and raised up on high !

13. Joshua, son of Nun, on Jericho — laid a curse on its walls and a doom on its

' I Maccab. i, 19.


278 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


fountains. — They whom Joshua cursed to their destruction, — again in the mystery of
Jesus have been blessed. — There was cast into them salt, — and they were healed and
sweetened: — a mystery of this salt, — the sweet salt that came from Mary, — that was
mingled in the water, — whereby was healed the noisomeness of our plagues.

14. Lo ! quiet waters are before you, — holy and tranquil and pleasant ; — for they
are not the waters of contention — that cast Joseph into the dungeon ; — nor yet are they
the waters, — those waters of strife, — beside which the people strove, — and gainsaid in
the wilderness. — There are waters whereby — there is reconciliation made with Heaven.

15. Hagar saw the spring of water, — and from it she gave drink to her forward son,
him who became as a wild ass in the wilderness. — Instead of that fountain of water is
Baptism. — In it are baptized the sons of Hagar, — and are become gentle and peaceful.
Who has seen rams ^ like these, — that are yoked, lo ! and labour — along with tame
bullocks, — and the seed of their tillage is reaped an hundredfold !

16. In the beginning the Spirit that brooded — moved on the waters ; they conceived
and gave birth — to serpents and fishes and birds. — The Holy Spirit has brooded in
Baptism, — and in mystery has given birth to eagles, — Virgins and Prelates; — and in
mystery has given birth to fishes, — celibates and intercessors ; and in mystery of ser-
pents,— lo ! the subtle have become simple as doves!

17. Lo ! the sword of our Lord in the waters 1 — that which divides sons and fathers :
— for it is the living sword that makes — division, lo ! of the living from the dying. —
Lo ! they are baptized and they become — Virgins and saints, — who have gone down,
been baptized, and put on — the One Only begotten. — Lo ! many have come boldly to
Him!

18. For whoso have been baptized and put on Him — the Only begotten the Lord
of the many, — has filled thereby the place of many, — for to him Christ has become a
great treasure : — for He became in the wilderness — a table of good meats, — and He
became at the marriage feast — a fountain of choice wines. — He has become such to all
in all things, — by helps and healings and promises.

19. Elisha was the equal of the Watchers — in his doings, glorious and holy. — The
camp of the Watchers was round about him ; — thus let Baptism be unto you, — a camp
of guardians, — for by means of it there dwells in the heart — the hope of them that are
below — and the Lord of them that are above. — Sanctify for Him your bodies, — for
where He abides, corruption comes not near.

20. They are no more, the waters of that sea — which by its billows preserved the
People, — and by its billows laid low the peoples. — Of contrary effect are the waters in
Baptism, — In them, lo ! the people have life ; — in them, lo ! the People perishes : — for
all that are not baptized, — in the waters that give life to all, — they are dead invisibly.

21. They are no more, the waters of that sea — which were tempestuous, and boiled
against Jonah, — and plunged into the depths the Son of Amittai. — Though he fled he
was bound in the prison-house ; — God cast him in and bound him — in dungeon within
dungeon ; — for he bound him in the sea, — and He bound him in the fish. — For him
Grace stood surety, — and she opened the prison and brought forth the preacher.

22. The Prophets have called the Most High a fire, — "a devouring fire," and " who
can dwell with it.?" ^ — The People were not-able to dwell in it ; — its might crushed the
peoples and they were confounded. — In it, with the unction ye have been anointed ; —
ye have put Him on in the water ; — in the bread ye have eaten Him ; — in the wine ye
have drunk Him ; — in the voice ye have heard Him ; — and in the eye of the mind ye
have seen Him 1

1 'Arbo = ram ; 'Arboyo = Arab. 2 jsai. xxx. 27.


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 279


IX.

(Resp. , Blessed is He Who came down, and sanctified water for the remission of the
sins of the children of Adam /)

1. O John, who sawest the Spirit, — that abode on the head of the Son, — to show how
the Head of the Highest — went down and was baptized — and came up to be Head on
earth ! — Children of the Spirit ye have thus become, — and Christ has become for you
the Head : — ye also have become His members.

2. Consider and see how exalted ye are ; — how instead of the river Jordan — ye have
glorious Baptism, wherein is peace; — spreading her wings to shade your bodies. — In
the wilderness John baptized : — in Her pure flood of Baptism, — purely are ye baptized
therein.

3. Infants think when they see its glory, — that by its pomp its might is enhanced.
— But it is the same, and within itself — is not divided. — But the might which never
waxes less or greater — in us is little or again great ; — and he in whom is great under-
standing,— great in him is Baptism.

4. A man's knowledge, if it be exalted, — exalted also is his degree above his brethren ;
— and he whose faith is great, — so also is his promise ; — and as is his wisdom, so also
his crowning. — As is the light, which though it he all goodly — and equal all of it with
itself,— :^^/ goodlier is one eye than another.

5. Jesus mingled His might in the water : — put ye Him on my brethren as discern-
ing men I — For there are that in the water merely — perceive that they are washed. —
With our body be our soul washed ! — The manifest water let the body perceive, — and
the soul the secret might ; — that both to the manifest and to the secret ye may be made
like !

6. How beautiful is Baptism — in the eye of the heart ; come, let us gaze on it ! —
Like as by a seal ye have been moulded ; — receive ye its image, — that nought may be
lacking to us of our image ! — For the sheep that are white of heart — gaze on the glory
that is in the water : — in your souls reflect ye it !

7. Water is by nature as a mirror, — for one who in it examines himself. — Stir up
thy soul, thou that discernest, — and belike unto it ! — For it in its midst reflects thy
image; — from it, on it, find an example ; — gaze in it on Baptism, — and put on the
beauty that is hidden therein !

8. What profits it him that hears—a voice and knows not its significance .? — Whoso
hears a voice and is devoid — of the understanding thereof, — his ear is filled but his soul
is empty. — Lo ! since the gift is abundant, — with discernment receive ye it.

9. Baptism that is with understanding — is the conjunction of two lights, — and rich

are the fountains of its rays. — — And the darkness that is on the mind

departs, — and the soul beholds Him in beauty, — the hidden Christ of glory, — and grieves
when the glory fails.

10. Baptism without understanding — is a treasure full yet empty ; — since he that
receives it is poor in it, — for he understands not — how great are its riches into which
he enters and dwells. — For great is the gift within it, — though the mean man perceives
not — that he is exalted even as it.

11. Open wide your minds and see, my brethren, — the secret column in the air, —
whose base is fixed from the midst of the water — unto the door of the Highest Place, —
like the ladder that Jacob saw. — Lo ! by it came down the light unto Baptism, — and hy
it the soul goes up to Heaven, — that in one love we may be mingled.


28o EPHRAIM SYRUS.


12. Our Lord when he was baptized by John — sent forth twelve fountains ; — and
they issued forth and cleansed by their streams — the defilement of the peoples. — His
worshippers are made white like His garments, — the garments in Tabor and the body
in the water. — Instead of the garments the peoples are made white, — and have become
for Him a clothing of glory.

13. From your garments learn, my brethren, — how your members should be kept.--
For if the garment, which ever so many times — may be made clean, — is duly kept for
the sake of its comeliness, — the body which has hut one baptism, — m.anifold more
exceeding is the care o/\\?> keeping, — for manifold are its dangers,

14. Again the sun in a house that is strait, — is straitened therein though he be great :
— but in a house that is goodly and large, — when he rises thereon — far and wide in it
he spreads his rays ; — and though the sun is one and the same in his nature, — in divers
houses he undergoes changes : — Even so our Lord in divers men.

X. • .

(Resp. — Glory to Him Who came and restored it I)

1. Adam sinned and earned all sorrows ; — likewise the world after His example, all
guilt. — And instead of considering how it should be restored, — considered how its fall
should be pleasant for it. — Glory to Him Who came and restored it !

2. This cause summoned Him that is pure, — that He should come and be baptized,
even He with the defiled, — Heaven for His glory was rent asunder. — That the purifier
of all might be baptized with all, — He came down and sanctified the water for our
baptism.

3. P'or that cause for which He entered into the womb, — for the same cause He went
down into the river. — For that cause for which He entered into the grave, — for the
same cause He makes us enter into His chamber. — He perfected mankind for every
cause.

4. His Conception is the store of our blessings ; — His Birth is the treasury of our
joys ; — His Baptism is the cause of our pardon ; — His Death is the cause of our life. —
Death He alone has overcome in His Resurrection.

5. At His Birth a star of light shone in the air ; — when He was baptized light flashed
from the water ; — at His Death the sun was darkened in the firmament ; — at His Passion
the luminaries set along with Him ; — at His Epiphany the luminaries arose with Him.

6. Revealed was His Glory because of His Majesty ; — revealed was His Passion
because of His Manhood ; — revealed was His Love because of His Graciousness ; —
revealed was His Judgment because of His Justice. — He has poured forth His attributes^
on them that were His.

7. That whoso has looked on His Glory and despised Him, — may look again on His
Glory and worship Him ; — and whoso has scorned to taste of His Graciousness, — may
fear lest he be made to feel His justice ; — He has poured forth His helps on His wor-
shippers.

8. Lo ! the East in the morning was made light ! — lo ! the South at noonday was
made dark I — The West again in turn at eventide was made light. — The three quarters
represent the one Birth; — His Death and His Life they declare.

9. His Birth flowed on and was joined to His Baptism ; — and His Baptism again
flowed on even to His Death ; — His Death led and reached to His Resurrection, — a
fourfold bridge unto His Kingdom ; and lo ! His sheep pass over in His footsteps.

10. And like as, save by the door of birth, — none can enter into creation ; — so, save


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 281


by the door of resurrection, — none can enter into the Kingdom, — and whoso has cut off
his bridge, has brought to nought his hope.

11. He put on His armour and conquered and was crowned ; — He left His armour
on earth and ascended, — that if any man desires the crown, — he may resort to the
armour and win by it — the crown of victory which he yearns after.

12. He fulfilled righteousness on earth, and ascended. — But if He, the All-cleanser,
was baptized, — What man is there that shall not be baptized .?— for grace has come to
baptism — to wash away the foulness of our w^ound.

13. The compulsion of God is an all-prevailing force; — [but that is not pleasing to
Him which is of compulsion,]' — as that which is of discerning will. — Therefore in
our fruits He calls us — who live not as under compulsion, by persuasion.

14. Good is He, for lo ! He labours in these tw^o things ; — He wills not to constrain
our freedom — nor again does He suffer us to abuse it. — For had he constrained it, He
had taken away its power ; — and had He let it go. He had deprived it of help.

15. He knows that if He constrains He deprives us ; — He knows that if He casts off
He destroys us ; — He knows that if He teaches He wins us. — He has not constrained
and He has not cast off, as the Evil One does : — 'He has taught, chastened, and won
us, as being the good God.

16. He knows that His treasuries abound : — the keys of His treasuries He has put
into our hands. — He has made the Cross our treasurer — to open for us the gates of
Paradise, --as Adam opened the gate of Gehenna.


XI.

(Resp. — Le/ the bodies rejoice which the Evil One had made naked ^ that in the water
they have put on their glory /)

1. Give thanks, O daughter, that thy crownings have been doubled; — for lo ! thy
temples and thy sons rejoice. — The dedication of thy temples is in the ministration ; —
The dedication of thy sons is in the anointing. — Blessed art thou that at once

— the tabernacle for them that dwell in thee, — and the Spirit

has abode upon thy sons !

2. Our Lord opened up Baptism — in the midst of Jordan the blessed river. — The
height and the depth rejoiced in Him ; — He brings forth the first fruits of His peace from
the water, — for they are first fruits, the fruits of Baptism. — The good God in His com-
passion will bring to pass — that His peace shall be first fruits on earth.

3. Moses stretched out the temporal Tabernacle ; — the priests bathed themselves in
water, — and went in and ministered ; and were stricken and punished, — because their
heart within was not cleansed. — Blessed art thou that in the Passover of the great
Passion, — the priests by the savour of their oblations, — lo ! are cleansing souls in
thee!

4. Great was the mystery that the Prophet saw, — the torrent that was mighty. — Into
its depths he gazed and beheld — thy beauty instead of himself ; thee it was he saw, —
for thy faith passes not away, — thou whose flood unseen shall overwhelm — the subtle-
ties of idolatry.

5. Though John was great among them that are born of women, — yet he that is
little is greater than he, — in this that his baptized were again baptized, — in the baptism

^ The rendering of this line is very conjectural.


282 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


that was of the Apostles. — Blessed <7r/ thou that thy priest is greater than he — in this
alone that forever — abides his baptism.

6. The baptism that was of Siloam — did not bring mercy to the man that was laid
there — who for thirty and eight years awaited it, — for he was a respecter of the persons
of the Levites. — Blessed art thou that thy healing is in thee for all men, — and thy
priests are devoted and ready — for all that are in need of thy help.

7. The Prophet healed the waters that were unwholesome, — and cured the disease of
the land that was barren, — so that its death was done away and its region resounded,
for its offspring increased and its bosom was filled. ^Greater is Thy grace, Lord, than
Elisha's ! — Multiply my lambs and my flocks — at the great stream of my fountain ! ^

8. Great is the marvel that is within thy abode ; — the flocks together with the
Shepherds, — those at the stream of the waters, — two unseen with one manifest who
baptizes. — Blessed is he who is baptized in their fountains ! — for three arms have up-
held him, — and three Names have preserved him !

XII.

(Resp. — Blessed is He Who went down and was baptized in Jordan^ and turned hack
the People from error f)

1. In Baptism Adam found agaiji — that glory \\\2iiwas among the trees of Eden. —
He went down, and received it out of the water ; — he put it on, and went up and was
adorned therein. — Blessed be He that has mercy on all !

2. Man fell in the midst of Paradise, — and in baptism compassion restored him : —
he lost his comeliness through Sata?i's envy, — and found it again by God's grace. —
Blessed be He that has mercy on all !

3. The wedded pair were adorned in Eden ; — but the serpent stole their crowns : —
yet mercy crushed down the accursed one, — and made the wedded pair goodly in their
raiment. — Blessed be He that has mercy on all !

4. They clothed themselves with leaves of necessity ; — but the Merciful had pity on
their beauty, — and instead of leaves of trees, — He clothed them with glory in the
water. —Blessed be He that has mercy on all !

5. Baptism is the well-spring of life, — which the Son of God opened by His Life ; —
and from His Side it has brought forth streams. — Come, all that thirst, come, rejoice ! —
Blessed be He that has mercy on all !

6. The Father has sealed Baptism, to exalt it ; — and the Son has espoused it to
glorify it ; — and the Spirit with threefold seal — has stamped it, and it has shone in holi-
ness.— Blessed be He that has mercy on all !

7. The Trinity that is unsearchable — has laid up treasures in baptism. — Descend,
ye poor, to its fountain ! — and be enriched from it, ye needy ! — Blessed be He that has
mercy on all !

1 Ezek. xlvii. r, sq.


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 283


xni.

Hymn of the Baptized.

(Resp. — Brethren, sing praises, io the Son of the Lord of all ; Who has bound for you
crowns, such as kings long for /)

1. Your garments glisten, my brethren, as snow; — and fair is your shining in the
likeness of Angels !

2. In the likeness of Angels, ye have come up, beloved, — from Jordan's river, in
the armour of the Holy Ghost.

3. The bridal chamber that fails not, my brethren, ye have received : — and the glory
of Adam's house to-day ye have put on.

4. The judgment that came of the fruit, was Adam's condemnation : — but for you
victory, has arisen this day.

5. Your vesture is shining, and goodly your crowns : — which the P'irstborn has
"bound for you, by the priest's hand this day.

6. Woe in Paradise, did Adam receive : — but you have received, glory this day.

7. The armour of victory, ye put on, my beloved : — in the hour when the priest,
invoked the Holy Ghost.

8. The Angels rejoice, men here below exult : — in your feast, my brethren, wherein
is no foulness.

9. The good things of Heaven, my brethren, ye have received : — beware of the
Evil One, lest he despoil you.

10. The day when He dawned, the Heavenly King : — opens for you His door, and
bids you enter Eden.

1 1. Crowns that fade not away, are set on your heads : — hymns of praise hourly, let
your mouths sing.

12. Adam by means of the fruit, God cast forth in sorrow : — but you He makes
glad, in the bride-chamber of joy.

13. Who would not rejoice, in your bridechamber, my brethren .? — for the Father
with His Son, and the Spirit rejoice in you.

14. Unto you shall the Father, be a wall of strength : — and the Son a Redeemer,
and the Spirit a guard.

15. iMartyrs by their blood, glorify their crowns: — but you our Redeemer, by His
Blood glorifies.

16. Watchers and Angels, joy over the repentant : — they shall joy over you my
brethren, that unto them ye are made like.

17. The fruit which Adam, tasted not in Paradise : — this day in your mouths, has
been placed with joy.

18. Our Redeemer figured, His Body by the tree :— whereof Adam tasted not, because
he had sinned.

19. The Evil One made war, and subdued Adam's house : — through your baptism,
my brethren, lo ! he is subdued this day.

20. Great is the victory, but to-day you have won : — if so be ye neglect not, you
shall not perish, my brethren.

21. Glory to them that are robed, glory to Adam's house ! — in the birth that is from
the water, let them rejoice and be blessed !

22. Praise to Him Who has robed. His Churches in glory ! — glory to Him Who has
magnified, the race of Adam's house.


284 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


XIV.

Hymn Concerning Our Lord and John.

(Resp. — Glory to Thee, my Lord, for Thee — with joy Heaven and earth worship!^

1. My thought bore me to Jordan, — and I saw a marvel when there was revealed —
the glorious Bridegroom who to the Bride — shall bring freedom and holiness.

2. I saw John filled with wonder, — and the multitudes standing about him, — and
the glorious Bridegroom bowled down — to the Son of the barren that he might baptize
Him.

3. At i'wQ, Word and the Voice my thought marvelled : — for lo ! John was the Voice ;
— our Lord was manifested as the Word, that what w^as hidden should become
revealed.

4. The Bride was espoused but knew not — who was the Bridegroom on whom
she gazed : — the guests were assembled, the desert was filled, — and our Lord was
hidden among them.

5. Then the Bridegroom revealed Himself ; — and to John at the voice He drew
near: — and the Forerunner was moved and said of Him — "This is the Bridegroom
Whom I proclaimed."

6. He came to baptism Who baptizes all, — and He showed Himself at Jordan. —
John saw Him and drew back, — deprecating, and thus he spake : —

7. "How, my Lord, wiliest Thou to be baptized, — Thou Who in Thy baptism
atonest all.? — Baptism looks unto Thee ; — shed Thou on it holiness and perfection.?'*

8. Our Lord said "I will it so ; — draw near, baptize Me that My Will may be
done. — Resist My Will thou canst not : — I shall be baptized of thee, for thus I will it."

9. "I entreat, my Lord, that I be not compelled, — for this is hard that Thou hast
said to me, — ' I have need that thou shouldst baptize Me; ' — for it is Thou that with
Thy hyssop purifiest all. "

10. "I have asked it, and it pleases Me that thus it should be ; — and thou, John,
why gainsayest thou.? — Suffer righteousness to be fulfilled, — and come, baptize Me;
why standest Thou .? "

11. "How can one openly grasp — in his hands the fire that burns.? — O Thou thai
art fire have mercy on me, — and bid me not come near Thee, for it is hard for me \"

12. "I have revealed to Thee My Will ; what questionest thou .? — Draw near, bap-
tize Me, and thou shalt not be burned. — The bridechamber is ready ; keep Me not
back — from the wedding-feast that has been made ready."

13. " The Watchers fear and dare not — gaze on Thee lest they be blinded ; — and I,
how, O my Lord, shall I baptize Thee .? — I am too weak to draw near ; blame me
not ! "

14. "Thou fearest ; therefore gainsay not — against My Will in what I desire : — and
Baptism has respect unto Me. — Accomplish the work to which thou hast been called ! "

15. " Lo ! I proclaimed Thee at Jordan — in the ears of the people that believed not ;
and if they shall see Thee baptized of me, — they w^ill doubt that Thou art the Lord."

16. " Lo ! I am to he baptized in their sight, — and the Father Who sent Me bears
witness of Me — that I am His Son and in Me He is well pleased, — to reconcile Adam
who was under His wrath."

17. "It becomes, me. O my Lord, to know my nature — that I am moulded out of the
ground, — and Thou the moulder Who formest all things : — I, then, why should I bap-
tize Thee in water .? "


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 285

18. ''It becomes thee to know wherefore 1 am come, — and for what cause I have
desired that thou shouldst baptize Me. — It is the middle of the way wherein I have
walked; — withhold thou not Baptism." -

19. " Small is the river whereto Thou art come, — that Thou shouldst lodge therein
and it should cleanse Thee. — The heavens suffice not for Thy mightiness ; — how much
less shall Baptism contain Thee I "

20. ''The womb is smaller than Jordan ; — yet was I willing to lodge in the Virgin :
— and as I was born from woman, — so too am I /o he baptized in Jordan."

21. " Lo ! the hosts are standing! — the ranks of Watchers, lo ! they worship! —
And if I draw near, my Lord, to baptize Thee, — I tremble for myself with quaking."

22. "The hosts and multitudes call thee happy, — all of them, for that thou bap-
tizest Me. — For this I have chosen thee from the womb: — fear thou not, for I have
willed it.

23. "I have prepared the way as I was sent : — I have betrothed the Bride as I was
commanded. — May Thy Epiphany be spread over the world — now that Thou art come,
and let me not baptize Thee ! "

24. " This is My preparation, for so have I willed; — I will go down and be baptized
in Jordan, — and make bright the armour for them that are baptized, — that they may be
white in Me and I not be conquered."

25. "Son of the Father, why should I baptize Thee.? — for lo ! Thou art in Thy
Father and Thy Father in Thee. — Holiness unto the priests Thou givest; — water that is
common wherefore askest Thou.''"

26. "The children of Adam look unto Me, — that I should work for them the new
birth. — A way in the waters I will search out for them, — and if I be not baptized this
cannot be."

2']. "Pontiffs of Thee are consecrated, — priests by Thy hyssop are purified; — the
anointed and the kings Thou makest. — Baptism, how shall it profit Thee P"

28. "The Bride thou betrothedst to Me awaits Me, — that I should go down, be bap-
tized, and sanctify her. — Friend of the Bridegroom withhold Me not — from the washing
that awaits Me."

29. "I am not able, for I am weak, — Thy blaze in my hands to grasp. — Lo ! Thy
legions are as flame ; — bid one of the Watchers baptize Thee ! "

30. "Not from the Watchers was My Body assumed, — that I should summon a
Watcher to baptize Me. — The body of Adam, lo ! I have put on, — and thou, son of
Adam, art to baptize Me."

31. " The waters saw Thee, and greatly feared; — the waters saw Thee, and lo !
they tremble ! — The river foams in its terror ; — and I that am weak, how shall I baptize
Thee .? "

32. " The waters in My Baptism are sanctified, — and fire and the Spirit from Me
shall they receive ; — and if I be not baptized they are not made perfect — to be fruitful of
children that shall not die."

II. "Fire, if to Thy fire it draw near, — shall be burnt up of it as stubble. — The
mountains of Sinai endured Thee not, — and I that am weak, wherein shall I baptize
Thee .? "

34. "I am the flaming fire ; — yet for man's sake I became a babe — in the virgin
womb of the maiden. — And now I am to be baptized in Jordan."

35. "It is very meet that Thou shouldst baptize me, — for Thou hast holiness to
purify all. — In Thee it is that the defiled are made holy ; but Thou that art holy, why
art Thou to be baptized.? "


286 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


^6. "It is very right that thou shouldst baptize Me, — as I bid, aiidshouldst not gain-
say.— Lo ! I baptized thee within the womb ; — baptize thou me in Jordan ! "

^y. " I am a bondman and I am weak. — Thou that freest all have mercy on me I —
Thy latchets to unloose I am not able ; — Thy exalted head who will make me worthy
/o touch ? ' '

38. "Bondmen in My Baptism are set free; — handwritings in My washing are
blotted out ; — manumissions in the water are sealed ; — and if I be not baptized all these
come to nought."

39. "A mantle of fire the air wears, — and waits for Thee, above Jordan ; — and if
Thou consentest to it and wiliest to be baptized, — Thou shalt baptize Thyself and fulfil
all."

40. "This is meet, that thou shouldst baptize Me, — that none may err and say con-
cerning Me, — 'Had He not been alien from the Father's house, — why feared the Levite
to baptize Him } ' "

41. "The prayer, then, when Thou art baptized, — how shall I complete over Jor-
dan?— When the Father and the Spirit are seen over Thee, — Whom shall I call on, as
priest } "

42. "The prayer in silence is to be completed : — come, thy hand alone lay thou on
Me. — and the Father shall utter in the priest's stead — that which is meet concerning
His Son."

43. "They that are bidden, lo ! all of them stand; — the Bridegroom's guests, lo f
they bear witness — that day by day I said among them, — 'I am the Voice and not the
Word.'"

44. *' Voice of him that cries in the wilderness, — fulfil thou the work for which thou
camest, — that the desert whereunto thou wentest out may resound — with the mighty
peace thou preachedst therein. "

45. " The shout of the Watchers has come to my ears ; — lo ! I hear from the Father's
house — the hosts that sound forth the cry, — 'In Thy Epiphany, O Bridegroom, the
worlds have life.'"

46. "The time hastes on, and the marriage guests — look to Me to see what is doing.
— Come, baptize Me, that they may give praise — to the Voice of the Father when it is
heard ! "

47. " I hearken, my Lord, according to Thy Word : — come to Baptism as Thy love
constrains Thee ! — The dust worships that whereunto he has attained, — that on Him
Who fashioned him he should lay his hand."

48. The heavenly ranks were silent as they stood, — and the Bridegroom went down
into Jordan ; — the Holy One was baptized and straightway went up, — and His Light
shone forth on the world.

49. The doors of the highest were opened above, — and the voice of the Father was
heard, — " This is my Beloved in Whom I am well pleased." — All ye peoples, come and
worship Him.

50. They that saw were amazed as they stood, at the Spirit Who came down and
bare witness to Him. — Praise to Thy Epiphany that gladdens all, — Thou in Whose
revelation the worlds are lightened !


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 287

XV.

1. In the Birth of the Son light dawned, — and darkness fled from the world, — and
the earth was enlightened ; then let it give glory — to the brightness of the Father Who
has enlightened it !

2. He dawned from the womb of the Virgin, — and the shadows passed away when
He was seen, — and the darkness of error was strangled by Him, — and the ends of ihe
earth were enlightened that they should give glory.

3. Among the peoples there was great tumult, — and in the darkness the light dawned,
— and the nations rejoiced to give glory — to Him in Whose Birth they all were en-
lightened.

4. His light shone out over the east ; — Persia was enlightened by the star : — His
Epiphany gave good tidings to her and invited her, — '' He is come for the sacrifice that
brings joy to all."

5. The star of light hasted and came and dawned — through the darkness, and sum-
moned them — that the peoples should come and exult — in the great Light that has come
down to earth.

6. One envoy from among the stars— the firmament sent to proclaim to them, — to
the sons of Persia, that they might make ready — to meet the King and to worship Him.

7. Great Assyria when she perceived it — called to the Magi and said to them, —
'*Take gifts and go, honour Him — the great King Who in Judea has dawned."

8. The princes of Persia, exulting, — carried gifts from their region; — and they
brought to the Son of the Virgin — gold and myrrh and frankincense.

9. They entered and found Him as a child — as He dwelt in the house of the lowly
woman ; — and they drew near and worshipped with gladness, — and brought near before
Him their treasures.

10. Mary said, " For whom are these ? — and for what purpose ? and what is the cause
— that has called you to come from your country — to the Child with your treasures.? "

11. They said, "Thy Son is a King, — and He binds crowns and is King of all ; —
and great is His power over the world, — and to His Kingdom shall all be obedient."

12. ''At what time did this come to pass, — that a lowly woman should bring forth
a King ? I who am in need and in want, — how then could a king come forth from me } "

13. "In thee alone has this come to pass — that a mighty King from thee should
appear; — thee in whom poverty shall be magnified, — and to thy Son shall crowns be
made subject."

14. " Treasures of Kings I have not ; — riches have never fallen to my lot. — My house
is lowly and my dwelling needy ; — why then proclaim ye that my Son is King.? "

15. '* Great treasure is in thy Son, — and wealth that suffices to make all rich ; — for
the treasures of kings are impoverished, — but He fails not nor can be measured."

16. "Whether haply some other be for you — the King that is born, enquire ye con-
cerning Him. — This is the son of a lowly woman, — oi one who is not meet to look on
a King."

17. "Can it be that light should ever miss — the way whereon it has been sent.? —
It was not darkness that summoned and led us ; — in light we walked, and thy Son is
King."

18. " Lo ! ye see a babe without speech, — and the house of His mother empty and
needy, — and of that which pertains to a king nought is in it : — how then in it is a king
to be seen ? "

19. "Lo ! we see that without speech and at rest— ?s the King, and lowly as thou


2SS EPHRAIM SYRUS.


hast said : — but again we see that the stars — in the highest He bids haste to proclaim
Him."

20. ''It were meet, O men, that ye should enquire — who is the King, and then
adore him ; — lest haply jyour way has been mistaken, — and another is the King that
is born."

21. "It were meet, O maiden, that thou shouldst receive //, — that we have learned
that thy Son is King, — from the s/ar of light that errs not, — and plain is the way, and
he has led us."

22. ''The Child is a little one, and lo ! he has not — the diadem of a king and of a
throne ; — and what have ye seen that ye should pay honour to Him, — as to a king,
with your treasures .? "

23. "A little one, because He willed it for quietness' sake, — and meek now until
He be revealed. — A time shall be for Him when all diadems — shall bow down and
worship Him."

24. "Armies he has none ; — nor has my Son legions and troops : — in the poverty
of His mother He dwells ; — why then King is He called by you .? "

25. "'The armies of thy Son are above; — they ride on high, and they flame, — and
one of them it was that came and summoned us, — and all our country was dismayed."

26. "The Child is a babe, and how is it possible — He should be King, unknown
to the world.? — And they that are mighty and of renown, — how can a babe be their
ruler } "

2"]. "Thy babe is aged, O Virgin, — and Ancient of Days and exalted above all ; —
and Adam beside Him is very babe, — and in Him all created things are made new."

28. "It is very seemly that ye should expound — all the mystery and explain it ; —
who it is that reveals to you the mystery of my Son, — that He is a King in your
region."

29. "It is likewise seemly for thee to accept this, — that unless the truth had led us
we had not wandered hither from the ends of the earth, — nor come for the sake of thy
Son."

30. "All the mystery as it was wrought — among you there in your country, — reveal
ye to me now as friends. — Who was He that called you to come to me.? "

31. "A mighty Star appeared to us — that was glorious exceedingly above the stars,
— and our land by its fire was kindled ; — that this King had appeared it bore tidings
to us."

32. "Do not, I beseech you, speak of — these things in our land lest they rage, —
a7id the kings of the earth join together — against the Child in their envy."

'^^. "Be not thou dismayed, O Virgin ! — Thy Son shall bring to nought all diadems,
and set them underneath his heel; — and they shall not subdue Him Whom they envy."

34. "Because of Herod I am afraid, — that unclean wolf, lest he assail me, — and
draw his sword and with it cut off — the sweet cluster before it be ripe."

35. "Because of Herod fear thou not; — for in the hands of thy Son is his throne
placed : — and as soon as He shall reign it shall be laid low, — and his diadem shall fall
on the earth beneath."

36. " A torrent of blood is Jerusalem, — wherein the excellent ones are slain; — and
if she perceives Him she w^ill assail Him. — In mystery speak ye, and noise it not
abroad."

37. "All torrents, and likewise swords, — -by the hands of thy Son shall be appeased ;
— and the sword of Jerusalem shall be blunted, — and shall not desire at all to kill."

38. "The scribes of the priests of Jerusalem — pour forth blood and heed not. —


HYMNS FOR THE FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY. 289

They will arouse murderous strife — against me and against the Child ; O Magi, be
silent ! "

39. "The scribes and the priests will be unable — to hurt thy son in their envy;
— for by Him their priesthood shall be dissolved, — and their festivals brought to
nought."

40. *' A Watcher revealed to me, when I received — conception of the Babe, that
my Son is a King ; — that His diadem is from on high and is not dissolved, — he declared
to me even as ye do."

41. *^ The Watcher, therefore, of whom thou hast spoken — is he who came as a star,
— and was shown to us and brought us good tidings — that He is great and glorious
above the stars."

42. ''That Angel declared to me — in his good tidings, when he appeared to me, —
that to His Kingdom no end shall be, — and the mystery is kept and shall not be
revealed."

43. *'The Star also declared again to us — that thy Son is He that shall keep the
diadem. — His aspect was something changed, — and he was the Angel and made it not
known to us."

44- '' Before me when the Watcher showed himself, — he called Him his Lord before
He was conceived ; — and as the Son of the Highest announced Him to me : — but where
His Father is he made not known to me."

45. '' Before us he proclaimed in the form of a star — that the Lord of the Highest is
He Who is born ; — and over the stars of light thy Son is ruler, — and unless He com-
mands they rise not."

46. ''In your presence, lo ! there are revealed — other mysteries, that ye may
learn the truth ; — how in virginity I bare my Son, — and He is Son of God ; go ye,
proclaim Him ! "

47. " In our presence the Star taught us — that His Birth is exalted above the world ;
and above all beings is thy Son, — and is Son of God according to thy saying."

48. "The world on high and \\\q world below bear witness to Him, — all the Watchers
and the stars, — that He is Son of God and Lord. — Bear ye His fame to your lands ! "

49. "All the world on high, in one star, — has stirred up Persia and she has learnt
the truth, — that thy Son is Son of God, — and to Him shall all peoples be subject."

50. "Peace bear ye to your lands: — peace be multiplied in your borders ! — As
apostles of truth may ye be believed — in all the way that ye shall pass through."

51. "The peace of thy Son, it shall bear us — in tranquillity to our land, as it has
led us hither ; — and when His power shall have grasped the worlds, — may He visit
our land and bless it !

52. " May Persia rejoice in your glad tidings ! — may Assyria exult in your coming !
— And when my Son's Kingdom shall arise, — may He plant His standard in your
country ! "

53. Let the Church sing with rejoicing, — " Glory in the Birth of the Highest, — by
Whom the world above and the world below are illumined ! " — Blessed he He in Whose
Birth all are made glad !

Vol. XIII. — 19


THE PEARL.

SEVEN HYMNS ON THE FAITH.


(Translated by Rev. J. B. Morris, M.A. [Oxford Library of the Fathers].)


THE PEARL,
SEVEN HYMNS ON THE FAITH.


HYMN I.

1. On a certain day a pearl did I take up, my brethren ; I saw in it mysteries per-
taining to the Kingdom ; semblances and types of the Majesty ; it became a fountain,
and I drank out of it mysteries of the Son.

I put it, my brethren, upon the palm of my hand, that I might examine it : I went
to look at it on one side, and it proved faces on all sides. I found out that the Son
was incomprehensible, since He is wholly Light.

In its brightness I beheld the Bright One Who cannot be clouded, and in its pure-
ness a great mystery, even the Body of our Lord which is well-refined : in its undi-
videdness I saw the Truth which is undivided.

It was so that I saw there its pure conception, — the Church, and the Son within her.
The cloud was the likeness of her that bare Him, and her type the heaven, since there
shone forth from her His gracious Shining.

I saw therein His trophies, and His victories, and His crowns. I saw His helpful
and overflowing graces, and His hidden things with His revealed things.

2. It was greater to me than the ark, for I was astonied thereat : I saw therein
folds without shadow to them because it was a daughter of light, types vocal without
tongues, utterances of mysteries without lips, a silent harp that without voice gave out
melodies.

The trumpet falters and the thunder mutters ; be not thou daring then ; leave things
hidden, take things revealed. Thou hast seen in the clear sky a second shower ; the
clefts of thine ears, as from the clouds, they are filled with interpretations.

And as that manna which alone filled the people, in the place of pleasant meats,
with its pleasantnesses, so does this pearl fill me in the place of books, and the reading
thereof, and the explanations thereof.

And when I asked if there were yet other mysteries, it had nio mouth for me that I
might hear from, neither any ears wherewith it might hear me. O thou thing without
senses, whence I have gained new senses !

3. It answered me and said, "The daughter of the sea am I, the illimitable sea !
And from that sea whence I came up it is that there is a mighty treasury of mys-
teries in my bosom ! Search thou out the sea, but search not out the Lord of the sea !

" I have seen the divers who came down after me, when astonied, so that from the
midst of the sea they returned to the dry ground ; for a few moments they sustained it
not. Who would linger and be searching on into the depths of the Godhead?

"The waves of the Son are full of blessings, and with mischiefs too. Have ye not
seen, then, the waves of the sea, which if a ship should struggle with them would
break her to pieces, and if she yield herself to them, and rebel not against them, then
she is preserved } In the sea all the Egyptians were choked, though they scrutinised

293


294


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


it not, and, without prying, the Hebrews too were overcome upon the dry land, and
how shall ye be kept alive? And the men of Sodom were licked up by the fire, and how
shall ye prevail ?

" At these uproars the fish in the sea were moved, ^ and Leviathan also. Have ye then
a heart of stone that ye read these things and run into these errors ? O great fear that
justice also should be so long silent \" ^

4. ''Searching is mingled with thanksgiving, and whether of the two will prevail?
The incense of praise riseth along with the fume of disputation from the tongue, and
unto which shall we hearken ? Prayer and prying [come] from one mouth,3 and which
shall we listen to ?

" For three days was Jonah a neighbour [of mine] in the sea : the living things that
were in the sea were affrighted, [saying,] 'Who shall flee from God? Jonah fled, and
ye are obstinate at your scrutiny of Him ! ' ''

HYMN n.

I. Whereunto art thou like? Let thy stillness speak to one that hears ; with silent
mouth speak with us : for whoso hears the stammerings of thy silence, to him thy type
utters its silent cry concerning our Redeemer.

Thy mother is a virgin of the sea ; though he took her not [to wife] : she fell into
his bosom, though he knew her not ; she conceived thee near him, though he did not
know her. Do thou, that art a type, reproach the Jewish women that have thee hung
upon them. Thou art the only progeny of all forms which art like to the Word on
High, Whom singly the Most High begot. The engraven forms seem to be the type of
created things above. This visible offspring of the invisible womb is a type of great
things/ Thy goodly conception was without seed, and without wedlock was thy pure
generation, and without brethren was thy single birth.

Our Lord had brethren and yet not brethren, since He was an Only-Begotten. O
solitary one, thou type exact of the Only-Begotten ! There is a type of thine in the
crown of kings, [wherein] thou hast brothers and sisters.

Goodly gems are thy brethren, with beryls and unions as thy companions : may
gold be as it were thy kinsman, may there be unto the King of kings a crown from thy
well-beloved ones ! When thou camest up from the sea, that living tomb, thou didst
cry out, Let me have a goodly assemblage of brethren, relatives, and kinsmen. As the
w^heat is in the stalk, so thou art in the crown with princes : and it is a just restoration
to thee, as if of a pledge,^ that from that depth thou shouldest be exalted to a goodly
eminence. Wheat the stalk bears in the field ; thee the head of the king upon his
chariot carries about.

0 daughter of the w^ater, who hast left sea, wherein thou wert born, and art gone
up to the dry land, wherein thou art beloved : for men have loved and seized and
adorned themselves with thee, like as they did that Offspring Whom the Gentiles loved
and crowned themselves withal.

It is by the mystery of truth that Leviathan is trodden down of mortals : the divers
put him off, and put on Christ. Li the sacrament of oil did the Apostles^ steal Thee
away, and came up. They snatched their souls from his mouth, bitter as it was.

1 Hos. iv. 3 ; Zeph. i. 3. ^ Eccles. viii. 11. 3 James iii. 10.

"^ Pearls, he means, have their beauty by nature and so are Hke Christ ; other stones must be graven
and so are Hke created natures.

^ Job. xli. 4 ; Ps. Ixxi. 14. ^ See Note on Hymn V. 4 (below)


THE PEARL, SEVEN HYMNS ON THE FAITH. 295

Thy Nature is like a silent lamb in its sweetness, of which if a man is to lay hold,
he lifts it in a crucial form by its ears, as it was on Golgotha. He cast out abundantly
all His gleams upon them that looked upon Him.

2. Shadowed forth in thy beauty is the beauty of the Son, Who clothed Himself with
suffering when the nails passed through Him. The awl passed in thee since they
handled thee roughly, as they did His hands ; and because He suffered He reigned, as
by thy sufferings thy beauty increased.

And if they showed no pity upon thee, neither did they love thee : still suffer as thou
mightest, thou hast come to reign 1 Simon Peter ^ showed pity on the Rock; whoso
hath smitten it, is himself thereby overcome ; it is by reason of Its suffering that Its
beauty hath adorned the height and the depth.

HYMN HI.

1. Thou dost not hide thyself in thy bareness, O pearl ! With the love of thee is the
merchant ravished also, for he strips off his garments ; not to cover thee, [seeing] thy
clothing is thy light, thy garment is thy brightness, O thou that art bared !

Thou art like Eve who was clothed with nakedness. Cursed be he that deceived
her and stripped her and left her. The serpent cannot strip off thy glory. In the
mysteries whose type thou art, women are clothed with Light in Eden.^

2. Very glistening are the pearls of Ethiopia, as it is written. Who gave thee to
Ethiopia [the land] of black men.^ He that gave light to the Gentiles, both to the
Ethiopians and unto the Indians did His bright beams reach.

The eunuch of Ethiopia upon his chariot" saw Philip : the Lamb of Light met the
dark man from out of the water. While he was reading, the Ethiopian was baptised
and shone with joy, and journeyed on !

He made disciples and taught, and out of black men he made men w^hite. ^ And the
dark Ethiopic women ^ became pearls for the Son ; He offered them up to the Father, as
a glistening crown from the Ethiopians.

3. The Queen of Sheba ^ was a sheep ^ that had come into the place of wolves ; the
lamp of truth did Solomon give her, who also married^ her when he fell away. She
was enlightened and went away, but they were dark as their manner was.

The bright spark which went down home with that blessed [Queen], held on its
shining amid the darkness, till the new Day-spring came. The bright spark met with
this shining, and illumined the place.

4. There are in the sea divers fishes of many cubits, and with all their greatness
they are very small ; but by thy littleness the crown is made great, like as the Son, by
whose littleness Adam was made great.

For the head is thy crown intended: for the eye thy beauty, for the ear thy goodli-
ness. Come up from the sea, thou neighbour to the dry land, and come and sojourn
by the [seat of] hearing. Let the ear love the word of life as it loveth thee !

In the ear is the word, and without it is the pearl. Let it as being warned by thee,

^ Cephas ; i.e., Rock.

2 I.e. with the mysteries typified in the pearl, women are clothed with light at Baptism.

^ Job. xxviii. 19 (Pesh.). 4 Acts viii. 27. 5 jgr. xiii. 23 ; Is, i. 18.

« Ps. Ixviii. 31, T I Kings x. i.

s Why St. E. contemplates the queen as a sheep appears from his remarks on the place. The following
are a part of them : " It was not the fame of Solomon only, but also the Name of the Lord, which called to
this queen, who sought to know the God of Solomon, who set out upon a dangerous long journey, and
brought presents fit for a king .... Our Lord also extolled this queen in the Gospel, and praised herze'alous-
Jiess, when He rebuked the sluggishness of the Tews."

* This was a tradition of the Jews, a tradition based in part on Canticles i. 5.


296 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


by thee get wisdom, and be warned by the word of truth. Be thou its mirror : the
beauty of the Word in thine own beauty shall it see : in thee it shall learn how precious
is the Word on High ! The ear is the leaf: the flesh is the tree, and thou in the midst
of it are a fruit of light, and to the womb that brings forth Light, thou art a type that
points.

Thee He used as a parable of that kingdom, O pearl ! as He did the virgins that
entered into it, five in number, clothed with the light of their lamps ! To thee are
those bright ones like, thou that art clad in light !

5. Who would give a pearl to the daughter of the poor? For when it hangs on her,
it becomes her not. Gain without price that faith, all of which becomes all the limbs
of men. But for no gold would a lady exchange her pearl.

It were a great disgrace if thou shouldst throw thy pearl away into the mire for
nought !

In the pearl of time let us behold that of eternity ; for it is in the purse, or in the
seal, or in the treasury. Within the gate there are other gates with their locks and
keys. Thy pearl hath the High One sealed up as taking account of all.

HYMN IV.

1. The thief gained the faith which gained him/ and brought him up and placed him
in paradise. He saw in the Cross a tree of life ; that was the fruit, he was the eater in
Adam's stead.

The fool, who goes astray, grazes the faith, as it were an eye,** by all manner of
questions. The probing of the finger blinds the eye, and much more doth that prying
blind the faith.

For even the diver pries not into his pearl. In.it do all merchants rejoice without
prying into whence it came ; even the king who is crowned therewith does not ex-
plore it.

2. Because Balaam was foolish, a foolish beast in the ass spoke with him, because
he despised God Who spoke with him. Thee too let the pearl reprove in the ass's
stead.

The people that had a heart of stone, by a Stone He set at nought,^ for lo, a stone
hears words. Witness its work that has reproved them ; and you, ye deaf ones, let the
pearl reprove to-day.

With the swallow '' and the crow did He put men to shame ; with the ox, yea with
the ass,^ did He put them to shame ; let the pearl reprove now, O ye birds and things
on earth and things below.

3. Not as the moon does thy light fill or wane ; the Sun whose light is greater than
all, lo ! of Him it is that a type is shadowed out in thy little compass. O type of the
Son, one spark of Whom is greater than the sun ! —

The pearl itself is full, for its light is full ; neither is there any cunning worker who
can steal from it ; for its wall is its own beauty, yea, its guard also ! It lacks not, since
it is entirely perfect.

And if a man would break thee to take a part from thee, thou art like the faith
which with the heretics perishes, seeing they have broken it in pieces and spoiled it :
for is it any better than this to have the faith scrutinised.?

The faith is an entire nature that may not be corrupted. The spoiler gets himself

^ Luke xxii. 42. 2 Zech. ii. 8. ^ Matt. xxi. 42. ^ Jer. viii. 7. ^ jg. j. 3.


THE PEARL, SEVEN HYMNS ON THE FAITH. 297


mischief by it : the heretic brings ruin on himself thereby. He that chases the light
from his pupils blinds himself.

Fire and air are divided when sundered. Light alone, of all creatures, as its
Creator, is not divided ; it is not barren, for that it also begets without losing there-

by.

4. And if a man thinks that thou art framed [by art] he errs greatly ; thy nature
proclaims that thou, as all stones, art not the framing of art ; and so thou art a type of
the Generation which no making framed.

Thy stone flees from a comparison with the Stone [which is] the Son. For thy
own generation is from the midst of the deep, that of the Son of thy Creator is from
the highest height ; He is not like thee, in that He is like His Father.

And as they tell, two wombs bare thee also. Thou camest down from on high a
fluid nature ; thou camest up from the sea a solid body. By means of thy second
birth thou didst show thy loveliness to the children of men.

Hands fixed thee, when thou wast embodied, into thy receptacles ; for thou art in
the crown as upon a cross, and in a coronet as in a victory ; thou art upon the ears, as
if to fill up what was lacking; thou extendest overall.

HYMN V.

1. O gift that camest up without price ^ w^ith the diver ! Thou laidest hold upon
this visible light, that without price rises for the children of men : a parable of the
hidden One that without price gives the hidden Dayspring !

And the painter too paints a likeness of thee with colours. Yet by thee is faith
painted in types and emblems for colours, and in the place of the image by thee and thy
colours is thy Creator painted.

O thou frankincense without smell, who breathest types from out of thee ! thou art
not to be eaten, yet thou givest a sweet smell unto them that hear thee ! thou art not to
be drunk, yet by. thy story, a fountain of types art thou made unto the ears !

2. It is thou which art great in thy littleness, O pearl ! Small is thy measure and
little thy compass with thy weight ; but great is thy glory : to that crown alone in
which thou art placed, there is none like.

And who hath not perceived of thy littleness, how great it is ; if one despises thee
and throws thee away, he would blame himself for his clownishness, for w^hen he saw
thee in a king's crown he would be attracted to thee.

3. Men stripped their clothes off and dived and drew thee out, pearl 1 It was not
kings that put thee before men, but those naked ones who were a type of the poor and
the fishers and the Galileans.

For clothed bodies were not able to come to thee ; they came that were stript as
children ; they plunged their bodies and came dov/n to thee ; and thou didst much desire
them, and thou didst aid them who thus loved thee.

Glad tidings did they give for thee : their tongues before their bosoms did the poor
[fishers] open, and produced and showed the new riches among the merchants : upon
the wrists of men they put thee as a medicine of life.

4. The naked ones in a type saw thy rising again by the sea-shore ; and by the side
of the lake they, the Apostles'^ of a truth, saw the rising again of the Son of thy Creator.
By thee and by thy Lord the sea and the lake were beautified.

' Is Iv. I. 2 xhe same word in Syriac means naked and Apostle.


298 EPHRAIM SYRUS.


The diver came up from the sea and put on his clothing ; and from the lake too
Simon Peter came up swimming and put on his coat ; * clad as with coats, with the love
of both of you, were these two.

5. And since I have wandered in thee, pearl, I will gather up my mind, and by
having contemplated thee, would become like thee, in that thou art all gathered up
into thyself; and as thou in all times art one, one let me become by thee !

Pearls have I gathered together that I might make a crown for the Son in the place
of stains which are in my members. Receive my offering, not that Thou art short-
coming ; it is because of mine own shortcoming that I have offered it to Thee. Whiten
my stains !

This crown is all spiritual pearls, which instead of gold are set in love, and instead
of ouches in faith ; and instead of hands, let praise offer it up to the Highest !

HYMN VI.

1. Would that the memory of the fathers would exhale from the tombs ; who were
very simple as being wise, and reverend as believing. They without cavilling searched
for, and came to the right path.

He gave the law ; the mountains melted away ; fools broke through it. By unclean
ravens He fed Elijah at the desert stream ; and moreover gave from the skeleton honey
unto Samson. They judged not, nor inquired why it was unclean, why clean.

2. And when He made void the sabbaths, the feeble Gentiles were clothed with
health. Samson took the daughter of the aliens, and there was no disputing among the
righteous ; the prophet also took a harlot, and the just held their peace.

He blamed the righteous,^ and He held up and lifted up [to view] their delinquencies :
He pitied sinners,^ and restored them without cost : and made low the mountains of
their sins :^ He proved that God is not to be arraigned by men, and as Lord of Truth,
that His servants were His shadow ; and whatsoever way His will looked, they directed
also their own wills ; and because Light was in Him,^ their shadows were enlightened.

3. How strangely perplexed are all the heretics by simple things I For when He
plainly foreshadowed this New Testament by that of the Prophets, those pitiable men
rose, as though from sleep, and shouted out and made a disturbance. And the Way,
wherein the righteous held straight on, and by their truths had gone forth therein, that
[Way] have these broken ^ up, because they were besotted : this they left and went
out of; because they pried, an evil searching, [yea,] an evil babbling led them astray.

They saw the ray : they made it darkness, that they might grope therein : they saw
the jewel, even the faith: while they pried into it, it fell and was lost. Of the pearl
they made a stone, that they might stumble upon it.

4. O Gift, which fools have made a poison ! The People were for separating Thy beau-
teous root from Thy fountain, though they separated it not : [false] teachings estranged
Thy beauty also from the stock thereof.

By Thee did they get themselves estranged, who wished to estrange Thee. By Thee
the tribes were cut off and scattered abroad from out of Sion, and also the [false]
teachings of the seceders.

Bring Thyself within the compass of our littleness, O Thou Gift of ours. For if
love cannot find Thee out on all sides, it cannot be still and at rest. Make Thyself
small, Thou Who art too great for all, Who comest unto all !

1 John xxi. 7. 2 Hos. i 2. 3 Matt. ix. 13. '^ Luke xviii. 9. ^ Cant. ii. 17.

^ Or, pierced — perhaps a word of intentionally uncertain meaning, so as to suit with " the way " in either
sense of it.


THE PEARL, SEVEN HYMNS ON THE FAITH. 299


5. By this would those who wrangle against our Pearl be reproved ; because instead
of love, strife has come in and dared to essay to unveil thy beauty. It was not graven,
since it is a progeny which cannot be interpreted.

Thou didst show thy beauty among the abjects to show whereto thou art like, thou
Pearl that art all faces. The beholders were astonied and perplexed at thee. The
separatists separated thee in two, and were separated in two by thee, thou that art of
one substance throughout.

They saw not thy beauty, because there was not in them the eye of truth. For the
veil of prophecy, full as it was of the mysteries ; to them w^as a covering of thy
glistering faces : they thought that thou wast other [than thou art], O thou mirror of
ours ! and therefore these blind schismatics defiled thy fair beauty.

6. Since they have extolled thee too much, or have lowered thee too much, bring
them to the even level. Come dovv^n, descend a little from that height of infidelity and
heathendom ; and come up from the depth of Judaism, though thou art in the Heaven.

Let our Lord be set between God and men ! ' Let the Prophets be as it were His
heralds ! Let the Just One, as being His Father, rejoice ! that Word it is which conquered
both Jews and Heathens !

7. Come, Thou Gift of Holy Church, stay, rest in the midst of Her ! The circumcised
have troubled Thee, in that they are vain babblers, and so have the [false] doctrines in
that they are contentious. Blessed be He that gave Thee a goodly company which
bears Thee about !

In the covenant of Moses is Thy brightness shadowed forth : in the new covenant
Thou dartest it forth : from those first Thy light shineth even unto those last. Blessed
be He that gave us Thy gleam as well as Thy bright rays.

HYMN VII.

1. As in a race saw I the disputers, the children, of strife, [trying] to taste fire, to see
the air, to handle the light : they were troubled at the gleaming, and struggled to make
divisions.

The Son, Who is too subtle for the mind, did they seek to feel : and the Holy Ghost
Who cannot be explored, they thought to explore with their questionings. The Father,
Who never at any time was searched out, have they explained and disputed of.

The sound form of our faith is from Abraham, and our repentance is from Nineveh
and the house of Rahab/ and ours are the expectations of the Prophets,^ ours of the
Apostles.

2. And envy is from Satan : the evil usage of the evil calf is from the Egyptians.''
The hateful sight of the hateful image of four faces is from the Hittites. ^ Accursed
disputation, that hidden moth, is from the Greeks.

The bitter [enemy] read and saw orthodox teachings, and subverted them ; he saw
hateful things, and sowed them ; and he saw hope, and he turned it upside down and
cut it off. The disputation that he planted, lo ! it has yielded a fruit bitter to the
tooth.

3. Satan saw that the Truth strangled him, and united himself to the tares, and

1 I Tim. ii. 5.

2 On Josh. fi. 9, For I know that God hath delivered tiuto yoii the land, etc., St. E. makes Rahab sav, '' This
forty years is this land yours ; and now it is that we migh't repent, that we have continued in it up to this day."

2 Gen. XV. 6.

4 The calf might be at once intended for a symbol of God, and also a copy from the worship of Apis.

5 Elsewhere ( 0pp. Syr. II. 384) St. E. calls the Teraphim of Micah (Judges" xviii. 2, 14) " the idol with four
faus."


300


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


secreted his frauds, and spread his snares for the faith, and cast upon the priests the
darts of the love of pre-eminence.

They made contests for the throne, to see which should first obtain it. There was
that meditated in secret and kept it close : there was that openly combated for it : and
there was that with a bribe crept up to it : and there was that with fraud dealt wisely
to obtain it.

The paths differed, the scope was one, and they were alike. Him that was young-,
and could not even think of it, because it was not time for him ; and him that was
hoary and shaped out dreams for time beyond ; all of them by his craftiness did the
wicked one persuade and subdue. Old men, youths, and even striplings, aim at
rank !

4. His former books did Satan put aside, and put on others : the People who was
grown old had the moth and the worm devoured and eaten and left and deserted : the
moth came into the new garment of the new peoples :

He saw the crucifiers who were rejected and cast forth as strangers : he made of
those of the household, pryers ; and of worshippers, they became disputants. From
that garment the moth gendered and wound it up and deposited it.

The worm gendered in the storehouse of wheat, and sat and looked on : and lo !
the pure wheat was mildewed, and devoured were the garments of glory ! He made a
mockery of us, and we of ourselves, since we were besotted !

He showed tares, and the bramble shot up in the pure vineyard ! He infected the
flock, and the leprosy broke out, and the sheep became hired servants of his ! He
began in the People, and came unto the Gentiles, that he might finish.

5. Instead of the reed which the former people made the Son hold, others have
dared with their reed ^ to write in their tracts that He is only a Son of man. Reed for
reed does the wicked one exchange against our Redeemer, and instead of the coat of
many colours,^ wherewith they clothed Him, titles has he dyed craftily. With diversity
of names he clothed Him ; either that of a creature or of a thing made, when He was
the Maker.

And as he plaited for Him by silent men speechless thorns that cry out, thorns from
the mind has he plaited [now] by the voice, as hymns; and concealed the spikes amid
melodies that they might not be perceived.^

6. When Satan saw that he was detected in his former [frauds]; that the spitting
was discovered, and vinegar, and thorns, nails and wood, garments and reed and spear,
which smote him, and were hated and openly known ; he changed his frauds.

Instead of the blow with the hand, by which our Lord was overcome, he brought
in distractions ; and instead of the spitting, cavilling entered in ; and instead of
garments, secret divisions ; and instead of the reed, came in strife to smite us on the
face.

Haughtiness called for rage its sister, and there answered and came envy, and
wrath, and pride, and fraud. They have taken counsel against our Redeemer as on
that day when they took counsels at His Passion.

And instead of the cross, a hidden wood hath strife become ; and instead of the
nails, questionings have come in ; and instead of hell, apostasy : the pattern of both
Satan would renew again.

Instead of the sponge which was cankered with vinegar and wormwood, he gave


^ Reeds are used all over the East to write with.

2 St. E. assumes that the type of Joseph was fulfilled in Christ to the letter.

3 This alludes probably to Bardesanes, the existence of whose rhythmical compositions induced St. E
to try and counteract them by orthodox ones of the same kind.


THE PEARL, SEVEN HYMNS ON THE FAITH. 301

prying-, the whole of which is cankered with death. The gall which they gave Him did
our Lord put away from Him ; the subtle questioning, which the rebellious one hath
given, to fools is sweet.

7. And at that time there were judges against them,^ lo, the judges are, as it were,
against us, and instead of a handwriting are their commands. Priests that consecrate
crowns, set snares for kings.

Instead of the priesthood praying for royalty that wars may cease from among men,
they teach wars of overthrow, which set kings to combat with those round about.

0 Lord, make the priests and kings peaceful ; that in one Church priests may pray
for their kings, and kings spare those round about them ; and may the peace which is
within Thee become ours. Lord, Thou that art within and without all things ! ^

1 Luke xxiii. 14, 15. 2 /^^^ Omnipresent in space, but not limited by space.


i


THREE HOMILIES.

(Translated by Rev. A. Edward Johnston, B.D.)

I. ON OUR LORD.
II. ON ADMONITION AND REPENTANCE.
III. ON THE SINFUIy WOMAN.


I


THREE HOMILIES.


ON OUR LORD.

I. Grace has drawn nigh to mouths, once
blasphemous, and has made them harps ;
sounding praise.

Therefore let all mouths render praise to
Him Who has removed from them blasphe-
mous speech. Glory to Thee Who didst
depart from one dwelling to take up thy
abode in another ! that He might come and
make us a dwelling-place for His Sender, the
only-begotten departed from [being] with
Deity and took up His abode in the Virgin ;
that by a common manner of birth, though
only-begotten, He might become the brother
of many. And He departed from Sheol and
took up His abode in the Kingdom ; that
He might seek out a path from Sheol which
oppresses all, to the Kingdom which requites
all. P'or our Lord gave His resurrection
as a pledge to mortals, that He would
remove them from Sheol, which receiA^es the
departed without distinction, to the Kingdom
which admits the invited with distinction ;
so that, from [the plan] which makes equal
the bodies of all men within it, we may
come to [the plan] which distinguishes the
works of all men within it. This is He Who
descended to Sheol and ascended, that from
[the place] which corrupts its sojourners, He
might bring us to the place which nourishes
with its blessings its dwellers ; even those
dwellers who, with the possessions, the
fruits, and the flowers, of this world, that
pass away, have crowned and adorned for
themselves there, tabernacles that pass not
away. That Firstborn Who was begotten
according to His nature, was born in another
birth that was external to His nature ; that
we might know that after our natural birth

we must have another birth which is outside
VOL. XIII. — 20


our nature. For He, since He was spiritual,
until He came to the corporeal birth, could
not be corporeal ; in like manner also the
corporeal, unless they are born in another
birth, cannot be spiritual. But the Son
Whose generation is unsearchable, was born
in another generation that may be searched
out ; that by the one we might learn that
His .Majesty is without limit, and by the
other might be taught that His grace is
without measure. For great is His Majesty
without measure. Whose first generation
cannot be imagined in any of our thoughts.
And His grace is abundant without limit,
Whose second birth is proclaimed by all
mouths.

2. This is He Who was begotten from the
Godhead according to His nature, and from
manhood not after His nature, and from
baptism not after His custom ; that we
might be begotten from manhood according
to our nature, and from Godhead not after
our nature, and by the Spirit not after our
custom. He then was begotten from the
Godhead, He that came to a second birth ;
in order to bring us to the birth that is dis-
coursed of, even His generation from the
Father : — not that it should be searched out,
but that it should be believed ; — and His
birth from the woman, not that it should be
despised, but that it should be exalted.
Now His death on the cross witnesses to
His birth from the woman. For He that
died was also born. And the Annunciation
of Gabriel declares His generation by the
Father, namely [the power of the Highest
shall overshadow thee].^ If then it was the
power of the Highest, it is plain that it was
not the seed of mortal man. So then His


1 Luke i. 35.


305


3o6


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


conception in the womb is bound up with
His death on the cross ; and His first gene-
ration is bound up with the declaration of
the Angel ; in order that whoso denies His
birth may be confuted by His crucifixion,
and whoso supposes that His beginning was
from Mary, may be admonished that His
Godhead is before all ; so that whoever has
concluded His beginning to be corporeal,
[may be proved to err hereby that His issuing
forth from the Father is narrated]. The
Father begat Him, and through Him created
the creatures. Flesh bare Him and through
Him slew lusts. Baptism brought him forth,
that through Him it might wash away stains.
Sheol brought Him forth, that through Him
its treasures might be emptied out. He
came to us from beside His Father by the
way of them that are born : and by the
way of them that die, He went forth to
go to His Father; so that by His com-
ing through birth. His advent might be
seen ; and by His returning through re-
surrection, His departure might be con-
firmed.

3. But our Lord was trampled on by
Death; and in His turn trod out away over
Death. This is He Who made Himself
subject to and endured death of His own
will, that He might cast down death against
his will. For our Lord bare His cross and
went forth according to the will of Death :
but He cried upon the cross ^ and brought
forth the dead from within Sheol against the
will of Death. For in that very thing by
which Death had slain Him [i.e., the body],
in that as armour He bore off the victory
over Death. But the Godhead concealed
itself in the manhood and fought against
Death. Death slew and was slain. Death
slew the natural life ; and the supernatural
life slew Him. And because Death was not
able to devour Him without the body, nor
Sheol to swallow Him up without the flesh,
He came unto the Virgin, that from thence
He might obtain that which should bear
Him to Sheol ; as from beside the ass they

1 St. Matt, xxvii. 50-52.


brought for Him the colt whereon He
entered Jerusalem, and proclaimed concern-
ing her overthrow and the destruction of her
children. With the body then that [was]
from the Virgin, He entered Sheol and
plundered its storehouses and emptied its
treasures. He came then to Eve the Mother
of all living. This is the vine whose fence
Death laid open by her own hands, and
caused her to taste of his fruits. So Eve
the Mother of all living became the well-
spring of death to all living. But Mary
budded forth, a new shoot from Eve the
ancient vine ; and new life dwelt in her,
that when Death should come confidently
after his custom to feed upon mortal fruits,
the life that is slayer of death might be
stored up [therein] against him ; that v^^hen
Death should have swallowed [the fruits]
without fear, he might vomit them forth and
with them many. For [He Who is] the
Medicine of life flew down from heaven, and
was mingled in the body, the mortal fruit.
Aud when Death came to feed after his
custom, the Life in His turn swallowed up
Death, lliis is the food that hungered to
eat its eater. So then, by one fruit which
Death swallowed hungrily, he vomited up
many lives which he had swallowed greed-
ily. The hunger then which hurried him
against one, emptied out his greed which
had hurried him against many. Thus Death
was diligent to swallow one, but was in
haste to set many free. For while One was
dying on the cross, many that were buried
from within Sheol were coming forth at His
cry. ^ This is the fruit that cleft asunder
Death who had swallowed it, and brought
out from within it the Life in quest of which
it was sent. For Sheol hid away all that
she had devoured. But through One that
was not devoured, all that she had devoured
were restored from within her. He, whose
stomach is disordered, vomits forth both
that which is sweet to him and that which
is not sweet. So the stomach of Death was
disordered, and as he was vomiting forth

2 St. Matt, xxvii. 50-53.


THREE HOMILIES.


307


the medicine of life which had sickened it,
he vomited forth along- with it also those
lives that had been swallowed by him with
pleasure.

4. This is the Son of the carpenter, Who
skilfully made His cross a bridge over Sheol
that swallows up all, and brought over man-
kind into the dwelling- of life. And because
it was through the tree that mankind had
fallen into Sheol, so upon the tree they
passed over into the dwelling of life. Through
the tree then wherein bitterness was tasted,
through it also sweetness was tasted ; that
we might learn of Him that amongst the
creatures nothing resists Him. Glory be to
Thee, Who didst lay Thy cross as a bridge
over death, that souls might pass over upon
it from the dwelling of the dead to the dwell-
ing of life !

5. The Gentiles praise Thee that Thy
Word has become a mirror before them, that
in it they might see death, secretly swallow-
ing up their lives. But graven images were
being adorned by their artificers ; and by
their adornments were disfiguring their
adorn ers. But Thou didst draw them to
Thy cross ; and while the beauties of the
body were disfigured upon it, the beauties
of the mind shone forth upon it. Then,
as for the Gentiles who used to go after
gods which were no gods, He Who was
God went after them, and by His words, as
by a bridle, turned them from many gods
to the One. This is that Mighty One,
Whose preaching became a bridle in the
jaws of the Gentiles, and led them away
from idols to Him that sent Him. But the
dead idols, with their closed mouths, used
to feed on the life of their worshippers. On
this account Thou didst mingle in their flesh
that blood of Thine, by which death was
enfeebled and laid low ; that the mouths of
their devourers might be driven away from
their lives. Also because Israel slew Thee
and was defiledby Thy blood, that idolatry,
that had been engrafted upon him was
driven away from him on account of Thy
blood. For he was weaned from that
heathenism through Thy blood ; because


that from it, he had never before been
weaned.

6. But Israel crucified our Lord, on the
plea that verily He was seducing us from the
One God. But they themselves used con-
stantly to wander away from the One God
through their many idols. While then they
imagine they crucify Him Who seduces them
from the One God, they are found to be led
away by Him from all idols to the One God ;
to the end that because they did not volun-
tarily learn of Him that He is God, they
might by compulsion learn of Him that He
is God ; when the good which had accrued
to them through Him should accuse them
concerning the evil which their hands had
done. Thus even though the tongue of the
oppressors denied, yet the help with which
they were helped convicted them. For
grace loaded them beyond their power, so
that they should be ashamed, while laden
with Thy blessings, to deny Thy person.
And also Thou didst have mercy on those,
whose lives had been made food for dead
idols. For the one calf which they made
in the desert,^ pastured on their lives as on
grass in the desert. For that idolatry which
they had stolen and brought out in their
hearts from Egypt, when it was made mani-
fest, slew openly those in whom it was
dwelling secretly. For it was like fire con-
cealed in wood, which when it is gendered
from within it, burns it. For Moses ground
to powder the calf and caused them to drink
it in the water of ordeal ; ^ that by drinking
of the calf all those who v^^ere living for its
worship might die. For the sons of Levi
ran upon them, those who ran to [help]
Moses and girded on their swords. ' For the
sons of Levi did not know, whom they
should slay, because those that worshipped
were mingled with those that worshipped
not. But He, for Whom it was easy to dis-
tinguish, distinguished those who were de-
filed from those who were not defiled ; so
that the innocent might give thanks that
their innocence had not passed [unseen


' Exod. xxxii. 4.

3 Exod. xxxii. 26, 27, 28.


2 Exod. xxxii. 2Q


3o8


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


by] the Just One ; and the guilty might
be convicted tiiat their offence had not es-
caped [the eye of] the Judge. But the
sons of Levi vi^ ere the open avengers. Ac-
cordingly Moses set a mark upon the of-
fenders, that it might be easy for the aven-
gers to avenge. For the draught of the calf
entered those in whom the love of the calf
was dwelling, and displayed in them a
manifest sign, that the drawn sword might
rush upon them. The congregation there-
fore which had committed fornication in
[the worship of] the calf, he caused to drink
of the water of ordeal, that the mark of
adulteresses might appear in it. From hence
was derived that law about women, ^ that
they should drink the water of ordeal, that
by the mark that came on adulteresses, the
congregation might be reminded of its forni-
cation that was in the worship of the calf,
and be on its guard with fear against another
[fornication] ; and remember the former
[fornication] with penitence of soul ; and
that when they were judging their women,
if they played the harlot against them, they
might condemn themselves, who were play-
ing the harlot against their God.

7. To Thee be glory who by Thy cross hast
taken away the heathenism in which both
circumcised and uncircumcised were caused
to stumble ! To Thee be praise, the medi-
cine of life, Who hast converted all that are
baptised, to Him Who is life of all, and Lord
of all ! The lost that are found bless Thee ;
for by the finding of the lost, Thou hast
given joy to the angels that are found and
were not lost. The uncircumcised praise
Thee, for in Thy peace the enmity that was
between is swallowed up, for Thou didst re-
ceive in Thy flesh the outward sign of
circumcision, through which the uncircum-
cised that were Thine, used to be accounted
as not Thine. For Thou didst make as
Thy sign the circumcision of the heart ; by
which the circumcised were made known,
that they were not Thine. For Thou didst
come to Thine own ^ and Thine own re-


' Num. V. 17-27


2 John i. ii.


ceived Thee not ; and by this they were
made known that they were not Thine.
But they to whom Thou didst not come,
through Thy mercy cry out after Thee, that
Thou wouldst satisfy them with the crumbs
which fall from the children's table.

8. God was sent from the Godhead, to
come and convict the graven images that
they were no gods. And when He took
away from them the name of God which
decked them out, then appeared the blem-
ishes of their persons. And their blemishes
were these ; — They have eyes and see not,
and ears and hear not. ^ Thy preaching per-
suaded their many worshippers to change
their many gods for the One. For in that
Thou didst take away the name of godhead
from the idols, worship also along with the
name was withdrawn ; that, namely, which
is bound up with the name ; for worship
also attends on the Name of God. Because,
then, worship also was rendered to the Name,
by all the Gentiles, at the last the worship-
ful Name shall be gathered in entirely to its
Lord. Therefore at the last worship, also
shall be gathered in completely to its Lord,
that it may be fulfilled that all things shall
be subjected to Him. Then, He in His turn
shall be subjected to Hint Who subjected all
things to Hi7n^ So that that Name, rising
from degree to degree, shall be bound up
with its root. For when all creatures shall
be bound by their love to the Son through
Whom they were created, and the Son shall
be bound by the love of that Father by
Whom He was begotten, all creatures shall
give thanks at the last to the Son, through
Whom they received all blessings ; and in
Him and with Him they shall give thanks
also to His Father, from Whose treasure He
distributes all riches to us.

9. Glory be to Thee Who didst clothe
Thyself in the body of mortal Adam, and
didst make it a fountain of life for all mortals.
Thou art He that livest, for Thy slayers
were as husbandmen to Thy life, for that
they sowed it as wheat in the depth [of the


3 Ps. cxv. 5, 6.


4 I Cor. XV. 27, 28.


THREE HOMILIES.


309


earth], that it may rise and raise up many
with it. Come, let us make our love the
great censer of the community, and offer on
it as incense our hymns and our prayers to
Him Who made His cross a censer for the
Godhead, and offered from it on behalf of
us all. He that was above stooped down
to those who were beneath, to distribute
His treasures to them. Accordingly, though
the needy drew near to His manhood, yet
they used to receive the gift from His God-
head. Therefore He made the body which
He put on, the treasurer of His riches, that
He, O Lord, might bring them out of Thy
storehouse, and distribute them to the needy,
the sons of His kindred.

10. Glory be to Him Who received from
us that He might give to us ; that through
that which is ours we might more abun-
dantly receive of that which is His ! Yea,
through that Mediator, mankind was able
to receive life from its helper, as through a
Mediator it had received in the beginning
death from its slayer. Thou art He Who
didst make for Thyself the body as a ser-
vant, that through it Thou mightest give to
them that desire Thee, all that they desire.
Moreover in Thee were made visible the
hidden wishes of them that slew [Thee] and
buried [Thee] ; through this, that Thou
clothedst Thyself in a body. For taking
occasion by that body of Thine, Thy slayers
slew Thee, and were slain by Thee ; and
taking occasion by Thy body, Thy buriers
buried Thee, and were raised up with Thee.
That Power Which may not be handled came
down and clothed itself in members that
may be touched ; that the needy may draw
near to Him, that in touching His manhood
they may discern His Godhead. For that
dumb man [whom the Lord healed] with
the fingers of the body, discerned that He
had approached his ears and touched his
tongue ; ' nay, with his fingers that may be
touched, he touched Godhead, that may not
be touched ; when it was loosing the string
of his tongue, and opening the clogged doors

1 Mark vii. 32-37.


of his ears. For the Architect of the body
and Artificer of the flesh came to him, and
with His gentle voice pierced without pain
his thickened ears. And his mouth which
was closed up, that it could not give birth
to a word, gave birth to praise to Him Who
made its barrenness fruitful in the birth of
words. He, then. Who gave to Adam that
he should speak at once without teaching.
Himself gave to the dumb that they should
speak easily, tongues that are learned with
difficulty.

II. Lo, again, another question is made
clear : — We enquire in what tongues our Lord
gave the power of speaking to the dumb, who
from all tongues came unto Him } And al-
though this be easy to know, yet our soul im-
pels us to that knowledge which is greater
than this. That [knowledge] then is, to know
that through the Son the first man was made.
For in this fact, that through Him speech
was given to the dumb, the sons of Adam,
we may learn that through Him speech was
given to Adam their first father. And here
also defective nature was supplied by our
Lord. He, then. Who was able to supply the
defect of nature,— it is manifest that through
Him is established the supplying of nature.
But there is no greater defect than this, when
a man is born without speech. For since it
is in this, in speech, that we excel all the
creatures, the defect of it is greater than all
[other] defects. He, then, through Whom
all this defect was supplied, — it is manifest
that through Him all fulness is established.
But because through Him the members re-
ceive all fulness in the womb secretly,
through Him their defect was supplied open-
ly ; that we might learn that through Him
in the beginning the whole frame was con-
stituted. He spat then on His fingers and
placed them in the ears of that deaf man ;
and He mixed clay of His spittle, and spread
it upon the eyes of the blind man ;'^ that we
might learn that as there was defect in the
eyeballs of that man who was blind from
his mother's womb, so there was defect in

2 St. John ix. 6.


3IO


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


the ears of this [man]. So then, by leaven
from the body of Him Who completes, the
defect of our formation is supplied. For it
was not meet that our Lord should have cut
off anything from His body to supply the
deficiency of other bodies ; but v^^ith that
w^hich could be taken away from Him, He
supplied the deficiency of them that lacked ;
just as in that which can be eaten, mortals
eat Him. He supplied then the deficiency,
and g-ave life to mortality, that we may
know that from the body in which fulness
dwelt, the deficiency of them that lacked
was supplied ; and from the body in which
life dwelt,' life was given to mortals.

12. Now the Prophets performed all
[other] signs ; but on no occasion supplied
the deficiency of members. But the de-
ficiency of the body was reserved, that it
should be supplied through our Lord ; that
souls might perceive that it is through Him
that every deficiency must be supplied. It
is meet, then, that the prudent should per-
ceive that He Who supplies the deficiencies
of the creatures, is Master of the formative
power of the Creator. But when He was
upon earth, our Lord gave to the deaf [and
dumb], [the power] of hearing and of speak-
iug tongues which they had not learned ;
that after He had ascended, [men] might
understand that He gave to His disciples
[the power] of speaking in every tongue.

13. Now the crucifiers supposed when
our Lord was dead that His signs had died
with Him, But His signs manifestly con-
tinued to live through His disciples ; that
the murderers might know that the Lord of
the signs was living. Beforehand His mur-
derers made trouble, crying out that His
disciples had stolen His corpse. But, after-
wards, His signs performed through His dis-
ci i)les, filled them with trouble. For His
disciples, who were supposed to have stolen
tlie dead corpse, were found to be raising to
life the dead corpses of others. But the un-
godly were terrified and said ; — " His dis-
ciples have stolen His body ; " that they


Col. ii. 9.


might be held in contempt when ii should
be discovered. But the disciples, who [they
said] stole the dead body from the living
guards, were found to be assailing Death in
the name of Him Who was stolen ; that
[Death] might not steal the life of the liv-
ing. So then, before He was crucified, He
gave the deaf the power of hearing, that
after He was crucified, all ears should hear
and believe in His resurrection. For before-
hand He confirmed our hearing by [the
word] of the dumb whose mouth was
opened, that it should not doubt concerning
the preaching of the Word. Our Redeemer
was in every way equipped, that in every
way He might rescue us from our captor.
For our Lord did not merely clothe Himself
in a body, but also arrayed Himself in
members and in garments ; that through
His members and His garments, they that
were afflicted with plagues might be en-
couraged to approach the treasury of heal-
ing, that they who were encouraged by His
mercy might approach His body and they
who were dismayed by His terror might ap-
proach His vesture. For with one woman
her fear suffered her merely to approach the
hem of His raiment ; ^ but with another, her
love impelled her even to approach His
flesh. ^ Now by her who received healing
by His garments, those were put to shame
who did not receive healing from His words ;
and by her who kissed His feet, he was
rebuked who did not desire to kiss His lips.
14. Now our Lord bestowed great gifts
through small means ; that He might teach
us of what they are deprived who have
scorned great things. For if from the hem
of His garment, healing like this was secret-
ly stolen, could He not assuredly heal when
His word distinctly granted healing.? And
if defiled lips were sanctified by kissing His
feet, how much more should not pure lips
be sanctified by kissing His mouth .'' For
the sinful woman by her kisses received the
grace of His sacred feet, which had come
with toil to bring her remission of her sins.


2 St. Matt. ix. 20.


3 St. Luke vii. 37, 38.


THREE HOMILIES.


3ir


She was refreshing the feet of her Healer
with oi'i freely, for freely had He brought
her the treasure of healing for her sickness.
For it was not for the sake of his stomach
that He Who satisfies the hungry was a
guest ; but for the sake of the sinful
woman's repentance He Who justifies sin-
ners made Himself a guest.

15. For it was not for the dainties of the
Pharisees that our Lord hungered, but for
the tears of the sinful woman He was an
hungered. For when He was satisfied and
refreshed by the tears for which He
hungered, He turned and rebuked him who
had bidden Him to the food that passes
away, that He might show that it was not
for the sake of food for the body that He
had become a guest, but for the sake of
help to the soul. For it was not for the sake
of pleasure that our Lord mingled with
gluttonous men and winebibbers, as the
Pharisee supposed ; but that in their
food as mortals He might mingle for them
His teaching as the medicine of life. For
even as it was in the matter of eating that
the Evil One gave his deadly counsel to
Adam and his helpmeet, so in the matter
of eating the Good Lord gave His life-giv-
ing counsel to the sons of Adam. For He
was the fisherman Who came down to fish
for the lives of the lost. He saw the pub-
licans and harlots rushing into prodigality
and drunkenness ; and He hastened to
spread His nets amongst their places of
assembly, that He might capture them from
food that fattens bodies, to fasting that fat-
tens souls.

16. Now the Pharisee made great pre-
parations for our Lord in His banquet ; and
the sinful woman did but little thincrs for
Him there. Yet he by his great dainties dis-
played the smallness of his love to our
Lord ; but she by her tears displayed the
greatness of her love to our Lord. Thus he
that had invited Him to the great banquet
was rebuked because of the smallness of
his love ; but she by her few tears atoned
for the many follies of her offences. Simon
the Pharisee received our Lord as a prophet ;


because of the signs, and not because of
faith. For he was a son of Israel, who
when signs drew near, himself also drew
near to the Lord of the signs ; and when
the signs ceased, he also stood naked with-
out faith. This man also when he saw our
Lord with signs, esteemed Him as a pro-
phet ; but when our Lord ceased from signs,
the doubting mind of the sons of his people
entered him. Tliis man if He had been a
prophet, He would have know7i that this
woman is a sinner. But our Lord for\M"iom
in every place all things are easy, here also
did not cease from His signs. For He saw
that because He had ceased a little from
signs, the blind mind of the Pharisee had
turned away from Him. For he had said
in error. This man, had He been a prophet.
He ivoiild have known. In this reflection
therefore the Pharisee doubted concerning
our Lord, whether He were a prophet or
no ; but by this very reflection he learned
that He is Lord of the prophets ; so that
from the source from which error* entered
him, from that source our Lord might bring
help to Him.

17. Our Lord then told him the parable of
the two debtors ; and made him judge ; that
by his tongue He might catch him in whose
heart the truth w^as not. One owed five hun-
dred dinars. Here then our Lord showed to
the Pharisee the multitude of the offences of
the sinful woman. He then who imagined
concerning our Lord that He did not know
that she was a sinner, in the result heard
from Him how great was the debt of her
sins. The Pharisee, then, who imagined
that our Lord did not know who she was,
and what was the reputation of the sinful
woman, was found himself not to know who
our Lord was, and what was His reputation.
Thus he was reproved in his error, who did
not even perceive his error. For the know-
ledge that he w^as assuredly erring eluded
him in his error. But he received a re-
minder from Him Who came to remind them
that err. The Pharisee had seen great signs
done by our Lord, as Israel byMoses ; but be-
cause there was not faith in him, that those


312


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


prodigies which he saw might be conjoined
with that faith, a little cause hindered and
annulled them. Had this ?na?i been a pro-
phet, he would have knoivn that this woman
is a sinner. For he let slip the wonders that
he had seen, and blindness readily entered
into him. For he was of the sons of Israel,
whom terrible signs accompanied up to
the sea, that they might fear ; and blessed
miracles surrounded in the waste desert,
that they might be reconciled ; but through
lack of faith, for a slight cause, they re-
jected them [saying] ; As for this Moses
who brought us up, we know not what has be-
come of him. ^ For they ceased to regard
the mighty works that had been surround-
ing them. They perceived that Moses was
not near them ; so that for this cause that had
come near, they drew [near] to the heathen-
ism of Egypt. For Moses was for a little
removed from before them, that the calf that
was before them might appear, that they
might worship it openly also ; for they had
been secretly worshipping it in their hearts.

1 8. But when their heathenism from being
inward became open, then Moses also from
being hidden openly appeared; that he might
openly punish those whose heathenism had
revelled beneath the holy cloud which had
overshadowed them. But God removed the
Shepherd of the flock from it for forty days,
that the flock might show that its trust was
fixed upon the calf. While God was feed-
ing the flock with all delights, it chose for
itself as its Shepherd the calf, which was
not able even to eat. Moses who kept them
in awe was removed from them, that the
idolatry might cry aloud in their mouths,
which the restraint of Moses had kept down
in their hearts. For they cried : Make us
gods, to go before us. ^

19. But when Moses came down, he
saw their heathenism revelling in the wide
plain with drums and cymbals. Speedily,
he put their madness to shame by means of
the Levites and drawn swords. So likewise
here, our Lord concealed His knowledge for


^ Ex. xxxii. I.


2 Ex. xxxii. I.


a little when the sinful woman approached
Him, that the Pharisee might form into
shape his thought, as his fathers had shaped
the pernicious calf. But when the Phar-
isee's error came to a head within him,
then the knowledge of our Lord was mani-
fested against it and dispelled it ; I entered
i7ito thy house ; thou gavest Me no watet for
My feet : But she has fnoistened them with
her tears. Therefore her sins which are
many are forgiven her.^ But the Pharisee
when he heard our Lord naming the sins of
the woman, many sins, was greatly put to
shame because he had greatly erred. For
he had supposed that our Lord did not even
know that she was a sinner. Our Lord had
before shown Himself as though not know^-
ing her for a sinner. For He allowed him
who had seen His signs, to show the doubt
of his mind, that it might become manifest
that his mind was bound in the ungodliness
of his fathers. But the physician, who by
his medicines brings out the hidden disease,
is not the helper of the disease but its de-
stroyer. For while the disease is hidden, it
rules in. the members, but when it is made
manifest by medicines, it is rooted out. So
then the Pharisee saw great things and
doubted about small things. But when our
Lord saw that his littleness made little of
great things in his mind. He speedily showed
him not only that she was a sinner, but
even the multitude of her sins ; that he
might be put to shame by little things, — he
who had not believed in wonders.

20. God gave room to Israel to enlarge its
heathenism in the wide desert ; whom God
cut short with whetted sword, that their
idolatry might not be spread abroad among
the Gentiles. So our Lord allowed the
Pharisee to imagine perverse things, that
He might in turn duly reprove his pride.
For concerning those things which the sin-
ful woman was doing rightly, the Pharisee
was thinking wrongly. But our Lord in
His turn rebuked him, concerning the right
things which he had wrongly withheld : /

3 Luke vii. 44-47.


THREE HOMILIES.


313


entered thy house ; thou gavest Me no ivater
for My feet. Behold the withholding of that
which was due ! But she has moiste?ied them
with her tears. Behold the payment of what
was due ! Thou didst not anoint Me with oil.
Behold the token of neglect ! But she has
anointed My feet with siveet ointment. Be-
hold the sign of zeal ! Thou didst not kiss
Me. Behold the testimony of enmity !
But she has not ceased to kiss My feet. Be-
hold the sign of love ! So then, by this
enumeration our Lord showed that the
Pharisee owed Him all those things and
had withheld them ; but that the sinful
woman had come in and rendered all those
things which he had withheld. Because
then she had paid the debts of him who
wrongfully withheld them, the Just One
forgave her, her own debt, even her sins.

21. Now the Pharisee, while he was
doubting concerning our Lord, that He was
not a prophet, pledged himself to the truth
unawares, in saying — Had this mail been a
prophet, lie woidd have k7iow7i that this
woman is a sinner. Therefore, if it should
be found that our Lord knew that she was
a sinner, He is, according to thy word, O
Pharisee, a prophet. Our Lord, therefore,
hastened to show both that she was a sin-
ner, and that her sins were many; that the
testimony of his own mouth might confute
him as a liar. For he was companion of
those that said : Who is able to forgive sins,
but God only P^ For from them our Lord
received testimony, that, therefore. He Who
is able to forgive sins, is God. Thenceforth,
then, tne contention was this, that our Lord
should show them whether He was able to
forgive sins or no. So He speedily healed the
members that were visible, that it might be
made sure that He had forgiven the sins that
were invisible. For our Lord cast before
them the word which was expected to catch
him that said it ; so that when they should
rush forward to catch Him by it, according
to their wish, they might be caught by Him
according to His wish. Fear not, My son,

1 Mark ii. 7.


thy sins are forgiven thee."^ While they were
hastening to catch Him on the charge of
blasphemy, they pledged themselves un-
awares to the truth. For WJio is able to for-
give sifis but God 07ily .^ Accordingly, our
Lord confuted them [as though saying] : "If
I shall have shown that I am able to forgive
sins, even though ye do not believe in Me
that I am God ; yet abide ye by your word,
which determined that whoso forgives sins
is God." Therefore that our Lord might
teach them that He forgives sins, He for-
gave that man his hidden sin, and caused
him to carry his bed openly ; that by the
carrying of the bed which carries [those that
lie on it], they might believe in the slaying
of the sin that slays.

This is a wonderful thing, that while our
Lord there called Himself the Son of man,
His adversaries, unawares, made Him to be
God as forgiving sins. Accordingly, while
they supposed that they had ensnared Him
by their craftiness, He entangled them in
their craftiness ; He made it a testimony to
His truth. So their evil thoughts became
unto them as bitter bonds ; and that they
might not free themselves from their bonds,
our Lord strengthened them by giving
strength to him [to whom He said] ; — Arise,
take up thy bed and go into thine house.* For
the testimony could not again be undone,
as though He were not God ; inasmuch as
Fie forgave sins. Nor yet could it be falsely
affirmed that He had not forgiven sins ; for
lo ! He had- healed [men's] limbs. For our
Lord bound up His hidden testimonies in
those which were manifest ; that their own
testimony mJght choke the infidels. Ac-
cordingly our Lord made their thoughts to
war against them, because they had warred
with the Good One, who by His healing
power warred against their diseases. For
that which Simon the Pharisee imagined,
and that which the scribes his companions
imagined, they imagined in their hearts
secretly ; but our Lord spread it forth openly.

Our Lord represented their hidden ima-


'^ Matt. ix. 2.


3 Matt. ix. 6.


314


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


ginations before them, that they might
learn that His knowledge reveals and shows
their secret things (;) so that though they
had not recognized Him by His open
signs, they might recognize Him when
He represented their secret imaginations ;
and that if only but by this, — that He
searched out their hearts, — their hearts
might perceive that He was God ; — that
at least when they saw that their ima-
ginations could not be hidden from Him,
they might cease from imagining evil against
Him. For they had imagined evil in their
heart ; but He exposed it openly, by this
[word] W/i_y are ye iniagini7ig evil in your
heart ? So that by this, that our Lord per-
ceived their hidden imagination, they should
recognize His hidden Godhead. For that
Godhead, by this very thing that they in
their error were reviling it, was by that re-
viling made known to them. For they re-
viled our Lord in the body, and supposed
that He was not God, and cast Him down
below" from on high ; but by the body He
was made known to them as being God, by
that body which was found passing to and
fro amongst them. For they, by casting
Him down to the depth, attempted to show
this, that God Who is above, cannot in
bodily wise be born below. But He by His
passage up to the height, taught them this ;
that for the body also that is sent down
below, it is not its nature to pass up to the
height rather than down to the depths ; so
that by the body which from below passed
on high upwards in the air, they might
learn of God that by His grace He descend-
ed down below from on hig-h.

2 2. But why instead of a stern reproof
did our Lord speak a parable of persuasion
to that Pharisee ? He spoke the parable to
him tenderly, that he, though froward,
might unawares be enticed to correct his
perversities. For the waters that are con-
gealed by the force of a cold wind, the heat
of the sun gently dissolves. So our Lord
did not at once oppose him harshly, that he
might not give occasion to the rebellious
to rebel again. But by blandishment He


brought him under the yoke, that when he
had been yoked. He might work with him,
though rebellious, according to His will.
Now, because Simon was proudly minded,
our Lord began humbly with him, that He
might not be to hirn a teacher according to
his folly. For if that Pharisee retained the
Pharisees' pride, how could our Lord cause
him to acquire humility, when the treasure
of humility was not under his hand.? But
since our Lord was teaching humiHty to all
men, He showed that His treasury was free
from every form of pride. But this was for
our sakes, that He might teach us, that what-
ever treasuries pride enters into, it is by
boastfulness that it gains access to them.
On this account let not thy left hand know
what thy riglit hand doeth. ' Our Lord then
did not employ harsh reproof, because His
coming was of grace : He did not refrain
from reproof, because His later coming will
be of retribution. For He put men to fear
in His coming of humility ; because it is a
fearful thing to fall into His hands'^ when He
shall come in flaniijig fireS^ But our Lord
bestowed the most part of His helps rather
by persuasion than by reproof For the
gentle shower softens the earth and pene-
trates all through it : but violent rain binds
and hardens the face of the earth, so that it
does not receive it. For a harsh word ex-
cites wrath, and w^ith it are bound up
wrongs. And when a harsh word has
opened the door, wrath enters in, and at
the heels of wrath, along with it enter in
wrongs.

23. But because all helps attend on hum-
ble speech, He who came to render help
employed it. Observe how mighty is the
power of a humble word ; for lo ! by it
vehement wrath is put down, and by it the
billows of a swelling mind are calmed. But
hear whence this was. That Pharisee
thought, had this man been a prophet, he
would have known. Contempt as well as
blasphemy can be discerned here. Hear
how our Lord in reply encountered this :


1 Matt. ii. 3.


2 Hebr. x. 31.


3 2 Thess. i. 7-8.


THREE HOMILIES.


315


Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee.
Love and reproof can be discerned here.
For this is a word of love such as friends use
with their friends. For when an adversary
reproaches his adversary, he speaks not to
him lilce this ; for the madness of anger does
not allow enemies to speak reasonably one
to another. But He Who prayed for them
that crucified Him, that He might show
that the fury of anger had no povver over
Him, was about to put to the question those
that crucified Him, that He might show
that He was governed by reason and not
by anger.

24. Accordingly, our Lord placed a word
of conciliation at the beginning of His
speech, that by conciliation He might pacify
the Pharisee, into whose mind discord and
division had entered. He was the physician
who ranged His cures against the things
hurtful [to men]. Our Lord then shot forth
this word as an arrow, and set in the head
of it conciliation as the barb. And He an-
ointed it with love, that soothes the mem-
bers ; so that when it flew into him who
was full of discord, he was at once changed
from discord to harmony. For straightway
upon hearing that humble voice of our Lord,
saying, — Simon, I have somewhat to say unto
ihee, that secret despiser returned his an-
swer, Say on, Lord. For the sweet voice
entered his bitter mind, and begot of it
pleasant fruit. For he who before this voice
was one that secretly despised, after this
voice became one that openly honoured.
For humility, by its sweet utterance, sub-
dues even its adversaries into rendering it
honour. For it is not over its friends that
humility tests its power, but over its enemies
it exhibits its victories.

25. Thus the heavenly King arrayed
Himself in armour of humility, and so con-
quered the bitter one, and drew from him
a good answer as a sure pledge [of victory].
This is the armour concerning which Paul
said, that by it we humble the loftiness that
exalteth itself against the k^iowledge of God.^

' 2 Cor. X. 5.


For Paul had received the proof of it in him-
self. For as he had been warring in pride,
but was conquered in humility, so is to be
conquered every lofty thing which exalteth
itself against this humility. For Saul was
journeying to subdue the disciples with hard
words, but the Master of the disciples sub-
dued him with a humble word. For when
He to whom all things are possible mani-
fested Himself to him, giving up all things
else. He spoke to him in humility alone,
that He might teach us that a soft tongue is
more effectual than all things else against
hard thouo:hts. For neither threats nor
words of terror were heard by Paul, but
weak words not able to avenge themselves :
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me .^ "^ But
the words which were thought not even
capable of avenging themselves, were found
to be taking vengeance by drawing him
away from the Jews and making him a
goodly vessel. He who was full of the bit-
ter will of the Jews, was then filled with the
sweet preaching of the cross. When he was
filled with the bitterness of the crucifiers,
in his bitterness he made havoc of the
churches. But when he was filled with the
sweetness of the Crucified, he embittered
the synagogues of the crucifiers. Our Lord
then strove wnth humble voice with him,
who had been warring against His churches
with hard bonds. Thus Saul, who had been
binding the disciples with bitter chains, was
bound with pleasant persuasions ; that he
might not again cast the disciples into
bonds ; since he w^as bound by the Cruci-
fied, Who puts to silence evil voices, whom
all they that were set against Plim could not
bind or injure. But when Paul ceased
from binding the disciples, he himself was
bound with chains by the persecutors. But
when he was bound with chains, he loosed
the bonds of idolatry by his bonds.

26. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me .^
He who had conquered His persecutors in
the world below, and ruled over the angels
in the world above, spoke from above with

2 Acts ix. 4.


3i6


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


humble voice. And He Who while He was
upon earth had denounced ten woes against
His crucifiers, when He was in heaven, did
not denounce even one woe against Saul,
His persecutor. Now, our Lord denounced
woe to His crucifiers, that He might teach
His disciples not to be dismayed by His
murderers. But our Lord spoke in humility
from heaven, that in humility the heads of
His church might speak, And if any one
should say, ''Wherein did our Lord speak
humbly with Paul ? for lo ! the eyes of Paul
were grievously smitten ; " let him know
that it was not from our merciful Lord
that this chastisement proceeded, who
spoke those words in humility ; but from
the vehement light that vehemently shone
forth there. And this light did not strike
Paul by way of retribution on account of
his deeds, but on account of the vehemence
of its rays it hurt him, as he also said :
Wheii I arose, I could discern nothing for the
glory of the light.'^ But if that light was
glorious, O Paul, how did the glorious light
become a blinding light to thee thyself.?
The light was that which, according to its
nature, illuminates above, but contrary to
its nature, it shone forth below. When it
illumined above, it was delightful ; but when
it shone forth below, it was blinding. For
the light was both grievous and pleasant.
It was grievous and violent towards the eyes
of the flesh ; and it was pleasant and de-
lightful to those who are fire and spirit.^

27. For I saw a light from heaven that ex-
celled the sun, and its light shone upon me. ^
So then mighty rays streamed forth without
moderation, and were poured upon feeble
eyes, which moderate rays refresh. For,
lo ! the sun also in measure assists the eyes,
but beyond measure and out of measure it
injures the eyes. And it is not by way of
vengeance in wrath that it smites them.
For lo ! it is the friend of the eyes and be-
loved of the eyeballs. And this is a marvel ;
while with its gentle lustre it befriends and
assists the eyes ; yet by its vehement rays it

^ Acts xxii. II. 2 Matt. iv. 11. ^ Acts xxvi, 13.


is hostile to and injures the eyeballs. But if
the sun which is here below, and of kindred
nature with the eyes that are here below,
yet injures them, in vehemence and not in
anger, in its proper force and not in wTath ;
how much more should the light that is from
above, akin to the things that are above, by
its vehemence injure a man here below who
has suddenly gazed upon that which is not
akin to his nature? For since Paul might
have been injured by the vehemence of this
sun to which he was accustomed, if he gazed
upon it not according to custom, how much
more should he be injured by the glory of
that light to wdiich his eyes never had been
accustomed.'^ For behold, Daniel also* was
melted and poured out on every side before
the glory of the angel, whose vehement
brightness suddenly shone upon him ! and
it was not because of the angel's wrath that
his human weakness was melted, just as it
is not on account of the wrath or hostility of
fire that wax is melted before it ; but on ac-
count of the weakness of the wax it cannot
keep firm and stand in presence of fire. When
then the two approach one another, the
power of the fire by its quality prevails ; but
the weakness of the wax on the other hand
is brought lower even than its former w^eak-
ness.

28. But the majesty of the angel was
manifested in itself; the weakness of flesh
in itself could not endure. For 77ty inward
parts were turned into corruption. ^ But yet
men see men, their fellows, and faint be-
fore them : Yet it is not by their bright
splendour that they are moved, but by their
harsh will. For servants are terrified by the
wrath of their masters, and those that are
judged tremble through fear of their judges.
But this did not befall Daniel on account of
threatening or anger from the angel ; but on
account of his terrible nature and prevailing
bricrhtness. For it was not with threaten-
ing, the angel came to him. For if he had
come with threatening, how could a mouth
full of threatening become full of peace,


4 Dan. X. 5, 6.


5 Dan. X. 8.


THREE HOMILIES.


317


when it came, saying, Peace be unto thee,
thou man of desire ? ^ Thus that mouth that
was a fountain of thunderings — for the voice
of his words was like the voice of many hosts, "^
that voice became to him a fountain teem-
ing with and containing peace. And when
[the voice] reached the terrified ears which
were athirst for the encouraging greeting of
peace, there was opened and poured out
[for Daniel] a draught of peace. And by
the angel's later [word of] peace, those ears
were encouraged, which had been terrified
by his former voice first. For [he said], Let
my Lord speak because L have been strength-
ened^ But because in that heart-moving
vision the fiery angel was about to an-
nounce nothing concerning Him, [the Lord] ,
on this account that majesty [of the angel]
was forward to give the salutation of peace
to the lowliness [of the prophet] ; that by
the eladdeninof salutation which that awful
majesty gave, the dread should be removed
which lay on the mind of the lowliness
and that was terrified.

29. But what shall we say about the Lord
of the Angel, Who said to Moses, — No man
shall see Me and live? * Is it on account of the
fury of His anger, that whoso shall see Him
shall die ? Or on account of the splendour
of His Being.? For that Being was not
made and was not created : so that eyes
Avhich have been made and created cannot
look upon it. For if it is on account of His
fury that whoso shall look upon Him shall
not live, lo ! He would have granted to
Moses to see Him because of His great love
to him. Accordingly, the Self-Existent by
His vision slays them that look upon Him ;
but He slays, not because of harsh fury but
because of His potent splendour. Because
of this He in His great love granted to
Moses to see His glory ; yet in the same
great love He restrained him from seeing
His glory. But it was not that the glory of
His majesty would have been at all dimin-
ished, but that weak eyes could not suffice
to bear the overpowering billows of His


1 Dan. X. 19 (Peshitto).
3 Dan. X. 19.


2 Dan. X. 6.

4 Exod. xxxiii. 20,


glory. Therefore God, Who in His love de-
sired that the vision of Moses should be
directed upon the goodly brightness of His
glory, in His love did not desire that the
vision of Moses should be blinded amidst
the potent rays of His glory. Therefore
Moses saw and saw not. He saw, that he
might be exalted ; he saw not, that he might
not be injured. For by that which he saw,
his lowliness was exalted ; and by that which
he saw not, his weakness was not blinded.
As also our eyes look upon the sun and look
not upon it ; and by what they see are
assisted ; and by what they see not, are un-
injured. Thus the eye sees, that it may be
benefited ; but it ventures not [to look], that
it may not be injured. So then through love
God hindered Moses from seeing that glory
that was too hard for his eyes : As also
Moses through his love prevented the chil-
dren of his people from seeing the bright-
ness that was too strong for their eyes.
For he learned from Him Who covered him,
and spread His hand, and hid from him the
splendour of the glory, that it might not in-
jure him ; so that he also should spread the
veil and conceal from the feeble ones the
overpowering splendour, that it might not
hurt them. Now when Moses saw that the
sons of perishable flesh could not gaze upon
the borrowed glory that was on his face, his
heart failed within him ; for that he had
sought to dare to gaze upon the glory of the
Eternal Being ; in whose floods, lo ! those
above and those below are plunged and
spring forth ; the depths whereof none can
fathom ; the shores whereof none can reach ;
whereof no end or limit can be found.

30. Now if any one should say, "Was it
not then possible for God [to bring it to pass]
that Moses should look upon that glory and
not be injured ; and that Paul likewise should
look upon the light and take no hurt .? " Let
him that says this understand that though it
is possible for the power and overruling
force of God, that the eyes should change
their nature ; yet it is inconsistent with the
wisdom and nature of God that the order of
nature should be confused. For, lo ! it is


3i8


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


also easy for the arm of the artificer to destroy
[his fabrics] ; but it is inconsistent with the
good sense of the artificer to ruin goodly
ornaments. And if any one wishes to say,
concerning something which to himself
seems meet ; — " It were meet for God to do
this ; '' let him know that it is meet for him-
self not to speak thus concerning God. For
the chief of all things meet is this : that a
man should not teach God what is meet.
For it becomes not man to become God's
instructor. For this is a great wickedness,
that we should become teachers to Him, of
Whom these created mouths of ours are un-
able to tell, in the formation of His handi-
work. For it is an unpardonable iniquity,
that the mouth in its boldness should teach
what is proper to that God by Whose grace
it learned to speak at all. If any one then
shall say, " It had been meet for God to do
this," I also, because I have a mouth and a
tongue, may say, "It had been meet for
God not to give to man freedom by which
he thus reproaches Him Who is not to be
reproached.'*' But I do not dare to say that
it was not meet for Him to give it ; lest I
also make myself an instructor of Him Who
is not to be instructed. For because He is
just, He would have been reproached by
Himself, had He not given freedom to men,
as though through grudging He had with-
held from lowly man the gift that makes
great. Therefore He gave it betimes by
His grace, that He might not be justly re-
proached by Himself ; even though through
freedom. His own gift, lo ! blasphemers
wickedly reproach Him.

31. Now why were the eyes of Moses
made to shine because of the glory which
he saw, while on the contrary [the eyes of]
Paul, instead of being made to shine, were
made utterly blind.? Yet we may be sure
that the eyes of Moses were not stronger
than those of Paul ; for they were akin in
one brotherhood of blood and flesh. But
another power through grace sustained the
eyes of Moses ; whereas no power was
added in mercy to the eyes of Paul, beyond
their natural power, which in wrath was


taken from them. But if we say that their
natural power was taken away from them,
and that [it was] on this account he was
defeated and overcome by the overpowering
light, — for had their natural power remained,
they would have been able to endure that
supernatural light. Yet let us be sure of
this, that as often as anything transcendent
is revealed, that surpasses and transcends
our nature, our natural power is not able to
stand before it. But if on the other hand
another power beyond our natural one is
added to us, then by that power received by
us in excess of and beyond nature, we shall
be able to stand before any strange thing
which comes upon us supernaturally.

32. For, lo ! the power of our ears and
eyes is in us and is formed in us in its natural
manner ; and yet our sight and hearing can-
not stand before mighty thunderings and
lightnings ; first, because they come with
vehemence ; and secondly, because their
potency suddenly surprises and astounds
our feebleness. This is what happened to
Paul. For the potency of the light suddenly
surprised his feeble eyes and injured them.
But the greatness of the voice brought low
his strength and entered his ears and opened
them. For they had been closed up by
Jewish contentiousness as by wax. For the
voice did not plough up the ears, as the light
injured the eyeballs. Why ? but because it
was meet that he should hear, but not that
he should see. Therefore the doors of hear-
ing were opened by the voice as by a key :
but the doors of sight were shut by the light
that should open them. Why then was it
meet that he should hear.? Clearly because
by that voice our Lord was able to reveal
Himself as being persecuted by Saul. For
He was not able to show Himself by sight
as being persecuted ; for there was no way
whereby this should be, that the son of
David should be seen fleeing and Saul pur-
suing after Him. ' For this happened in very
deed with that first Saul and with the first
David. The one was pursuing ; the other

^ I Sam. xxiii. xxiv.


THREE HOMILIES.


319


was being persecuted ; they both of them
saw and were seen, each by the other. But
here the ear alone could hear of the perse-
cution of the Son of David ; the eye could
not see that He was being persecuted. For
it was in [the person of] others He was being
persecuted, while He was Himself in heaven;
— He Who beforetime had been persecuted
in His own person while He was upon earth.
Therefore the ears [of Saul] were opened
and his eyes were closed. And He Who
by sight could not represent Himself before
Saul as persecuted, represented Himself by
word before him as persecuted ; when he
cried and said ; — Said, Saul, why persecutest
thou Me? Accordingly, his eyes were closed,
because they could not see the persecution
of Christ ; but his ears were opened, because
they could hear of His persecution. So then
although the eyes of Moses were bodily
eyes, as those of Paul, yet his inward eyes
were Christian ; for Moses wrote 0/ Me : ^ but
the outward eyes of Paul were open, while
the inward [eyes] were shut. Then because
the inward eyes of Moses shone clear, his
outward eyes also were made to shine
clearly. But the outward eyes of Paul were
closed, that by the closing of those that
w^ere outward, there might come to pass the
opening of those that were inward. For he
who by the outward eyes was not able to
see the Lord in His signs, he when those
bodily eyes were closed, saw with those
within. And because he had received the
proof in his own person, he wrote to those
who had their bodily eyes full of light ; —
May He illumine the eyes of your hearts.'^
Therefore the signs manifested to the ex-
ternal eyes of the Jews, profited them not
at all; but faith of the heart opened the
eyes of the heart of the Gentiles. But be-
cause, had Moses come down in his accus-
tomed aspect from the mountain, without
that shining of countenance, and said, "I
saw there the glory of God," the faithless
fathers would not have believed him ; so
also, had Paul, without suffering blindness


1 John V. 46.


2 Eph. i. 18.


of his eyes, said, "I heard the voice of
Christ," the sons who crucified Christ would
not have received it as true. Therefore He
set on Moses as in love, an excelling sign of
splendour, that the deceivers might believe
that he had seen the Divine glory ; but on
Saul, as on a persecutor, He set the hateful
sign of blindness, that the liars might be-
lieve that he had heard the words of Christ ;
that so thou might not again speak against
Moses, and that these might not doubt con-
cerning Paul. For God set sii^ns on the
bodies of the blind, and sent them to those
who were in error, who used to make signs
upon the borders of their garments. But
they remembered not the signs on their
garments, and in the signs of the body they
greatly erred. The fathers who saw the
glory of Moses, did not obey Moses ; nor
did the sons who saw the blindness of Paul
believe Paul. But three times in the desert
they threatened to stone Moses and his
house with stones as dogs. ^ For all the
congregation hade stone them with stones.*
And thrice they scourged Paul with rods as
a dog on his body. [?]^ Thrice was I beaten
with rods. ^ These are the lions who through
their love for their Lord were beaten as dogs ;
and were torn as flocks of sheep, those flocks
that used to stone their guardian shepherds,
in order that ravening wolves might rule
over them.

'^2,' But the crucifiers who corrupted the
soldiers with a bribe, they perhaps said con-
cerning Paul ; — '' The disciples have bribed
him with a bribe ; therefore he associates
with the disciples." For those who by the
giving of a bribe strove that the resurrection
of our Lord might not be preached, slan-
dered Paul with the name of a bribe, that
his revelation might not be believed. There-
fore the voice astonished him, and the light
blinded him, that his astionishment might
pacify his violence, and his blindness might
put to shame his slanderers. For the voice


3 Only one such threat is recorded (see margin) ; but
cf. Exod. viii. 26, and xvii. 4.
•iNum. xiv. 10. 5 Rendering doubtful.

^ 2 Cor, xi, 25,


320


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


astounded his hearing in this, that it said
meekly to him ; — {Saul, why persecutest thou
Me P) : and the light bhnded his sight, that
when the slanderers should have said that
he had received a bribe, and thereby was
suborned to lie, his blindness which had
been brought about by that light might con-
fute them, showing that it was through it
that he had been driven to speak what was
true. So that those who supposed that his
hands had received a bribe, and that because
of it his lips lied, might know that his eyes
had given up their light and because of this
his lips proclaimed the truth. But again for
another reason the meek voice accompanied
the overpowering light ; namely, that as it
were from meekness unto exaltation our
Lord might produce help for the persecutor ;
in like manner as also all His helps were
produced, from lowliness unto greatness.
For our Lord's meekness continued from
the womb to the tomb. And observe that
greatness comes close upon His lowliness,
and exaltation on His meekness. For
whereas His greatness was observed in
divers things, His Divinity was revealed by
glorious signs ; that it might be know^n that
the One Who stood amongst them, was not
one but two. For His nature is not humble
nature alone, nor is it an exalted nature
alone ; but there are two natures that are
mingled, the one with the other ; the exalted
and the humble. Therefore these two
natures show forth their qualities ; so that
by the quality of each of the two, man-
kind might distinguish between the two ;
that it might not be supposed that He was
merely one, — He Who was two by com-
mingling : but that it might be known that
He was two in respect of the blending,
though He was one in respect of His Being.
These things our Lord, through His humility
and exaltation, taught to Paul also in the
way to Damascus.

34. For our Lord appeared to Saul in
meekness, since meekness was close to His
greatness ; that because of His greatness it
might be known Who He is Who spake
meekly. For even as His disciples preached


on earth of our Lord in meekness aiid in
exaltation, — in the meekness of His persecu-
tion, and in the exaltation of His signs, —
so also our Lord preached of Himself in
meekness and in exaltation in Paul's pres-
ence— in the exaltation of the potency of
the light which flashed, and in the meekness
of that meek voice which said ; Saul, why
persecutest thou Me? — so that the preaching
of Him which His disciples preached con-
cerning Him in presence of many, should be
like to that preaching which He preached
concerning Himself But even as, if He
had not spoken meekly, it would not have
been made known there that He was meek,
so, had He not appeared there as an over-
powering light, it w^ould not have been made
known there that He was exalted.

35. And if thou shouldst say; ''What
necessity was there that He should speak
humbly } Could He not have convinced
him also through the greatness of the light .? "
Know, thou that questionest, that this re-
joinder may be returned to thee ; that be-
cause it was necessary that He should speak
humbly. He therefore spoke humbly. For
by Him Who is wise in all things, there was
done there nothing that was not meet to be
done. For He Who has given knowledge
to artificers to do each thing severally with
the instrument meet for it, does He not
Himself know that which He gives others
the power of knowing .? Therefore whatso-
ever has been wrought or is being wrought
by the Godhead, that very thing that is
wrought by Him at that time, is for the
furtherance of [God's] working at that time,
even though to the blind the Divine order-
ings seem contrariwise. But that we may
not restrain by constraint of words a wise
enquirer, one that wishes to grow by true
persuasion as the seed by the rain-drops ;
know, O enquirer, that because Saul was a
persecutor, but our Lord was endeavouring
to make him persecuted instead of per-
secutor, therefore He of His wisdom made
haste to cry — Saul, why persecutest thou
Me? — in order that, when Saul who was being
made a disciple, heard Him Wlio was mak-


THREE HOMILIES.


321


ing- him a disciple, saying-, Why persecutest
thou Me P he might know that the Master
Whose servant he was becoming-, was a
persecuted Master, and so might quickly
cast away the persecution of his former
masters, and might clothe himself in the
persecuted state of his persecuted Master.
Now any master who wishes to teach a man
anything, teaches him either by deeds or
by words. But if he teach him neither by
words nor by deeds, the man cannot be in-
structed in his craft. So that, even though
our Lord did not teach Paul humility by
deeds, yet by voice He taught him endur-
ance of persecution which He could not
teach him by deed. For before our Lord
was crucified, He taught His disciples
humble endurance of persecution by deed.
But after He had finished His persecution
by crucifixion, as He said, Lo I all things
are finished.^ He could not vainly return
and begin again anything which once for
all had been wisely finished. Or why
again do ye seek for the crucifixion and
shame of the Son of God.?

36. For even though our Lord in His
grace had beforetime brought the majesty
of His Godhead into humility, yet afterwards
in Flis justice He willed not again to bring
back to humiliation the littleness of man-
hood which had been made great. But be-
cause it was necessary that the persecuting
disciple should learn endurance of persecu-
tion, while yet it was impossible that the
Master should again come down and be
persecuted afresh ; He taught him by voice
that which could not be taught by deeds.
Saul, why persecutest tlioii Me ? The ex-
planation of which utterance is this ; — " Saul,
why art thou not persecuted in Me } " But in
order that Saul might not suppose that it was
because of His weakness our Lord was perse-
cuted, the strength of the overpowering light
which shone upon him, convinced him. For
if the eyes of Saul could not endure the shin-
ing of that light, how could the hands of Saul
bind and fetter the disciples of the Lord of


' John xix. 30.
VOL. XIII. — 21


that light } But his hands had fettered the
disciples, that he might learn their power in
their bonds ; while his eyes could not en-
dure the beams, that by their strength he
migfht learn his own weakness. But had
not the power of that light shone upon him,
when the Lord said to him ; Saul, why perse-
cutest tJiou Me P Then because of the mad-
ness of the pride wherein Paul was set up at
that time, he would perhaps have said this
to Him, "I am persecuting Thee for this
reason, because Thou hast said, Why perse-
cutest thou Me P For who is there that would
not persecute Thee, when Thou, with such
strength, troublest Thy persecutor with
these feeble cries." But the humility of our
Lord was heard in the voice, and the power
of the light shone forth in the beams. So
Paul could not despise the humility of
the voice, because of the glory of the
light.

37. Thus were his ears brought into dis-
cipleship to the voice which he heard, be-
cause his eyes sufficed not to endure the
beams which they saw. That marvel of
the dawning of the light was shed forth
upon his eyeballs and did them hurt ; and
the voice of the Lord of the light entered
his ears, but did them no harm. But be-
tween the light and the Lord of the light,
which ought to have been the stronger.?
For if the light which was created by Him
was so overpowering, how much more over-
powering He by Whom this very light was
created ! But if the Lord of the light was
overpowering, as indeed He is overpower-
ing, how did His voice enter the hearing and
not harm it .? even as that lio-ht which hurt
the sight.? But hear the wonder and the
marvel which our Lord wrought by His
ofrace. For our Lord willed not to humble
that light which is His ; but He being Lord
of the light humbled Himself. But as the
Lord of the light is greater than the light
which is His, so great is the glory that the
Lord of the light should humble Himself
rather than humble the light.

38. As also in the night, while He was
praying, it is written ; — There appeared to


322


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


HiTn a7i angel strengthening Him. ^ But here
all mouths, celestial and terrestrial, are in-
sufficient to give thanks to Him by Whose
hand the angels were created ; that He was
strengthened for the sake of sinners by that
angel who was created by His hand. As then
the angel from above stood in glory and in
brightness, while the Lord of the angel,
that He might exalt man who was degraded,
stood in degradation and humility ; so also
here that light flashed forth in manifestation ;
but the Lord of the light, for the sake of
helping one persecutor, spoke with humble
voice and lowly words.

39. For this cause therefore that light
which was overpowering, because it was
not diminished, entered the eyeballs with
overpowering manifestation and injured
them. But the Lord of the light, because
He had lowered Himself in order to help, —
His lowly voice entered the ears that had
need and helped them. But in order that
the help of that voice which had become
lowly, might not fail Him, therefore the
strength of that light was not lowered, in
order that because of that light, which was
not lowered, the help of that voice which
was lowered, might be believed. But this
is a marvel, that until our Lord made Him-
self lowly in voice, Paul was not made
lowly in deed ; for even as, before He came
down and clothed Himself in a body, our
Lord was in exaltation with His Father ;
yet in His exaltation men did not learn
humility ; but when He humbled Himself
and came down from His exaltation, then
by His humbleness humility was soon
among men ; so again after His resurrection
and ascension He was in glory at the right
hand of God His Father, but by that His
exaltation, Paul did not learn humility.
Therefore He that was exalted and sat at
the right hand of His Father, ceased from
glorious and lofty speech, and He cried
as one wronged and oppressed, with
feeble and meek words, saying, — Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou Me P Thus, humble

' Luke xxii. 43.


words prevailed over harsh bridles. For
by humble words, as by bridles, the perse-
cuted led the persecutor from the broad way
of the persecutors into the narrow way of
the persecuted. And since all the signs that
were done in the Name of our Lord did not
convince Paul, our Lord made haste to meet
with humility him who was hastening on
the way to Damascus in the vehemence of
pride. Thus by His humble words, the
harsh vehemence of pride was checked.

40. He then Who used humble words with
Paul His persecutor. He also used humble
sayings with the Pharisee. For so great is
the power of humility that even God Who
overcomes all did not overcome without it.
Humility was able also in the wilderness to
bear the burden of the stiff-necked people.
For against the people who were more stub-
born than all men, was set Moses who was
more meek than all men. For God Who
needs not anything, when He had set free
the people, afterwards had need of the hu-
mility of Moses, that this humility might
endure the wrath and murmuring of the
People that provoked him. For humility
alone could endure the gainsayings of that
people, which the signs of Egypt and the
prodigies (wrought) in the desert could not
subdue. For when pride had wrought di-
visions amongst the people, humility by its
prayer used to close up their divisions. If
then the humility of the Stammerer endured
six hundred thousand, how much more ex-
ceedingly did the humility of Him, Who
gave speech to the Stammerer endure ? For
the humility of Moses is a shadow of the
humility of our Lord.

41. Our Lord then saw that Simon the
Pharisee did not believe the signs and won-
ders which he had seen. He came to him
to persuade him with humble v^^ords ; and
humble utterances overcame him, whom
mighty wonders had not overcome. What
then are the wonders which that Pharisee
had seen ? He had seen the dead raised to
life, the lepers cleansed, the blind with eyes
opened. These signs compelled that Pl^ari-
see to entertain our Lord as a prophet. But


THREE HOMILIES.


323


he who entertained Him as a prophet,
changed so as to despise Him for one who
had not knowledge, saying (namely); —
Had this man been a prophet, He would have
known that this woman — who had approached
Him — is a sinner. But we may despise the
Pharisee and say, Had he been a man of
discernment,^ he would have learned from
that sinful woman, who approached our
Lord, not that He was a prophet, but the
Lord of the Prophets. For the tears of the
sinful w^oman testified, that it was not a
prophet they were propitiating, but Him,
Who, as God, was wroth with her sins. For,
because the prophets sufficed not to raise
sinners to life, the Lord of the prophets came
down to heal those who were in evil case.
But what physician is there who hinders the
smitten, that they should not come to him,
O blind Pharisee, as it befel that she came
to our Physician ! For why did the smitten
woman approach Him, — she, whose wounds
were healed by her tears } He Who had
come down to be a fountain of healing
amongst the diseased, was proclaiming
this ; — Lei every one that is athirst, come and
drink."^ But when the Pharisees, this man's
companions, murmured at the healing of
sinners, the Physician taught concerning
His art, that the door is opened for the dis-
eased and not for the whole, for they that
are ivhole need not a physician hut they that
are sick.^ Therefore the praise of the phy-
sician is the healinof of the diseased ; — that
the shame of the Pharisee who reproved the
praise of our physician may be greater. But
our Lord used to show signs in the streets ;
and also when He entered into the house of
the Pharisee, He showed signs which were
greater than those He had shown outside.
For in the street He made whole the bodies
that were sick, but within He healed the
souls that were diseased. Outside, He
raised to life the mortality of Lazarus : but
within, He raised to life the mortality of the
sinful woman. He restored the living soul


1 Parusha ; the resemblance of the word to Pari-
sha (= Pharisee) is here played on.

2 John vii. 37. ^ Matt. ix. 12.


to the corpse from which it had gone out ;
And He expelled from the sinful woman the
deadly sin which dwelt within her. But the
blind (Pharisee) who w^as insufficient for
great things, because of the great things
which he saw not, belied those small things
which he had seen. For he was a son of
Israel who attributed weakness to his God,
and not to himself. For (Israel said),
Though He smote the rock and the waters
flowed, can He also give us bread P * But
when our Lord saw his weakness, that it
missed the great things and, because of
them, the small things also, He hasted to
put forward a simple word, as though for a
babe that was being reared on milk, and
was not capable of solid food.

42. For by that wdierein thou knewest, O
Pharisee, that our Lord was not a prophet,
by that very thing it was proved that thou
didst not know the prophets. For by this
that thou saidst ; — Had this inan been a pro-
pJiet, he would liave known, thou showest
herein that (in thy esteem) whoever is a
prophet knows all things. But lo ! some
matters were hidden from the prophets ;
how then dost thou attribute the revelation
of all hidden things to the prophets 1 But
this unwise teacher who perverted the scrip-
tures of the Prophets, did not even under-
stand what he read in the scriptures. For
it was not only that the greatness of the Lord
was not discerned by that Pharisee, but he
did not even discern the weakness of the
prophets. For our Lord, as knowing all
things, allowed that sinful woman to come
in and receive His peace. But Elisha, as
one ignorant, said to the Shunamite ; — Peace
to thee and peace be to the child.^ Accord-
ingly he who supposed that our Lord was
proved not to be a prophet, was himself
proved not to know the Prophets. When
the mind contains malice and cannot refrain,
then that malice which is in it, is cunning
in finding a pretext for opening a door ; but
in case that pretext, in which the deceiver
takes refuge is confuted, he knows that


•* Ps. Ixxviii, 20.


5 2 Kings iv. 26.


324


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


within this there is another concealed which
he may employ.

Now observe this son of Israel, how he was
like Israel in stubbornness. For heathenism
was bound up in the mind of the People ;
therefore Moses was taken away from them,
that the wickedness that was within them
might become manifest. But that they might
not be put to shame, and that it might not be
known how they were seeking idols, they
first sought for Moses, and then for idols.
As for this Moses, we know not what has he-
come of him. '^ And if God, Who cannot die,
brought thee out of Egypt, why dost thou
seek for a man, who at some time must die .?
Yet they did not desire Moses, that he
should become a god to them ; because
Moses could hear and see and reprove ; but
they sought for a god who could neither
hear nor see nor reprove. But whensoever
Moses shall have died, what shall remain of
him .? For behold, thy God is a living God,
and lo ! He has revealed Himself to thee by
living testimonies. For the bright cloud
was at that time overshadowing them, and
they had the pillar of light in the night-time.
Water flowed for them from the rock, and
they drank its streams. They were delighted
every day by tasting that manna, the fame
of which we have heard. How was IMoses
far from thee .? Behold the signs of Moses
surround thee. Or how does the person of
Moses profit thee, when thou hast such a
guide as this .^ If thy garments wear not
old, and a temperate air refreshes thee, if
the heat and the cold do not hurt thee, and
thou hast rest from war, and art far removed
from the fear of Egypt, — what thing then
was lacking to Israel that he sought for
Moses } Open heathenism was lacking to
him. For it was not for Moses that he
sought, but on the pretext of Moses' absence
he followed after the calf. Thus briefly
have we showed, that when the mind is full
of anything, but an opposing reason meets
it, then it forces it by violence to open for it
a door to that which it desires.

^ Ex. xxxii. I. •


43. Thou too, O Pharisee, athirst for blas-
phemy, what sawest thou in our Lord, to
show that He was not a prophet,? For lo !
the things that belong to the Lord of the
Prophets were seen in Him. For the gushing
tears made haste to proclaim that they were
shed as before God. The sorrowing kisses
testified that they sought to win over the
creditor to tear up the debt-bonds. The
goodly ointment of the sinful woman pro-
claimed that it was a bribe of penitence.
These medicines the sinful woman offered
to her Physician, that by her tears He might
wash away her stains, by her kisses He
might heal her wounds, by her sweet oint-
ment He might make her evil name sweet
as the odour of her ointment. This is the
Physician who heals men by the medicines
which they bring to Him. These marvels
were shown at that time ; but to the Pharisee
instead of these there appeared blasphemy.
For what could be established in the weep-
ing of the sinful woman, but that He can
justify sinners.? Else, judge thou in thy
mind, O blind teacher, why was that mourn-
ful weeping in the joyful feast, so that, while
they were making merry with food, she was
in bitterness with her tears .? Because she
was a sinner, her deeds were unchaste, and
these (deeds) she was wont to do. But if
at that time, from the wantonness of sinners
she was turned to chastity, then acknow-
ledge, thou who saidst He is not a prophet,
that He is One who makes those chaste
that have been wanton. For by this, that
thou knowest that she is a sinner, and by
this, that thou seest her now penitent, search
out where is the power that changed her.
For he ought to have fallen down and wor-
shipped Him Who, while silent, in His
silence turned to chastity those sinners
whom the Prophets by their vehement utter-
ances could not turn to chastity. A won-
derful and marvellous thing was seen in the
house of the Pharisee ; a sinful woman that
sat and wept, and she who wept said not
wherefore she wept ; nor did He at Whose
feet she sat say to her. Why weepest thou ?
The sinner did not need with her lips to


THREE HOMILIES.


325


petition our Lord, because she believed that
He knew, as God, the petitions that were
hidden in her tears. Nor did our Lord asl<:
her, What hast thou done? For He knew
that by her pure kisses she was atoning- for
her transgressions. So then she, because
she believed that He knew the things that
were hidden, offered to Him her prayers in
her heart ; for knowing secret things He had
no need of the outward lips. If then the
sinner, because she knew that our Lord was
God, sought not to persuade Him with her
lips ; and our Lord, because as God He
discerned her thoughts, therefore questioned
her not ; dost not thou, O tyrant Pharisee,
from the silence of both understand the posi-
tion of both ; that she was praying as to
God in her heart, and that He as God was
in silence searching out her thoughts.? But
the Pharisee could not see and understand
these things, because he was a son of Israel,
who though perceiving, saw not, and though
he heard, understood not. Though then
our Lord knew that that Pharisee thought
evil thoughts concerning Him, He confuted
him gently and not harshly. For sweetness
came down from on high to break down the
bitterness with which the Evil One had
stamped us. Therefore our Lord taught
that Pharisee of Himself and in Himself, as
though saying, Even as I, though I knew
the evil things in thy heart, yet gently
persuaded thee, so though I knew the evil
things of this woman, I mercifully received
her.

But let us hear how long-suffering was
drawn after the hasty thought, so as to
draw it from haste to understanding. A
certain creditor had two debtors. One oived
five hundred dinars, and the other fifty
dinars. — (Be not wearied, O hearer, at the
length of the repetition of the parable, lest
thou be contrary to Him Who in the parable
was long-suffering for the sake of giving
help. ) — At lengthy when neither of them had
wJierewithal to pay, he forgave them both.
WJiich of them dost thou think would love
him more .^ Simon said to Hi?n, I suppose
that he, to wJiotn more zvas forgiven. Our


Lord said to him, Thou hast rightly judged.
Our Lord in His justice commended the
perverse (Pharisee), because of the right
judgment, which he had judged, though he
in his wickedness had answered the good
Lord concerning the mercy He had wrought.
Now many things are laid up in this parable ;
for it is a treasury full of many helps. Why
then did our Lord require that the Pharisee
should pass judgment for Him between the
two debtors } Was it not that the greatness,
coming after the littleness, might show it-
self that nothing of the littleness was drawn
after the greatness.? For our Lord, since
He knew the secret things, was long-suffer-
ing and questioned Simon, that those might
be put to shame who, though not knowing,
were hasty to blame, but not to enquire.
For if, O man, before I heard thy judgment
passed, I judged not of it, why didst thou,
before thou heardest from Me, the case of
the sinful woman, hastily blame .? Now
this was done for our instruction, that we
might be swift to enquire, but slow to pass
our sentence. For had that Pharisee been
long-suffering, lo ! that pardon which our
Lord in the end gave to tlie sinful woman,
would have taught him everything. Long-
suffering is wont to acquire all things for
those that acquire it.

44. But again ; through the forgiveness of
the two debtors, our Lord led into forgive-
ness him who was in need of forgiveness,
yet in whose e)^es the forgiveness of debts
was hateful For though the debts of the
Pharisee himself needed forgiveness, yet
the forgiveness of the debts of the sinful
woman was hateful in his eyes. For had
there been this forgiveness of debts in the
mind of the Pharisee, it would not have
been in his eyes disgraceful that that sinful
woman should have come for forgiveness
of her debts to God and not to the priests ;
for the priests could not forgive sins such as
those. But this sinful woman from the
glorious works which our Lord did, believed
that He could also forgive sins. For she
knew that whoso is able to restore the
members of the body, is able also to cleanse


326


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


away the spots of the soul. But the Phari-
see, thoug-h he was a teacher, did not know
this. For the teachers of Israel were wont
to be fools, put to shame by the despised
and vile. For they were put to shame by
that blind man to whom they said; — We
know that this man is a sinner. ^ But he
said to them : — How did He open Tny eyes ?
lo ! God hears 7iot sinners} These are the
blind teachers who were made guides to
others ; and their perverse path was made
straight by a blind man.

45. But hear ye the marvel that our Lord
wrought. Because that Pharisee supposed
that our Lord did not know that the woman
who touched Him was a sinner ; our Lord
made the lips of the Pharisee like the strings
of a harp ; and by his very lips He sang
how she was trampling under foot his sins,
though he knew it not. And he who as
though he knew had blamed, was found to
be a harp, whereto another could sing of
that which he knew. For our Lord com-
pared the sins of the sinful v/oman to five
hundred dinars, and caused them to pass
into the hearing of the Pharisee by the par-
able which he heard ; and again brought
them forth from his mouth in the judgment
he gave ; though Simon knew not, when he
was judging, that those five hundred dinars
denoted the sins of the sinful woman. And
(the Pharisee) who thought concerning our
Lord that He had not knowledge of her
sins, was himself found not to have know-
ledge of them, when he heard of those
debts in the parable, and gave judgment
concerning them with his voice. But when
it was explained to him at last by ouf Lord,
then the Pharisee knew that alike his ears
and also his lips were, as it were, instru-
ments for our Lord, through which He might
sing the glories of His knowledge.

For this Pharisee was the fellow of those
scribes, whose sentence by their own
mouths our Lord gave against them ; — What
then will the Lord of the vineyard do to those
husbandmen?'^ They say unto Him, against


1 John ix. 24-31.


2 Matt. xxi. 40-44.


themselves : — He ivill terribly destroy tJiefn,
and will hire out the vineyard to husband-
men who will reiider unto Him the fruit in
its season. This is the Godhead to which
all things are easy, which by the mouths,
the very mouths that blasphemed it, pro-
nounced the sentence of those very mouths
against them.

46. Glory then be to Him the Livisible,
who clothed Himself in invisibility, that
sinners might be able to draw near to Him.
For our Lord did not repel the sinful woman
as the Pharisee expected ; inasmuch as He
descended from the height which no man
can reach unto, altogether in order that
lowly publicans, like Zaccheus, might reach
unto Him. And the Nature which none can
handle, clothed Itself in a body, altogether
in order that all lips ^ might kiss His feet as
the sinful woman did. For the sacred soul
was hidden within the veil of flesh, and so
touched all unclean lips and sanctified them.
Thus He Whom His appetite was supposed
to invite to feasting, His feet invited to tears ;
He was the good Physician, who came forth
to go to the sinful woman who was seeking
Him in her soul. She then anointed the
feet of our Lord, w^ho (anointed) not His
head, — she who was trodden down in the
dust by all. For those Pharisees who justi-
fied themselves and despised all (else), trod
her down. But He the Merciful, Whose
pure body sanctified her uncleanness, had
pity on her.

47. But Mary anointed the head of our
Lord's body," as a token of the better part
which she had chosen. And Christ prophe-
sied concerning that which her soul had
chosen. While Martha was cumbered with
serving, Mary was hungering to be satisfied
with spiritual things by Him W^ho also sat-
isfies us with bodily things. So Mary re-
freshed Him with precious ointment, as He
had refreshed her with His exalted teaching.
Mary by the oil showed forth the mystery
of His mortality. Who by His teaching
mortified the concupiscence of her flesh.


^ Is. vi. 7.


4 Matt. xxvi. 7.


THREE HOMILIES.


327


Thus the sinful woman by the flood of her
tears, in full assurance was rewarded with
remission of sins from beside His feet; and
she who had the issue of blood, stole heal-
ing from the hem of His garment. But
Mary receiv^ed blessing openly from His
mouth, as a reward of the service of her
hands upon His head. For she poured out
on His head the precious ointment, and re-
ceived from His mouth a wonderful pro-
mise. This is the ointment which was sown
above and yielded fruit below. For she
sowed it on His head and gathered its fruit
from between His lips ; — She shall have a
name and I his memorial in every place where
My Gospel shall be preached. ' Accordingly,
what she then received of Him, He is able
to cause to pass unto all generations : and
in no generation can any hinder it. For
the ointment which she poured upon His
head, gave its odour in presence of all the
guests and refreshed Him ; so also the
goodly name which He gave her, passes
down through all generations and brings
honour to her. Even as all who were at
the feast were sensible of her ointment ; it
was meet that all who come into the world
should be sensible of her triumph. This is
a loan whereof the increase is exacted in
all generations.

48. Now Simeon the priest, when he took
Him up in his arms to present Him before
God,^ understood as he saw [Him] that He
was not presenting Him, but was being
himself presented. For the Son was not
presented by the servant to His Father, but
the servant was presented by the Son to his
Lord. For it is not possible that He, by
Whom every offering is presented, should
be presented by another. For the offering
does not present him that offers it ; but by
them that offer are offerings presented. So
then He Who receives offerings gave Him-
self to be offered by another, that those who
presented Him, while offering Him, might
themselves be presented by Him. For as
He gave His body to be eaten, that when


1 Matt. xxvi. n.


2 Luke ii. 28.


eaten It might quicken to life them that ate
Him ; so He gave Himself to be offered,
that by His Cross the hands of them that
offered Him might be sanctified. So, then,
though the arms of Simeon seemed to be
presenting the Son, yet the words of Simeon
testified that he was presented by the Son.
Therefore we can have no dispute concern-
ing this, because that which was said put
an end to dispute ; — Now lellest Thou Thy
servant depart in peace^ He then who is let
depart to go in peace to God, is presented
as an offering to God. And in order to
make known by whom he was presented,
he said, — For lo I mine eyes have seen Thy
mercy.'' If there was no grace wrought
on him, w4iy then did he give thanks }
But rightly did he give thanks, that he
was thought worthy to receive in his
arms Him, Whom angels and prophets
greatly desired to see. For lo ! mine eyes
have seen Thy mercy. Let us understand
then and see. Is mercy that which shows
mercy to another, or is it that which receives
mercy from another.? But if mercy is that
which shows mercy to all, well did Simeon
call our Lord by the name of the mercy that
sh6wed mercy to him, — Him Who freed him
from the world which is full of snares, that
he might go to Eden which is full of plea-
sures ; for he who was priest said and testi-
fied-that he was offered as an offering, that
from the midst of the perishing world he
should go and be stored up in the treasure-
house which is kept safe. For one for whom
it may be that what he has found should be
lost, to him it belongs to be diligent that it
should be kept safe. But for our Lord it
could not be that He should be lost ; but by
Him the lost were found. So then, through
the Son Who could not be lost, the servant
who was very desirous not to be lost, was
presented. Lo I mine eyes have seen Thy
mercy. It is evident Simeon received grace
from that Child Wliom he was carrying.
For inwardly he received grace from that
Infant, Whom openly he received in his


3 Luke ii. .29-


4 Luke ii. 30.


328


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


arms. For through Him Who was glorious,
even when He was carried, being small and
feeble, he that carried Him was made great.

49. But inasmuch as Simeon endured to
carry on his weak arms that Majesty which
the creatures could not endure, it is evident
that his weakness was made strong by the
strength which he carried. For at that time
Simeon also along with all creatures was
secretly upheld by the almighty strength of
the Son. Now this is a marvel, that out-
wardly it was he that was strengthened that
carried Him Who strengthened him ; but
inwardly it was the strength that bore its
bearer. For the Majesty straitened itself,
that they who carried it might endure it ; in
order that as far as that Majesty stooped to
our littleness, so far should our love be
raised up from all desires to reach that
Majesty.

50. So likewise the ship that carried our
Lord ; it was He that bare it, in that He
stayed from it the wind that would have
sunk it. Peace, for thou art shut up. While
He was on the sea. His arm reached even
to the fountain of the wind,' to shut it up.
The ship bare His manhood, but the power
of His Godhead bare the ship and all that
was therein. But that He might show that
even His manhood needed not the ship, in-
stead of the planks which a shipwright puts
together and fastens. He like the Architect
of creation, made the waters solid and joined
them together and laid them under His feet.
So the Lord strengthened the hands of
Simeon the Priest, that his arms might bear
up in the Temple the strength that was bear-
ing up all ; as He strengthened the feet of
Simeon the Apostle, that they might bear
themselves up on the water. And so that
name which bore the first-begotten in the
Temple was afterwards borne up by the first-
begotten in the sea ; that He might show that
as in the sea the drowning was borne up by
Him, He did not need to be borne by Simeon
on the dry ground. But our Lord bare
Simeon up openly in the midst of the sea to

^ Mark iv. 39.


teach that also on the dry land He sup-
ported him secretly.

51. Accordingly, the Son came to the
servant ; not that the Son might be pre-
sented by the servant, but that by the Son
the servant might present to His Lord
Priesthood and Prophecy, to be laid up with
Him. For prophecy and priesthood, which
were given through Moses, were handed
down, both of them, and reached to Simeon.
For he was a pure vessel, who sanctified
himself that he might be like Moses, capable
for both of them. There are small vessels
which are capable for great gifts. There
are gifts for which one is capable, by reason
of their grace ; yet many are not capable
for them, by reason of their greatness.
Thus, then, Simeon presented our Lord, and
in Him offered both these things ; so that
that which was given to Moses in the wilder-
ness, was received from Simeon in the
Temple. But seeing that our Lord is the
vessel wherein all fulness dwells, when
Simeon was offering Him before God, he
poured over Him (as a drink-offering) those
two (gifts), priesthood from His hands and
prophecy from His lips. Priesthood con-
tinued on the hands of Simeon, because of
his purifications ; and prophecy dwelt in
operation upon his lips, because of revela-
tions. When then these two powers saw
Him who was Lord of both, they two united
together and poured themselves into the
vessel that was capable of both ; that could
contain priesthood and kingdom and pro-
phecy. That Infant then, who was wrapped
in swaddling clothes, because of His gra-
ciousness, clothed Himself in priesthood
and prophecy because of His Majesty. For
Simeon clothed Him in these, and gave Him
to her who had wrapped Him in swaddling
clothes. For when he gave Him to His
mother, he gave along with Him the priest-
hood ; and when he prophesied to her con-
cerning Him, This (child) is set for /he fall
and rising again,'^ he gave prophecy also
with Him.

2 Luke ii. 34.


THREE HOMILIES.


329


52. Then Mary received her firstborn and
went forth. He was outwardly wrapped in
swaddling- clothes, but secretly He was
clothed with prophecy and priesthood.
Whatsoever then was handed down from
Moses, was received from Simeon, but con-
tinued and was possessed by the Lord of
both. So then the steward first, and the
treasurer lastly, handed over the keys of
priesthood and prophecy to Him who has
authority over the treasurer of them both.
Therefore, His Father gave Him the spirit
not by measure,^ because all measures of the
spirit are under his hand. And that our
Lord might show that He received the keys
from the former stewards, He said to
Simeon : To Ihee I will give Ihe keys of the
doors^ But how should He have given
them to another, had He not received them
from another } So, then, the keys which
He had received from Simeon the priest,
them He gave to another Simeon the
Apostle ; that even though the People had
not hearkened to the former Simeon, the
Gentiles might hearken to the latter Simeon.

53. But because John also was the trea-
surer of baptism, the Lord of the stewardship
came to him to receive from him the keys
of the house of reconciliation. For John
used to wash away in common water the
blemishes of sins ; that bodies might become
meet for the garment of the Spirit, given
by our Lord. Therefore, because the Spirit
was with the Son, He came to John to re-
ceive from him baptism, that Fie might
mingle with the visible waters the invisible
Spirit ; that they whose bodies should feel
the moistening of the water, their souls
should feel the gift of the Spirit ; that even
as the bodies outwardly feel the pouring of
the water upon them, so the souls inwardly
may feel the pouring of the Spirit upon
them. Accordingly, even as our Lord when
He was baptised, was clothed in baptism
and carried baptism with Him, so also when
He was presented in the Temple, Fie put on
prophecy and priesthood, and went forth


^ John iii. 34.


2 Matt. xvi. 19.


bearing the purity of the priesthood upon
Flis pure members, and bearing the words
of prophecy in His wondrous ears. For
when Simeon was sanctifying the body of
the Child who sanctifies all, that body re-
ceived the priesthood in its sanctification.
And again, when Simeon was prophesying
over Him, prophecy quickly entered the
hearing of the Child. For if John leaped in
the womb and perceived the voice of the
Mother of our Lord,** how much more should
our Lord have heard in the Temple } For
lo ! it was because of Him that John knew
(so as) to hear in the womb.

54. Accordingly, each one of the gifts that
was stored up for the Son, He gathered
fro.m their true tree. For He received bap-
tism from the Jordan, even though John
still after Him used to baptise. And He
received priesthood from the Temple, even
though Annas the High Priest exercised it.
And again. He received prophecy which had
been handed down amongst the righteous,
even though by it Caiaphas in mockery
platted a crown for our Lord, and He re-
ceived the kingdom from the house of David,
even though Herod held the place and exer-
cised it.

55. This is He Who flew and came down
from on high ; and when all those gifts
which He had given to those of old time
saw Him, they came flying from every
quarter and rested on Him their Giver. For
they gathered themselves together from
every side, to come and be grafted into
their natural tree. For they had been grafted
into bitter trees, namely into wicked kings
and priests. Therefore they hastened to
come to their sweet parent-stock ; namely
to the Godhead Who in sufficiency came
down to the people of Israel, that the parts
of Him might be gathered to Him. And
when He received of them that which was
His own, that which was not His own was
rejected ; since for the sake of His own He
had borne also with that which was not His
own. For He bore with the idolatry of

3 Luke i. 41.


330


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


Israel, for the sake of His priesthood ; and
He bore with its diviners, for the sake of
His prophets ; and He bore with its wicked
dominion, for the sake of His holy crown.

56. But when our Lord took to Himself
Priesthood from them. He sanctified by it
all the Gentiles. And again, when He took
to Himself prophecy. He revealed by it His
counsels to all nations. And when he wove
His crown, He bound the strong One who
takes all men captive, and divides his spoils.
These gifts were barren, with the fig-tree,
which while it w^as barren of fruit made
barren such glorious powers as these. There-
fore as being without fruit, it was cut off,
that these gifts might pass forth from it and
bring forth fruit abundantly among all the
Gentiles.

57. So He, Who came to make our bodies
abodes for His indwelling, passed by all
those dwelling-places. Let each one of us
then be a dwellmg-placefor Him Who loves
me. Let us come to Him and make our
abode with Him. This is the Godhead
Whom though all creation cannot contain,
yet a lowly and humble soul suffices to re-
ceive Him.

ON ADMONITION AND REPENTANCE.

1. Not of compulsion is the doctrine ; of
free-will is the word of life. Wlioso is will-
ing to hear the doctrine, let him cleanse the
field of his will, that the good seed fall not
among the thorns of vain enquirings. If
thou w^ouldst heed the word of life, cut thy-
self off from evil things ; the hearing of the
word profits nothing to the man that is
busied with sins. If thou wiliest to be good,
love not dissolute customs. First of all,
trust in God, and then hearken thou to His
law.

2. Thou canst not hear His words, while
thou dost not know thyself; and if thou
keepest His judgments while thy under-
standing is aloof from Him, who will give
thee thy reward .? Who will keep for thee
thy recompense.? Thou wast baptised in
His Name ; confess His Name ! In the


Persons and in the naming, Father and Son
and Holy Spirit, three Names and Persons,
these three shall be a wall to thee, against
divisions and wrano^linsrs. Doubt not thou
of the truth, lest thou perish through the
truth. Thou wast baptised from the
vC''ater ; thou hast put on Christ in His nam-
ing ; the seat of the Lord is on thy person
and His stamp on thy forehead. See that
thou become not another's, for other Lord
hast thou none. One is He Who formed us
in His mercy ; one is He Who redeemed us
on His cross. He it is Who guides our life ;
He it is Who has power over our feebleness ;
He it is Who brings to pass our Resurrec-
tion. He rewards us according to our
works. Blessed is he that confesses Him,
and hears and keeps His commandments !
Thou, O man, art a son of God Who is high
over all. See that thou vex not by thy
w^orks the Father Who is good and gracious.

3. If thou art wroth against thy neigh-
bour, thou art wroth against God ; and if
thou bearest anger in thy heart, against thy
Lord is thy boldness uplifted. If in envy
thou rebukest, wicked is all thy reproof.
But if charity dwell in thee, thou hast on
earth no enemy. And if thou art a true son
of peace, thou wilt stir up wrath in no man.
If thou art just and upright, thou wilt not
do wrong to thy fellow. And if thou lovest
to be angry, be angry with the wicked and
it will become thee; if to wage war thou
seekest, lo ! Satan is thy adversary ; if thou
desirest to revile, against the demons dis-
play thy curses. If thou shouldst insult the
King's image, thou shalt pay the penalty of
murder ; and if thou revilest a man, thou
revilest the image of God. Do honour to
thy neighbour, and lo ! thou hast honoured
God. But if thou wouldst dishonour Him,
in wrath assail thy neighbour !

4. This is the first Commandment, — Thou
shall love Ihe Lord thy God with all thy heart
and thy soul, and with thy might according
as thou art able. The sign that thou lovest
God, is this, that thou lovest thy fellow ;
and if thou hatest thy fellow, thy hatred is
towards God. For it is blasphemy if thou


THREE HOMILIES.


331


prayest before God while thou art wroth.
For thy heart also convicts thee, that in vain
thou multipliest words : thy conscience
rightly judges that in thy prayers thou pro-
fitest nought. Christ as He hung on the
height of the tree, interceded for His mur-
derers ; and thou (who art) dust, son of the
clay, rage fills thee at its will. Thou keep-
est anger against thy brother ; and dost
thou yet dare to pray ? Even he that stands
on thy side, though he be not neighbour to
thy sins, the taint of iniquity reaches unto
him, and his petition is not heard. Leave
off rage and then pray ; and unless thou
wouldst further provoke, restrain anger and
so shalt thou supplicate. And if he (the
other) is not to encounter thee in fury, ban-
ish rage from that body, because it is holden
with lusts.

5. Thou hast a spiritual nature ; the soul
is the image of the Creator ; honour the im-
age of God, by being in agreement with all
men. Remember death, and be not angry,
that thy peace be not of constraint. As
long as thy life remains to thee, cleanse thy
soul from wrath ; for if it should go to Sheol
with thee, thy road will be straight to Ge-
henna. Keep not anger in thy heart ; hold
not fury in thy soul ; thou hast not power
over thy soul, save to do that which is good.
Thou art bought with the blood of God; ^ thou
art redeemed by the passion of Christ ; for
thy sake He suffered death, that thou might-
est die to thy sins. His face endured spit-
ting, that thou mightest not shrink from
scorn. Vinegar and gall did He drink, that
thou mightest be set apart from wrath. He
received stripes on His body, that thou
mightest not fear suffering. If thou art in
truth His servant, fear thy holy Lord ; if thou
art His true disciple, walk in thy Master's
footsteps. Endure scorn from thy brother,
that thou mayest be the companion of Christ.
Display not anger against man, that thou be
not set apart from thy Redeemer.

6. Thou art a man, the dust of the earth,
clay, kinsman of the clod ; thou art the

^ Acts XX. 28.


son of the race of beasts. If thou knowest
not thy honour ; separate thy soul from ani-
mals, by works and not by words. If thou
lovest derision, thou art altogether as Satan ;
and if thou mockest at thy fellow, thou art
the mouth of the Devil ; if against defects
and flaws, in (injurious) names thou de-
lightest, Satan is not in creation but his
place thou hast seized by force. Get thee
far, O man, from this ; for it is altogether
hurtful ; and if thou desirest to live well, sit
not with the scorner, lest thou become the
partner of his sin and of his punishment.
Hate mockery which is altogether (the
cause of weeping), and mirth which is (the
cause of) cleansing. And if thou shouldst
hear. a mocker by chance, when thou art not
desiring it, sign thyself with the cross of
light, and hasten from thence like an ante-
lope. Where Satan lodges, Christ will in no-
wise dwell ; a spacious dwelling for Satan is
the man that mocks at his neighbour ; a pal-
ace of the Enemy is the heart of the mocker.
Satan does not desire to add any other evil
to it. Mockery is sufficient for him to sup-
ply the place of all. Neither his belly nor
yet his purse can (the sinner) fill with that
sin of his. By his laughter is the wretch
despoiled, and he knows not nor does he
perceive it. For his wound, there is no cure ;
for his sickness, there is no healing ; his
pain, admits no remedy ; and his sore, en-
dures no medicine. I desire not with such
a one to put forth my tongue to reprove
him: enough for him is his own shame;
sufficient for him is his boldness. Blessed
is he that has not heard him ; and blessed
is he that has not known him. Be it far
from thee, O Church, that he should enter
thee, that evil leaven of Satan !

7. Narrow is the way of life, and broad the
way of torment ; prayer is able to bring a
man to the house of the kingdom. This is
the perfect work ; prayer that is pure from
iniquity. The righteousness of man is as
nothing accounted. The work of men,
what is it ? His labour is altogether vanity. ^

2 Eccles. i. 3,


332


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


Of Thee, O Lord, of Thy grace it is that in
our nature we should become good. Of
Thee is righteousness, that we from men
should become righteous. Of Thee is the
mercy and favour, that w^e from the dust
should become Thy image. Give power to
our will, that we be not sunk in sin ! Pour
into our heart memory, that at every hour
we may know Thy honour ! Plant Thou
truth in our minds, that we perish not
among doubts ! Occupy our understanding
with Thy law, that it wander not in vain
thoughts ! Order the motions of our mem-
bers, that they bring no hurt upon us !
Draw thou near to God, that Satan may flee
from thee. Cast out passions from thy
heart, and lo ! thou hast put to flight the
enemy. Hate thou sins and wickedness,
and Satan at once will have fled. Whatsoever
sins thou servest, thou art worshipping secret
idols. Whatsoever transgressions thou
lovest, thou art serving demons in thy soul.
Whensoever thou strivest with thy brother,
Satan abides in peace. Whensoever thou
enviest thy fellow, thou givest rest to Devils.
Whensoever thou tellest the shortcoming of
others who are not present, thy tongue has
made a harp for the music of the devil.
WTiensoever hatred is in thy soul, great is
the peace of the Deceiver. Whensoever
thou lovest incantations, thy labour is alto-
gether of the left hand. ^ If thou lovest un-
seemly discourse, thou preparest a feast for
demons. For this is the worship of idols,
the working of the lusts (of the flesh).

8. If so be thou givest a gift in pride, this
is not of God. If thou art lifted up by
reason of thy knowledge, thou hast denied
the grace of God. If thou art poor and
proud, lo ! thy end is in thy torment. If
thou art haughty and needy, lo ! thy need
is toward thy destruction. If thou art sick
and criest out, lo ! thy trouble is full of
harm. If thou art in need of food, yet thy
mind longs for riches ; thy distress is with
the poor, but thy torment with the rich. If
thou shalt look unchastely, and shalt desire

' I.e., such as fits for a place on Christ's left hand,
at the Judgment.


thy neighbour's wife, lo ! thy portion shall be
with the adulterers, and thy hell with the
fornicators. Let thine own fountain he for
thyself, and drink waters froTn thy well. Let
thy fou7itains he for thyself alone, and let
7iot another drink with thee."^ Require purity
of thy body as thou requirest of thy yoke-
fellow. Thou wouldst not have her commit
lewdness, the wife of thy youth, with an-
other man ; commit not thou lewdness with
another woman, the wife of a different hus-
band. Let the defilement of her be hateful
in thine eyes ; keep aloof from it altogether.
Chastity beseems the wife ; purity is as her
adornment ; law becomes the husband ;
justice is the crowni for his head. Desire
not thou the bed of thy neighbour lest an-
other desire thy bed. Preserve purity in thy
marriage, that thy marriage may be holy.
His conscience reproves the man, who cor-
rupts the wife of his neighbour. He fears,
and deceives through terror, whoso has en-
gaged in fornication. Darkness is dearer to
him than light, whose manner of life is not
pure. Every hour he stands in dread, who
commits adultery secretly. The adulterer
is also a thief who breaks into houses in
darkness. The very place reproves him,
where he does the evil and wickedness. He
enters the chamber and sins ; in the dark-
ness he does his will. The time will come
when it shall be disclosed, when his secret
deeds shall be manifested. With what eyes
dost thou look towards God in prayer }
What hands dost thou raise when thou
askest pardon .? Be ashamed and dismayed
for thyself, that thou art void of understand-
ing. If when thy neighbour see thee, thou
art ashamed and dismayed, how much more
shouldst thou be ashamed before God Who
sees all.? Thou art like the sow,^ thy com-
panion, that w^allows altogether in mire.
Even in seeing, thou mayest sin, if thy mind
is not watchful ; and in hearing thou mayest
transgress, if thou dost not guard thy hear-
ing. The fornicator's heart waxes wanton
through speech that is full of un cleanness.


2 Prov. V. 15-17.


3 2 Pet. ii. 22.


THREE HOMILIES.


333


The passion hidden in the mind, sight and
hearing awaken it.

9. He puts on garments of shame who de-
sires to commit fornication, that from the
kist of raiment, lewdness may enter and
dwell in his heart. Make thou not snares
of thy garments for that which is openly
wanton. Speak not a word in craftiness,
nor dig thy neighbour's well. Look not after
the harlot ; be not snared by the beauty of
her face. She is even as the dog that is
mad, yea, much more bold than it.
Modesty is removed from her face, she
knows not what shame is. With spitting
accept her person ; with reviling meet her-
self ; with a rod pursue her like a dog, for
she is like one, and to be compared with
such. Reject the sweetness of her words,
lest thou fall into her net. She empties
purses and wallets, and her gains are with-
out number. Flee from her, for she is the
daughter of vipers, that she tear not in
pieces thy whole body.

10. Thou shalt not slander any man, lest
they call thee Satan. If thou hatest the
name, go not near to the act; but if thou
lovest the act, be not angry at the name.
Count thyself rebuked first of all by the
beasts and birds, how that every kind cleaves
to its kind ; and so agree thou with thy
yokefellow. Rejoice not in men's dis-
honour, that thou become not a Satan thy-
self. If evil should happen to him that hates
thee, see thou rejoice not, lest thou sin. If
thine adversary should fall, be thou in pain
and mourning. Keep thy heart with all dili-
gence,-^ that it sin not in secret ; for there is
to be a laying bare of thoughts and of actions.
Employ thy hands in labour, and let thy
heart meditate in prayer. Love not vain
discourse, for discourse that shall be profit-
able alike to the soul and the body lightens
the burden of thy labour.

11. Does the poor man cry at thy door.?
Arise and open for him gladly : refresh him
when he is wearied ; sustain his heart, for
it is sad. Thou knowest by experience the

^ Prov. iv. 23.


affliction of poverty : receive not others in
thy house, and drive not out the beggar.
Have thou also a law, a comely law for thy
household. Establish an order that is wise,
that the abjects laugh not at thee. Be care-
ful in all thy doings, that thou be not a sport
for fools ; be upright and prudent, and both
simple and wise.^ Let thy body be quiet
and cheerful, thy greeting seemly and
simple ; thy discourse without fault, thy
speech brief and savoury ; thy words few
and sound, full of savour and understand-
ing. Speak not overmuch, not even words
that are wise ; ^ for all things that are over-
many, though they be wise are wearisome.
— To them of thy household be as a father.
Amongst thy brethren esteem thyself least,
and inferior amongst thy fellows, and of little
account with all men. With thy friend keep
a secret ; to those that love thee be true.
See that there be no wrangling ; the secrets
of thy friends reveal not, lest all that hear
thee hate thee and esteem thee a mischief-
maker. With those that hate thee wrangle
not, neither face to face nor yet in thy
heart. No enemy shalt thou have but Satan
his very self. Give counsel to the wife thou
hast wedded ; give heed to her doings ; as
stronger thou art answerable that thou
shouldst sustain her weakness. For weak
is womankind, and very ready to fall. Be
thou as a hawk, when kindled (to anger),
but when wrath departs from thee, be glad-
some and also firm, in the blending of di-
verse qualities. Keep silence among the
aged; to the elders give due honour. Hon-
our the priests with diligence, as good
stewards of the household. Give due hon-
our to their degree, and search not out their
doings. In his degree the priest is an angel,
but in his doings a man. By mercy he is
made a mediator, between God and man-
kind.

12. Search not out the faults of men ; re-
veal not the sin of thy fellow ; the short-
comings of thy neighbours, in speech of the
mouth repeat not. Thou art not judge in

2 Matt. X. 16.


334


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


creation, thou hast not dominion over the
earth. If thou lovest righteousness, reprove
thy soul and thyself. Be thou judge unto
thine own sins, and chastener of thy own
transgressions. Make thou not inquiry mali-
ciously, into the misdeeds of men. For if
thou doest this, injuries will not be lacking
to thee. Trust not the hearing of the ear,
for many are the deceivers. Vain reports
believe thou not, for false rumours are not
few.

13. Regard not spells and divinations, for
that is communion with Satan. Love not
idle prating, not even in behalf of righteous-
ness. Discourse concerning thyself begin
thou not, even in behalf of what is becom-
ing. Flee and hide thyself from wrangling,
as from a violent robber. See that thou be not
a surety in a loan, lest thou sin. According
as thou hast, assist him, (even) the man
that is poorer than thou. Mock not the
foolish man ; pray that thou be not even as
he. Him that sins blame not, lest thou also
be put to confusion. To him that repents
of his sins be a helper and counsellor, and
encourage him that is able to rise. Let him
hold fast hope in God, and his sin shall be
burned as stubble. Visit the sick and be
not wearied, that thou mayest be beloved
of men. Be familiar wuth the house of
mourning, but a stranger to the house of
feasting. Be not constant in drinking wine,
lest thy shortcomings multiply. Cast a wall
round thy lips, and set a guard upon thy
mouth ; endure suffering wuth thy neighbour
and share also in his tribulation. A good
friend in tribulation is made known to him
that loves him. In charity follow the
deceased, with sorrow and wnth offerings,
and pray that he may have rest in the hid-
den place whither he is going.

14. When thou standest in prayer, cry in
thy soul : Have mercy on me, I am a sin-
ner and weak ; be gracious, O God, to my
weakness, and grant strength to me to pray
a prayer that shall be pleasing to Thy Will.
"Punish Thou not mine enemies, take not
vengeance on them that hate me ; but grant
them in Thy grace that they may become


doers of Thy Will." At the time of prayer
and petition, in contemplations such as
these continue thou. Bow thy head before
the Mighty One.

15. Do not thou resist evil, for he is evil
from the Evil One, whoso resists evil, ^ Keep
not back aught from any man, that if he
perishes thou mayest not be blamed.
Change not thy respect for a man's person,
according to goods and possessions. Make
all things as though they w^ere not and God
aloi^ie were in being. If thou shalt ask of
thy neighbour and he shall not give thee
according to thy w^ish, see that thou say not
in anger a word that is full of bitterness.
Oppose not thou [fit] seasons, for many are
the changes. Put sorrow far from thy flesh, '•^
and sadness from thy thoughts; save only
that for thy sins thou shouldst be constant
in sadness. Cease not from labour, not even
though thou be rich, for the slothful man
gains manifold guilt by his idleness.

16. Be thou a lover of poverty, and be
desirous of neediness. If thou hast them
both for thy portion, thou art an ii^heritor
on high. Despise not the voice of the poor
and give him not cause to curse thee. For
if he curse whose palate is bitter, the Lord
will hear his petition. If his garments are
foul, wash them in water, which freely is
bought. Has a poor man entered into thy
house.? God has entered into thy house;
God dwells within thy abode. He, whom
thou hast refreshed from his troubles, from
troubles will deliver thee. Hast thou washed
the feet of the stranger ? Thou hast washed
away the filth of thy sins. Hast thou pre-
pared a table before him .? Behold God eat-
ing [at it], and Christ likewise drinking [at
it], and the Holy Spirit resting [on it]. Is
the poor satisfied at thy table and refreshed ?
Thou hast satisfied Christ thy Lord. He is
ready to be thy rewarder ; in presence of
angels and men He will confess thou hast
fed His hunger; He will give thanks unto
thee that thou didst give Him drink, and
quench His thirst.


1 Matt. V. 39.


2 Eccles. xi. 10.


THREE HOMILIES.


335


17. O how gracious is the Lord ! O how
measureless are His mercies ! Happy the
race of mortals when God confesses it !
Woe to the soul which He denies ! Fire is
stored up for its punishment. Be of good
cheer, my son, in hope ; sow good [seed] '
and faint not. The husbandman sows in
hope, and the merchant journeys in hope,
thou also lovest good [seed] ; in the hope
look for the reward. Do not thou aught
at all without the beginning of prayer.
With the sign of the living cross, seal all
thy doings, my son. Go not forth from the
door of thy house till thou hast signed the
cross. Whether in eating or in drinking,
whether in sleeping or in waking, whether
in thy house or on the road, or again in the
season of leisure, neglect not this sign ; for
there is no guardian like it. It shall be unto
thee as a wall, in the forefront of all thy do-
ings. And teach this to thy children, that
heedfully they be conformed to it.

18. Yoke thyself under the law, that thou
mayest be a freeman in very truth. Work
not the desire of thy soul apart from the
law of God. How many commandments
must I write, and how many laws must I
engrave ; which^ if thou desirest thy free-
dom, thou canst learn all from thyself.? And
if thou lovest purity, thou wilt teach it to
others also. Let nature be thy book, and
all creation thy tables ; and learn from them
the laws, and meditate things unwritten.
The sun in his course teaches thee that thou
rest from labour. The night in her silence
cries to thee that a limit is set to thy works.
The earth and the fruit of the tree cry that
there is a season for all things. The seed
thou sowest in the winter, in the summer
thou gatherest its harvest. Thus in the
world sow seeds of righteousness, and in
the Resurrection gather them in. The bird
in its daily gleaning reproves the covetous
and his greed, and rebukes the extortion
that grasps the store of others. Death, the
limit of all things, is itself the reprover of
all things.

1 Gal. vi. 9.


19. Take thou refuge in God Who passes
not away nor is changed. Restrain laugh-
ter by suffering, and mirthfulness by sorrow.
Console suffering by hope, and sadness by
expectation. Believe and trust, thou that
art wise, for God is He Who guides thee ;
and if His care leaves thee not, there is
nothing that can harm thee. If one man
by another man, the lowly by the great, can
be saved, how much more shall the refuge of
God preserve the man that believes.? Fear
not because of adversaries who with vio-
lence come upon thee. He will watchfully
guard thy soul, and hurtful things become
profitable. No one shall lead thee by com-
pulsion, save only where there is freedom.
No one falls into temptation, that passes the
measure of his strength. There is no evil in
chastisement, if so be that freedom is willing.
The doings are not perverse of freedom, its
v/ill is perverted.

20. To men that are just and upright,
temptations become helps. Job, a man of
discernment, was victorious in temptations,
Sickness came upon him, and he complained
not; disease afflicted him and he murmured
not ; his body failed and his strength
departed, but his will was not weakened.
He proved perfect in all by sufferings, for
as much as temptations crushed him not.
Abraham was a stranger, from his place, his
race [and his kindred]. But by this he was
not harmed ; nay rather he triumphed
greatly. So Joseph from the house of bond-
age was made to rule as king of Egypt.
They of the company of Ananias and Daniel
delivered others from bondage. See then,
O thou that art wise, the power that freedom
possesses ; that nothing can injure it unless
the will is weakened. Israel with sump-
tuous living waxed fat, and kicked,* and
forgot his covenant. He worshipped vain
gods, and forgot the nature of his creation.
The bondage that was in Egypt he forgat
in the repose of the desert. As often as he
was afflicted, he acknowledged the Lord
alone ; but when he was dwelling in repose,

2 Deut. xxxii. 15.


336


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


he forgot God his Redeemer. Seek thou not
here repose, for this is a world of toil. And
if thou canst wisely discern, change thou
not time for time ; that which abides for that
which abides not ; that which ceases not
for that which ceases ; nor truth for lying ;
nor body for shadow ; nor watching for
slumber ; nor that which is in season for that
which is out of season ; nor the Time for the
times. Collect thy mind, let it not wander
among varieties which profit not.

21. No one in creation is rich but he that
fears God ; no one is truly poor but he that
lacks the truth. How needy is he, and not
rich, whose need witnesses against him,
that even from the abject and the beggars
he needs to receive a gift. He is truly a
bondman, and many are his masters : he
renders service to money, to riches, and
possessions. His lords are void of mercy,
for they grant him no repose. Flee, and
live in poverty ; (as) a mother she pities her
beloved. Seek thou refuge in indigence,
who nourishes her children with choice
things ; her yoke is light and pleasant,
and sweet to the palate her memory. The
sick in conscience alone abhors the draught
of poverty ; the fainthearted dreads the yoke
of indigence that is honourable. Who has
granted to Thee, Son of man, in the world
to find repose ? Who has granted to thee,
thing of dust, to be rich amidst poverty ?
Be not thou through desires needy and
looking to others. Sufficient for thee is thy
daily bread, that comes of the sweat of thy
face. Let this be (the measure of) thy need,
that which the day gives thee ; and if thou
findest for thyself a feast, take of it that
which thou needest. Thou shalt not take
ill a day (the provision) of days, for the
belly keeps no treasure. Praise and give
thanks when thou art satisfied, that therein
thou provoke not the Giver to anger. In
purity strengthen thyself, that thou mayest
gain from it profit. In everything give
thanks and praise unto God as the Redeemer,
that He may grant thee by His grace, that
we may hear and do His Will.
. Thou to whom I have given the counsel


of life, be not thou negligent in it. From
that which is other men's (doctrine) have I
written to thee ; see thou despise not their
words. And if I depart before thee, in thy
prayer make mention of me. In every
season pray and beseech that our love may
continue true. But as for us, on behalf of
these things let us offer up praise and honour
to Father, to Son, and to Holy Spirit, now
and for ever. Amen.

ON THE SINFUL WOMAN.

1. Hear and be comforted, beloved, how^
merciful is God. To the sinful woman He
forgave her offences ; yea, He upheld her
when she was afflicted. W^ith clay He
opened the eyes of the blind, so that the
eyeballs beheld the light. ^ To the palsied
He granted healing, who arose and walked
and carried his bed. ^ And to us He has
given the pearls ; His holy Body and Blood.
He brought His medicines secretly ; and
with them He heals openly. And He
wandered round in the land of Judea, like a
physician, bearing his medicines. Simon
invited Him to the feast, to eat bread in his
house. ^ The sinful woman rejoiced when
she heard that He sat and was feastin^r in
Simon's house ; her thoughts gathered to-
gether like the sea, and like the billows her
love surged. She beheld the Sea of Grace,
how it had forced itself into one place ; and
she resolved to go and drown all her wick-
edness in its billows.

2. She bound her heart, because it had
offended, with chains and tears of suffering ;
and she began weeping (with herself) :
' ' What avails me this fornication ? What
avails this lewdness ? I have defiled the inno-
cent ones without shame ; I have corrupted
the orphan ; and without fear I have robbed
the merchants of merchandise, and my rapa-
city was not satisfied. I have been as a bow
in war, and have slain the good and the bad.
I have been as a storm on the sea, and have
sunk the ships of many. Why did I not win

1 John ix. 6. 2 Matt. ix. 2. 3 Luke vii. 36.


THREE HOMILIES.


337


me one man, who might have corrected my
lewdness ? For one man is of God, but many-
are of Satan."

3. These things she inwardly said; then
began she to do outwardly. She washed
and put away from her eyes the dye that
blinded them that saw it. And tears gushed
forth from her eyes over that deadly eye-
paint. ^ She drew off and cast from her
hands the enticing bracelets of her youth.
She put off and cast away from her body
the tunic of fine linen of whoredom, and
resolved to go and attire herself in the tunic,
the garment of reconciliation. She drew
off and cast from her feet the adorned
sandals of lewdness ; and directed the steps
of her going in the path of the heavenly
Eagle. She took up her gold in her palm
and held it up to the face of heaven, and
began to cry secretly, to Him who hears
openly : ''This, O Lord, that I have gained
from iniquity, with it will I purchase to my-
self redemption. This w^hich was gathered
from orphans, with it will I win the Lord
of orphans."

4. These things she said secretly ; then
began to do openly. She took up the gold
in her palm, and carried the alabaster box
in her hands. Then hastily went she forth
in sadness to the perfumer. The perfumer
saw her and wondered, and fell into ques-
tioning with her ; and thus he began to say
to the harlot in the first words he spoke :
''Was it not enough for thee, harlot, that
thou hast corrupted all our town ? What
means this fashion that thou showest to-day
to thy lovers — that thou hast put off thy
wantonness and hast clothed thyself in
modesty ? Heretofore, when thou camest
to me, thy aspect was different from to-
day's. Thou wast clothed in goodly rai-
ment, and didst bring little gold; and didst
ask for precious ointment, to make thy
lewdness pleasant. But lo ! to-day thy
vesture is mean, and thou hast brought
much gold. Thy change I understand not ;
wherefore is this fashion of thine ? Either


^ Stibium.
VOL. XIII. — 22


clothe thee in raiment according to thy
ability, or buy ointment according to thy
clothing. For this ointment becomes not
or is suited to this attire. Can it be that
a merchant has met thee, and brings great
wealth ; and thou hast seen that he loves it
not, the fashion of thy lewdness ? So
thou hast put off thy lewdness and hast
clothed thyself in meekness, that by various
fashions thou mayest capture much wealth.
But if he loves this fashion because he is a
chaste man in truth, then woe to him ! Into
what has he fallen ? Into a gulf that has
swallowed up his merchandise. But I give
thee advice, as a man that desires thy wel-
fare, that thou send aw^ay thy many lovers
who have helped thee nought from thy
youth, and henceforth seek out one husband
who may correct thy lewdness."

5. These things spake the perfumer, in
wisdom, to the harlot. The sinful woman
answered and said to him, to the perfumer
after his discourse, " Hinder me not, Oman,
and stop me not by thy questioning. I
have asked of thee ointment, not freely, but
I will pay thee its value not grudgingly.
Take thee the gold, as much as thou de-
mandest, and give me the precious oint-
ment ; take thee that which endures not and
give me that which endures ; and I will go
to Him who endures, and will buy that
which endures. And as to that thou saidst,
about a merchant ; a Man has met me to-day
Who bears riches in abundance. He has
robbed me and I have robbed Him ; He
has robbed me of my transgressions and
sins, and I have robbed Him of His wealth.
And as to that thou saidst of a husband ;
I have won me a Husband in heaven, Whose
dominion stands for ever, and His kingdom
shall not be dissolved ? " She took up the
ointment and went forth.

6. In haste went she forth ; as Satan saw
her and was enraged ; and was greatly
grieved in his mind. At one time he re-
joiced, and again at another he was grieved.
That she carried the perfumed oil, he re-
joiced in his inward mind; but that she was
clad in mean raiment — at this doinir of hers


338


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


he was afraid. He clave then to her and
followed her, as a robber follows a mer-
chant. He listened to the murmurs of her
lips, to hear the voice of her words. He
closely watched her eyeballs (to mark)
whither the glance of her eyes was directed ;
and as he went he moved by her feet (to
mark) whither her goings were directed.
Very full of craft is Satan, from our words
to learn our aim. Therefore our Lord has
taught us not to raise our voice when we
pray, that the Devil may not hear our words
and draw near and become our adversary.
So then, when Satan saw that he could not
chanofe her mind, he clothed himself in the
fashion of a man, and drew to himself a
crowd of youths, like her lovers of former
times ; and then began he thus to address
her: ''By thy life, O woman, tell me,
whither are thy footsteps directed ? What
means this haste? For thou hasteth more
than other days. What means this thy
meekness, for thy soul is meek like a hand-
maid's .? Instead of garments of fine linen,
lo ! thou art clothed in sordid weeds ; in-
stead of bracelets of gold and silver, there
are not even rings on thy fingers ; instead
of goodly sandals for thy feet, not even worn
shoes are on thy feet. Disclose to me all
thy doing, for I understand not thy change.
Is it that some one of thy lovers has died,
and thou goest to bury him ? We will go
with thee to the funeral, and with thee will
(take part with thee) in sorrow."

7. The sinful woman answered and said
to him, (even) to Satan, after his speech :
''Well hast thou said that I go to inter the
dead, one that has died to me. The sin of
my thoughts has died, and I go to bury it."
Satan answered and said to her, (even) to
the sinful woman after her words : " Go to,
O woman, I tell thee that I am the first of
thy lovers. I am not such as thou, and I
place my hands upon thee. I will give thee
again more gold than before."

8. The sinful woman answered and said
to him, even .to Satan after his discourse :
" I an- wearied of thee, O man, and thou
art no more my lover. I have w^on me a


husband in heaven, Who is God, that is
over all, and His dominion stands for ever,
and His kingdom shall not be dissolved.
For lo ! in thy presence I say ; I say it
again and I lie not. I was a handmaid to
Satan from my childhood unto this day. I
was a bridge, and he trode upon me, and I
destroyed thousands of men. The eye-
paint blinded my eyes, and (I was) blind
among many whom I blinded. I becam.e
sightless and knew not that there is One
Who gives light to the sightless. Lo ! I go
to get light for mine eyes, and by that light
to give light to many. I was fast bound,
and knew not that there is One Who over-
throws idols. Lo ! I go to have my idols
destroyed, and so to destroy the follies of
many. I was wounded and knew not that
there is One Who binds up wounds ; and lo !
I go to have my wounds bound." These
things the harlot spake to Satan in her wis-
dom ; and he groaned and was grieved
and wept ; and he cried aloud and thus
he spake: — "I am conquered by thee,
O woman, and what I shall do I know
not."

9. As soon as Satan perceived that he
could not change her mind, he began to
weep for himself and thus it w^as that he
spake: " Flenceforth is my boasting per-
ished, and the pride of all my days. How
shall I lay for her a snare, for her who is
ascending on high ? how shall I shoot
arrows at her, (even) at her whose wall is
unshaken ? Therefore I go into Jesus' pre-
sence; lo! she is about to enter His presence ;
and I shall say to Him thus : " This woman
is an harlot." Perchance He may reject
and not receive her. And I shall say to
Him thus : "This woman who comes into
Thy presence is a woman that is an harlot*
She has led captive men by her whoredom ;
she is polluted from her youth. But Thou,
O Lord, art righteous ; all men throng to
see Thee. And if mankind see Thee that
Thou hast speech with the harlot, they all
will flee from Thy presence, and no man will
salute Thee."

10. These things Satan spake within him-


THREE HOMILIES.


339


self, nor was he moved. ^ Then he changed
the course of his thoug-ht, and thus it was
that he spake. " How shall I enter into
Jesus' presence, for to Him the secret
things are manifest ? He knows me, who I
am, that no good office is my purpose. If
haply He rebuke me I am undone, and all
my wiles will be wasted. I will go to the
house of Simon, for secret things are not
manifest to him. And into his heart I will
put it ; perchance on that hook he may be
caught. And thus will I say unto him :
By thy life, O Simon, tell me; this man that
sojourns in thy house is he a man that is
righteous, or a friend of the doers of wick-
edness.? I am a wealthy man, and a man
that has possessions, and I wish like thee
to invite him that he may come in and
bless my possessions."

II. Simon answered and thus he said to
the Evil One after his words: "From the
day that (first) I saw Him I have seen no
lewdness in Him, but rather quietness and
peace, humility and seemliness. The sick
He heals without reward, the diseased He
freely cures. He approaches and stands by
the grave, and calls, and the dead arise.
Jairus^ called Him to raise his daughter to
life, trusting that He could raise her to life.
And as He went with him in the way, He
gave healing to the woman diseased, who
laid hold of the hem of His garment and
stole healing from Him, and her pain which
was hard and bitter at once departed from
her. He went forth to the desert and saw
the hungry,^ how they were fainting with
famine. He made them sit down on the
grass, and fed them in His mercy. In the
ship He slept" as He willed, and the sea
swelled against the disciples. He arose
and rebuked the billows, and there was a
great calm. The widow, ^ the desolate one
who was following her only son, on the
way to the grave He consoled her. He
gave him to her and gladdened her heart.


' The text and rendering of these two places are
doubtful.
■^ St. Mark v. 22. 3 st. Matt. xiv. 15.

4 St. Matt. xiv. 24. & St. Luke vii. 11.


To one man who was dumb and blind, ^ by
His voice He brought healing. The lepers
He cleansed by His word ; to the limbs of
the palsied ^ He restored strength. For the
blind man,® afflicted and weary, He opened
his eyes and he saw the light. And for two
others who besought Him,^ at once He
opened their eyes. As for me, thus have
I heard the fame of the man from afar ; and
I called Him to bless my possessions, and
to bless all my flocks and herds."

12. Satan answered and said to him, to
Simon after his words : " Praise not a man
at his beginning, until thou learnest his end ;
hitherto this man is sober and his soul takes
not pleasure in wine. If he shall go forth
from thy house, and holds not converse with
an harlot, then he is a righteous man and
no friend of them that do wickedness."
Such things did Satan speak in his crafti-
ness to Simon. Then he approached and
stood afar off, to see what should come to
pass.

13. The sinful woman full of transgressions
stood clinging by the door. -She clasped
her arms in prayer, and thus she spake be-
seeching : — "Blessed Son Who hast de-
scended to earth for the sake of man's re-
demption, close not Thy door in my face ;
for Thou hast called me and lo 1 I come. I
know that Thou hast not rejected me ; open
for me the door of Thy mercy, that I may
come in, O my Lord, and find refuge in
Thee, from the Evil One and his hosts ! I
was a sparrow, and the hawk pursued me,
and I have fled and taken refuge in Thy nest.
I was a heifer, and the yoke galled me, and
I will turn back my wanderings to Thee,
Lay upon me the shoulder of Thy yoke that
I may take it on me, and work with Thy
oxen." Thus did the harlot speak at the
door with much weeping. The master of
the house looked and saw her, and the
colour of his visage was changed ; and he
began thus to address her, (even) the harlot,
in the opening of his words : — "Depart thou


6 St. Matt. xii. 22.
^ St. John ix. I.


^ St. Matt. ix. 2.
9 St. Matt. XX. 30.


340


EPHRAIM SYRUS.


hence, O harlot, for this man who abides in
our house is a man that is righteous, and
they that are of his companions are blame-
less. Is it not enough for thee, harlot, that
thou hast corrupted the whole town ? Thou
hast corrupted the chaste without shame ;
thou hast robbed the orphans, and hast not
blushed, and hast plundered the merchants'
wares, and thy countenance is not abashed.
From him thy heart [and soul] labour [to
take]. But from him thy net takes no
spoil.' For this man is righteous indeed,
and they of his company are blameless."

14. The sinful woman answered and said
to him, even to Simon when he had ceased :
^'Thou surely art the guardian of the door,

0 thou that knowest things that are secret !

1 will propose the matter in the feast, and
thou shalt be free from blame. And if there
be any that wills me to come in, he will bid
me and I will come in." Simon ran and
closed the door, and approached and stood
afar off. And he tarried a long time and
proposed not the matter in the feast. But
He, Who knows what is secret, beckoned to
Simon and said to him : — ''Come hither,
Simon, I bid thee ; does any one stand at
the door.? Whosoever he be, open to him
that he may come in ; let him receive what
he needs, and go. If he be hungry and
hunger for bread, lo ! in thy house is the
table of life ; and if he be thirsty, and thirst
for water, lo ! the blessed fountain is in thy
dwelling. And if he be sick and ask for
healing, lo ! the great Physician is in thy
house. Suffer sinners to look upon Me, for
for their sakes have I abased Myself. I will
not ascend to heaven, to the dwelling
whence I came down, until I bear back the
sheep that has wandered from its Father's
house, and lift it up on My shoulders and
bear it aloft to heaven." Simon answered
and thus he said to Jesus, when He had
done speaking: — "My Lord, this woman
that stands in the doorway is a harlot : she
is lewd and not free-born, polluted from
her childhood. And Thou, my Lord, art a

' Text defective here.


righteous man, and all are eager to see
Thee ; and if men see Thee having speech
with the harlot, all men will flee from be-
side Thee, and no man will salute Thee."
Jesus answered, and thus He said to Simon
when he was done speaking : — " Whosoever
it be, open for him to come in, and thou shalt
be free from blame ; and though his offences
be many, without rebuke I bid thee [receive
him]."


#


*


15. Simon approached and opened the
door, and began thus to speak: — "Come,
enter, fulfil that thou wiliest, to him who is
even as thou." The sinful woman, full of
transgressions, passed forward and stood by
His feet, and clasped her arms in prayer, and
with these words she spake : — " Mine eyes
have become watercourses that cease not
from [watering] the fields, and to-day they
wash the feet of Him Who follows after
sinners. This hair, abundant in locks from
my childhood till this day, let it not grieve
Thee that it should wipe this holy body.
The mouth that has kissed the lewd, forbid
it not to kiss the body that remits trans-
gressions and sins." These things the harlot
spake to Jesus, with much weeping. And
Simon stood afar off to see what He would
do to her. But He Who knows the things
that are secret, beckoned to Simon and said to
him : — " Lo ! I will tell thee, O Simon, what
thy meditation is, concerning the harlot.
Within thy mind thou imaginest and within
thy soul thou saidst, * I have called this
man righteous, but lo ! the harlot kisses
Him. I have called Him to bless my pos-
sessions, and lo ! the harlot embraces Him.'
O Simon, there were two debtors, whose
creditor was one only ; one owed him five-
hundred [pence], and the other owed fifty.
And when the creditor saw that neither of
these two had aught, the creditor pardoned
and forgave them both their debt. Which
of them ought to render the greater thanks '^
He who was forgiven five hundred, or he
who was forgiven fifty ? " Simon answered,
and thus he said to Jesus, when He had


THREE HOMILIES.


341


done speaking: — "He who was forgiven
five hundred ought to render the greater
thanks. " Jesus answered and thus He said :
*'Thou art he that owes five hundred, and
this woman owes fifty. Lo ! I came into
thy house, O Simon ; and water for My feet
thou broughtest not ; and this woman, of
whom thou saidst that she was an harlot,
one from her childhood defiled, has washed
My feet with her tears, and with her hair
she has wiped them. Ought I to send her
away, O Simon, without receiving forgive-


ness ? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, I will
write of her in the Gospel. Go, O woman,
thy sins are forgiven thee and all thy trans-
gression is covered ; henceforth and to the
end of the world."

May our Lord account us worthy of hear-
ing this word of His : — "Come, enter, ye
blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom
made ready for all who shall do My will,
and observe all My commandments." To
Him be glory ; on us be mercy ; at all times.
Amen I Amen !


APHRAHAT.

SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


I. OF FAITH.
V. OF WARS.
VI. OF MONKS.
VIII. OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD.

X. OF PASTORS.
XVII. OF CHRIST THE SON OF GOD.
XXI. OF PERSECUTION.
XXII. OF DEATH AND THE LATTER TIMES.


APHRAHAT.


LETTER OF AN INQUIRER.

1. Beloved, I send thee inquiries and
questions, for I am compelled to seek fur-
ther instruction of thee on many points.
Do not thou refuse to hear me. My spirit
urges me to warn thee about many topics '
that thou mayest unfold for me the spiritual
perceptions of thy mind, and mayest show
me of all that thou hast apprehended from
the holy books, that so my deficiency may
be supplied by thee and my hunger satisfied
by thy doctrine, and that thou mayest
assuage my thirst from the fountain of thine
instruction. Yet though many things are
set in my thought to ask thee, they all are
notwithstanding reserved with me, that
when I come to thee, thou mayest instruct
me on all subjects.

2. But before all things I desire that thou
wouldst write and instruct me concerning
this that straitens me, namely, concerning
our faith ; how it is, and what its foundation
is, and on what structure it rises, on what
it rests, and in what way is its fulfilment and
consummation, and what are the works re-
quired for it. Fori of myself firmly believe
that God is one, Who made the heavens and
the earth from the beginning ; that He
adorned the world by His handiwork ; that
He made man in His image ; He it is that ac-
cepted the offering of Abel. He translated
Enoch because of his excellence. He pre-
served Noah because of his ri^rhteousness.
He chose Abraham because of his faith. He
spake with Moses on account of his meek-
ness. He it is that spake in all the pro-
phets, and furthermore He sent His Christ


1 The beginning to this point is lost in the §yriac
but has been preserved in the Armenian translation.
We have borrowed it thence through the Latin trans-
lation of Graffin {Patrologia Syriaca, Tom. I.).


into the world. Since then, my brother, I
thus believe in these things that so they are,
I therefore, brother, request of thee that thou
wouldest write and show me what are the
works required for this our faith, that so thou
mayest set me at rest.

THE ''DEMONSTRATIONS" OF APH-
RAHAT.

Demonstration I. — Of Faith.

§ I. I have received thy letter, my beloved,
and when I read it, it greatly gladdened me
that thou hast turned thy thoughts to these
investigations. For this thing that thou
hast askedof me shall be freely granted,^ for
freely it was received. And whosoever has,
and desires to withhold from him that seeks,
whatsoever he withholds shall betaken away
from him. Whoever of free grace receives, of
free grace also does it behove him to give.
And so, my beloved, as to that which thou
hast asked of me, so far as my insignifi-
cance has apprehended, I will write to thee.
And also whatsoever thou hast not sought
of me, invoking God, I will explain to thee.
Hear then, my beloved, and open the inward
ears of thy heart unto me, and the spiritual
perceptions of thy mind to that which I say
unto thee.

§ 2. P'aithis compounded of many things,
and by many kinds is it brought to perfec-
tion. For it is like a building that is built
up of many pieces of workmanship and
so its edifice rises to the top. And know,
my beloved, that in the foundations of the
building stones are laid, and so resting upon
stones the whole edifice rises until it is per-
fected. Thus also the true Stone, our Lord


2 S. Matt. X. 8.


345


34^


APHRAHAT.


Jesus Christ, is the foundation of all our
faith. And on Him, on [this] Stone faith is
based. And resting on faith all the struc-
ture rises until it is completed. For it is the
foundation that is the beginning of all the
building. For when any one is brought nigh
unto faith, it is laid for him upon the Stone,
that is our Lord Jesus Christ. And his
building cannot be shi^ken by the waves,
nor can it be injured by the winds. By the
stormy blasts it does not fall, because its
structure is reared upon the rock of the true
Stone. And in this that I have called Christ
the Stone, I have not spoken of my own
thought, but the Prophets beforehand called
Him the Stone. And this I shall make clear
to thee.

§ 3. And now hear concerning faith that is
based upon the Stone, and concerning the
structure that is reared up upon the Stone. For
first a man believes, and when he believes,
he loves. When he loves, he hopes. When
he hopes, he is justified. When he is justi-
fied, he is perfected. When he is perfected,
he is consummated. And when his whole
structure is raised up, consummated, and
perfected, then he becomes a house and a
temple for a dwelling-place of Christ, as
Jeremiah the Prophet said : — The temple of
the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple
of the Lord are ye, if ye amend your ways and
your works.^. And again. He said through
the Prophet : — / ivill dwell in them and walk
in them^ And also the Blessed Apostle
thus said : — Ye are the temple of God and
the spirit of Christ dwell eth in you.^ And
also our Lord again thus said to His dis-
ciples : — Ve are in Me and L am in
you.*'

§ 4. And when the house has become a
dwelling-place, then the man begins to be
anxious as to that which is required for Him
Who dwells in the building. Just as if a
king or an honourable man, to whom a
royal name is given, should lodge in the
house, there would be required for the King
all the appurtenances of royalty and all the


' Jer. vii. 4 5.

3 I. Cor. iii.'i6, etc.


2 Levit. xxvi. 12.
4 John, xiv. 20.


service that is needed for the King's honour.
For in a house that is void of all good
things, the King will not lodge, nor will he
dwell in the midst of it ; but all that is
choicest in the house is required for the King
and that nothing in it be deficient. And if any-
thing be deficient there in the house in which
the King lodges, the keeper of the house is
delivered over to death, because he did not
make ready the service for the King. So
also let the man, who becomes a house, yea
a dwelling-place, for Christ, take heed to
what is needed for the service of Christ,
Wlio lodges in him, and with what things
he may please Him. For first he builds his
building on the Stone, which is Christ. On
Him, on the Stone, is faith based, and on
faith is reared up all the structure. For the
habitation of the house is required pure
fasting, and it is made firm by faith. There
is also needed for it pure prayer, and through
faith is it accepted. Necessary for it too
is love, and with faith is it compounded.
Furthermore alms are needed, and through
faith are they given. He demands also
meekness, and by faith is it adorned. He
chooses too virginity, and by faith is it
loved. He joins with himself holiness, and
in faith is it planted. He cares also for
wisdom, and through faith is it acquired.
He desires also hospitality, and by faith does
it abound. Requisite for Him also is sim-
plicity, and with faith is it commingled.
He demands patience also, and by faith is
it perfected. He has respect also to long-
suffering, and through faith is it acquired.
He loves mourning also, and through faith
is it manifested. He seeks also for purity,
and by faith is it preserved. All these
things does the faith demand that is based
on the rock of the true Stone, that is Christ.
These works are required for Christ the
King, Who dwells in men that are built up
in these works.

§ 5. And if perchance thou shouldest say :
— If Christ is set for the foundation, how
does Christ also dwell in the building when
it is completed.? For both these things did
the blessed Apostle say. For he said : — /


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


347


as a wise architect have laid the foundation.^
And there he defined the foundation and
made it clear, for he said as follows : — No
man can lay other foundation than that which
is laid, which is fesus Christ.'^ And that
Christ furthermore dwells in that building is
the word that was written above — that of
Jeremiah who called men temples and said
of God that He dwelt in them. And the
Apostle said: — The Spirit of Christ dwell-
eth i?t you.^ And our Lord said: — I and
My Father are one^ And therefore that
word is accomplished, that Christ dwells in
men, namely, in those who believe on Him,
and He is the foundation on which is reared
up the w^hole building.

6. But I must proceed to my former state-
ment that Christ is called the Stone in the
Prophets. For in ancient times David said
concerning Him : — The stonewhich the build-
ers rejected has become the head of the build-
ing.^ And how did the builders reject this
Stone which is Christ .'' How else than that
they so rejected Him before Pilate and said :
— This man shall not be King over us.^
And again in that parable that our Lord
spake that a certain nobleman went to re-
ceive kingly power and to return and rule
over them ; and they sent after Him envoys
saying : — This man shall not be King over us. ''
By these things they rejected the Stone which
is Christ. And how did it become the head
of the building } How else than that it was
set up over the building of the Gentiles and
upon it is reared up all their building. And
who are the builders.? Who but the priests
and Pharisees who did not build a sure
building, but were overthrowing everything
that he was building, as is written in Ezekiel
the Prophet : — He was building a wall of par-
tition., but they were shaking it, that it might fall^
And again it is written : — / sought amongst
them a man who was closing the fence and
standing in the breach over the face of the land.,
that I might Jiot destroy it and I did not find. ^


1 I Cor.
3 I Cor.


10.

i6.

^ Ps. cxviii. 22.
■^ John xix. 15.
^ Ez. xiii. 10.


'^ I Cor, iii. 11.
* John X. 30.
^ Luke xix. 14.
^ Luke xix. 13, 14.
' Ez. xxii. 30.


And furthermore Isaiah also prophesied
beforehand with regard to this stone. For
he said : — Thus saith the Lord, Behold I lay
in Zion a chosen stone in the precious cor-
ner, the head of the wall of the foundation.'^
And he said again there : — Every one that
believeth on it shall not fear. ^ And whosoever
falleth on that stone shall be broken, and
every one on whom it shall fall, it will crush. *
For the people of the house of Israel fell
upon Him, and He became their destruction
for ever. And again it shall fall on the image
and crush it.^ And the Gentiles believed on
it and do not fear.

7. And He shows thus with regard to that
stone that it was laid as head of the wall
and as foundation. But if that stone was
laid as the foundation, how did it also be-
come the head of the wall.? How but that
when our Lord came. He laid His faith in
the earth like a foundation, and it rose
above all the heavens likethe head of the
wall and all the building was finished with
the stones, from the bottom to the top. And
with regard to the faith about which I said
that He laid His faith in the earth, this
David proclaimed beforehand about Christ.
For He said : — Faith shall spring up from the
earth.^ And that again, it is above, he said: —
Righteousness looked down from the heavens.

8. And again Daniel also spoke concern-
ing this stone which is Christ. For he said :
— The stone was cut out from the mountain,
not by hands, and it smote the image, and the
whole earth was filled with it. ^ This he showed
beforehand with regard to Christ that the
whole earth shall be filled with Him. For
lo ! by the faith of Christ are all the ends of
the earth filled, as David said : — The sound
of the Gospel of Christ has gone forth ijito
all the earth.^ And again when He sent forth
His apostles He spake thus to them : — Go

forth, make disciples of all nations and they
will believe on Me.^ And again the Prophet
Zechariah also prophesied about that stone


16.


2 Is. xxviii.
4 Matt. xxi. 44.
fi Ps. Ixxxv. 12.
^ Ps. xix. 4.


2 Is. xxviii. 16.
5 Dan. ii. 34.
'^ Dan. ii. 34. 35.
'^ Matt. xxViiil 19.


348


APHRAHAT.


which is Christ, For he said : — I saw a chief
stone of equality and of love. ^ And why did
he say ''chief'} Surely because from the
beginning^ He was with His Father. And
again that he spake of love, it was because
when He came into the world, He said thus
to His disciples : — This is My commandment,
that ye love one another.^ And again He
said : — I have calledyou My friends (lovers)/
And the blessed Apostle said thus : — God
loved as in tJie love of His Son.^ Of a truth
Christ loved us and gave Himself for us. ^

§ 9, And definitely did He show concern-
ing this stone : — Lo ! on litis stonewilll open
seven eyes.'' And what then are the seven
eyes that were opened on the stone ? Clearly
the Spirit of God that abode on Christ with
seven operations, as Isaiah the Prophet
said : — The Spirit of God shall rest and dwell
upon Him, (a spirit) of wisdom and under-
standing, of counsel and of courage, of knowl-
edge and of the fear of the Lord.^ These
were the seven eyes that were opened upon
the Stone, and these are the seven eyes of the
Lord which look upon all the earth.^

§ 10. And also with reference to Christ was
this (which follows) said. For he said that
He was given as a light to all the Gentiles
as the Prophet Isaiah said : — / have giveii
Thee as a light to all the Gentiles., that Thou
shouldest he My redeinption to the ends of the
earth. ^ And furthermore David also said ; —
Thy ivordis a lamp unto ?ny feet and a light
unto jny paths.'^ And also the word and dis-
course of the Lord is Christ, as is written in
the beginning of the Gospel of our Saviour :
— In th e h egin ning was th e Word. ^ A n d w i th
regard to the light there again he bore wit-
ness : — The light was shining in the darkness
and the darkness comprehended it not. " What
then is this : — The light was shilling in the
darkness and the darkness compreheiided it


^ Zach. iv. 2.

2 The words for chicj and for beginning are almost
identical in the Syriac.

^ John XV. 12. 4 John xv. 15.

5 Cf. Eph. ii. 4. 5. 6 Cf. Eph. V. 2.

'' Zech. iii. 9. ^ is. xi. i, 2.

^ Zech. iv. 10. ' Is. xlix. 6.

^ Ps. cxix. 105. 3 John i, i.
4 John i. 5.


not /^ Clearly Christ, Whose light shone in
the midst of tho people of the house of Is-
rael, and the people of the house of Israel
did not comprehend the light of Christ, in
that they did not believe on Him, as it is
written : — He came unto His own, and His
own received Him not. ^ And also our Lord
Jesus called them darkness, for He said to
His disciples ; — Whatsoever I say unto you
in the darkness, that speak ye in the light,^
namely, let your light shine among the Gen-
tiles ;'' because they received the light of
Christ, Who is the Light of the Gentiles.
And He said again to His Apostles: — Ye are
the light of the world. "^ And again He said
unto them ; — Let your light shine before men,
that they may see your good works and glorify
your Father which is in heaven."^ And again
He showed with regard to Himself that He
is the light, for He said to His disciples : —
Walk while the light is with you, ere the dark-
ness overtake you.'^ And again He said to
them : — Believe on the light that ye may he
children of light. '^ And again He said : — /
am the light of the world. "^ And again He
said : — No mail lighteth a lamp and putteth it
under a bushel or under a bed, or putteth it in
a hidden place, but putteth it upon the lamp-
stand that every one may see the light of the
lamp.^ And the shining lamp is Christ, as
David said; — Thy word is a lamp unto 7?iy
feet and a liglit to my paths. ^

§ II. And furthermore the Prophet Hosea
also said : — Light you a lamp and seek ye the
Lord.^ And our Lord Jesus Christ said : —
Wliat woman is there who has ten drachmos
and shall lose one of them, and will not light
a lamp and sweep the house and seek her
drachma that she lost .^ '' What then does this
woman signify } Clearly the congregation
of the house of Israel, to which the ten com-
mandments were given. They lost the first
commandment — that in which He warned


5 John i. II.

'' Cf. Matt. V. 16.

3 Matt. V. 16.

2 John xii. 36.

^ Matt. V. 15 ; Mark iv. 21

5 Ps. cxix, 105.

'' Luke XV. 8.


6 Matt. X. 27.
8 Matt. V. 14.
' John xii. 35.
3 John viii. 12.
Luke viii. 16.
^ Hos. X. 12.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


349


them saying : — / am the Lord your God,
Who brought you up from the hind of Egypt. ^
And when they had lost this first command-
ment, also the nnie which are after it they
could not keep, because on the first depend
the nine. For it was an impossibility that
while worshipping Baal, they should keep
the nine commandments. For they lost the
first commandment, like that woman who
lost one drachma from the ten. So the
Prophet cried unto them : — Light you a lamp
and seek ye the Lord."^ And furthermore the
Prophet Isaiah also said : — Seek ye the Lord,
and when ye shall have found ILim, call upon
Him ; and when He is near let the sinner aban-
don his way and the wicked man his thought. ^
For that lamp shone and they did not by it
seek the Lord their God. And its light
shone in the darkness and the darkness did
not comprehend it. And the lamp was set
up on the lamp-stand and those who were
in the house did not see its light. And what
then means this, that the lamp was set up
on the lamp-stand.? Clearly His being raised
up upon the cross. And by this all the
house was made dark over them. For when
they crucified Him, the light was darkened
from them, and shone amongst the Gentiles,
because that from the time of the sixth hour
(of the day) on which they crucified Him
even unto the ninth hour there was darkness
in all the land of Israel. And the sun set in
midday and the land was darkened in the
shining daytime, as is written in Zechariab
the Prophet : — // shall come to pass in that
day, saith the Lord, L will cause the sun to set
in midday, and will make dark the land in the
shining daytime. ^

§ 12. Now I must proceed to my former
subject of faith, that on it are reared up all
the good w^orks of the building. And again,
in what I said with regard to the building,
it was in no strange fashion that I spoke,
but the blessed Apostle wrote in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, saying : — L as a
wise master-builder have laid the foundation, but

1 Ex. XX. 2. 2 Hqs X. 12.

3 Is. Iv. 6, 7.

4 Am. viii. 9. (Cf. the commentary ascribed to
Ephrem in loco.) Cf. Zech. xiv. 6, 7.


every one buildeth on it. ^ One builds silver and
gold and goodly stones ; another builds reed
and straw and stubble. In the last day that
building shall be tried by fire ; for the gold
and silver and goodly stones shall be pre-
served in the midst of the fire, because they
are a firm building. But as for the straw and
reed and stubble, the fire shall have power
upon them and they shall be burned. And
what is the gold and silver and goodly stones
by which the building is raised up .? Clearly
the good deeds of faith, which shall be pre-
served in the midst of the fire ; because
Christ dwells in that secure building, and
He is its preserver from the fire. And let
us consider and understand (this) from the
example that God has given us also in the
former dispensation, because the promises
of that dispensation will abide sure for us.
Let us then understand from (the case of)
those three righteous men who were cast
into the midst of the fire and were not
burned, namely, Hananiah, Azariah and
Misael, over whom the fire had no power,
because they built a secure building and re-
jected the commandment of Nebuchadnezzar
the king and did not worship the image that
he made. And as for those who transgressed
the commandment of God, the fire at once
prevailed over them and burned them, and
they were burned without mercy. For the
Sodomites were burned like straw and reed
and stubble. Furthermore, Nadab and
Abihu were burned, who transgressed the
commandment of God. Again, two hundred
and fifty men were burned, who were offer-
ing incense. Again, two princes and a
hundred who were with them were burned,
because they approached the mountain on
which Elijah was sitting, who ascended in
a chariot of fire to heaven. The calumni-
ators also were burned because they dug a
pit for righteous men. Accordingly, be-
loved, the righteous shall be tried by the
fire, like gold and silver and goodly stones,
and the wicked shall be burned in the fire
like straw and reed and stubble, and the fire
shall have power upon them and they shall

^ I Cor. iii 10, 12, sqq.


350


APHRAHAT.


be burned ; even as the Prophet Isaiah said :

By fire shall Ihe Lord Judge and by it shall

He try all flesh. "■ And again he said: — Ye
shall go out and see ihe carcases of the men
who offended against Me, wJiose worm shall
not die, nor shall their fire he quenched, a?id
they shall be an astonishment to all flesh ^

§ 13. And again the Apostle has com-
mented for us upon this building and upon
this foundation ; for he said thus ; — No man
can lay another foundation than that which is
laid, which is fesus Christ.'^ Again the Apostle
said about faith that it is conjoined with
hope and love, for he said thus : — Tliese are
three which shall abide, faith and hope and
love.^ And he showed with regard to faith
that first it is laid on a sure foundation/

§ 14. For Abel, because of his faith his
offering was accepted. And Enoch, because
he was well-pleasing through his faith, was
removed from death. Noah, because he
believed, was preserved from the deluge.
Abraham, through his faith, obtained bless-
ing, and it was accounted to him for right-
eousness. Isaac, because he believed, was
loved. Jacob, because of his faith, was pre-
served. Joseph, because of his faith, was tried
in the waters of contention, and was deliv-
ered from his trial, and his Lord established
a witness in him, as David said : — Witness
hath he established in foseph.'' IMoses
also by his faith performed many wonder-
ful works of power. By his faith he de-
stroyed the Egyptians with ten plagues.
Again, by faith he divided the sea, and
caused his people to cross over and sank
the Egyptians in the midst of it. By faith
he cast the wood into the bitter waters and
they became sweet. By faith he brought
down manna and satisfied his people, ^y
faith he spread out his hands and conquered
Amalek, as is written : — His hands continued


2 Is. Ixvi. 24.
^ I Cor. xiii. 13.


^ Is. Ixvi. 16.

^ I Cor. iii. 11.

^ The allusion is to Heb. xi.

This sentence, connecting sections 13 (which re-
lates to r Corinthians iii. and xiii.) and 14 (which
echoes Hebrews xi.), seems to imply ( " he showed " )
that they are written by the same author, — in other
ivords, to ascribe Hebrews to St. Paul.

^ Ps. Ixxxi. 6.


in faith till the setting of the sun.'' Also by
faith he went up to Mount Sinai, when he
twice fasted for the space of forty days.
Again by faith he conquered Sihon and Og,
the Kings of the Amontes.

§ 15. This is wonderful, my beloved, and
a great prodigy that Moses did in the Red
Sea, when the waters were divided by faith,
and stood up on high like mountains or like
mighty cliffs. They were checked and stood
still at the commandment ; they were closed
up as in vessels, and fast bound in the height
as in the depth. Their fluidity did not over-
flow the boundary, but rather they changed
the nature of their creation. Irrational
creatures became obedient. The billows
became rigid and were awaiting the venge-
ance, when the people should have passed
over. Wonderful was it how the waves
stood still and expected the commandment
and the vengeance. The foundations (hid-
den) from the ages of the world were re-
vealed, and that which from the beginning
had been liquid suddenly became dry. Tlie
gates lifted up their heads and the everlasting
gates were lifted up.^ The pillar of fire en-
tered and illuminated the entire camp. The
people passed over by faith. And the judg-
ment of righteousness was wrought upon
Pharaoh and upon his host and upon his
chariots.

§ 16. Thus also Joshua the son of Nun
divided Jordan by his faith, and the children
of Israel crossed over as in the days of
IMoses. But know, my beloved, that this
passage of the Jordan was three times laid
open by its being divided. First through
Joshua the Son of Nun, and secondly
through Elijah, and then through Elisha.
For the word of the Book makes known that
over against this passage of Jericho, there
Elijah was taken up to heaven ; for when
Elisha turned back from following him and
divided the Jordan and passed over, the
children of the Prophets of Jericho came out
to meet Elisha and said : — TJie spirit of
Elijah rests upon Elisha. " Furthermore when

■^ Ex. xvii. 12. (Pesh.) « Ps. xxiv. 7, 9 ^2 K. ii. 8-15.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


351


the people crossed over in the days of Joshua
the son of Nun (it was there), for thus it is
written : — The people passed over, over
against Jericho.^ Also Joshua the son of
Nun by faith cast down the walls of Jericho,
and they fell without difficulty. Again by
faith he destroyed thirty-one kings and made
the children of Israel to inherit the land.
Furthermore by his faith he spread out his
hands towards heaven and stayed the sun
in Gibeon and the moon in the valley of
Ajalon.^ And they were stayed and stood
still from their courses. But enough ! All
the righteous, our fathers, in all that they
did were victorious through faith, as also
the blessed Apostle testified with regard to
all of them : — By faith tliey prevailecV Again
Solomon said: — Many men are called merci-
ful, hut a faithful nianwho can find ?'^ Also
Job thus said : — My iiitegrity shall not pass
from me, and in })iy righteousness ivill I
persist. ^

§ 17. Also our Saviour used thus to say
to every one who drew near to Him to be
healed : — According to tliy faith he it unto thee. ^
And when the blind man approached Him,
He said to him : — Dost thou helieve tJiat I ain
able to Ileal thee .^ That blind man said to
Him : — Fea, Lord, I helieve.'' And his faith
opened his eyes. And to him whose son
was sick. He said : — Believe and thy son
shall live. He said to Him : — I helieve, Lord ;
help thou my feehle faith. ^ And by his faith
his son was healed. And also when the
nobleman ® came near to Him, by his faith
was his boy healed, when he said to our
Lord : — Speak the word and my servant will
he cured. ^ And our Lord was astonished at
his faith, and according to his faith it hap-
pened to him. And also when the chief of
the Synagogue requested Him concerning
his daughter, He said thus to him : — Only
firmly helieve and thy daughter shall live. ^ So
he believed and his daughter lived and arose.

1 jos. iii. 17. 2 Jos. X. 13,

3 "Heb. xi. 33. 4 Prov. xx. 6.

^ Job. xxvii. 5, 6. 6 e. q. Matt. ix. 29.

' Matt, ix. 28. s Mark ix. 22, 26.
^ Lit. '' king's servant," John iv. 46, which is here
confused with Matt. viii. 8.

' Matt. viii. 8, 10. 2 Mark v. 23-36.


And when Lazarus died, our Lord said to
jMartha : — Lfthou believest, thy hr other shall
rise. Martha saith unto Him ; — Yea^ Lord,
L helieve.^ And He raised him after four
days. And also Simon who w^as called
Cephas because of his faith was called the
firm rock.* And again when our Lord gave
the Sacrament of Baptism to His apostles,
He said thus to them : — Whosoever helieveth
and is haptized shall live, and whosoever he-
lieveth not shall he co7idemned.^ Again He
said to his Apostles : — Lf ye helieve and douht
not, there is 710 thing ye shall not he ahle to do. ^
For when our Lord walked on the billows
of the sea, Simon also by his faith walked
with Him ; but when in respect of his faith
he doubted, and began to sink, our Lord
called him, thou of little faith.'' And when
the Apostles asked of our Lord, they begged
nothing at His hands but this, saying to
Him : — Lncrease our faith. He said to
them : — Lf there ivere in you faith, even a
mountain would remove from hefore you. *"
And He said to them : — Douht ye not, lest ye
sink down in the midst of the world, even as
Simon when he douhted hegan to sink in the
midst of the sea.^ And again He said thus ; —
TJiis shall he the sign for those that helieve ;
they shall speak with new tongues and shall
cast out demons, and they shall lay their hands
on the sick and they shall he made whole. ^

§ 18. Let us draw near then, my beloved,
to faith, since its powers are so many. For
faith raised up to the heavens (Enoch), and
conquered the Deluge. It caused the barren
to bring forth. It delivered from the sword.
It raised up from the pit. It enriched the
poor. It released the captives. It delivered
the persecuted. It brought down the fire.
It divided the sea. It cleft the rock, and
gave to the thirsty water to drink. It satis-
fied the hungry. It raised the dead, and
brought them up from Sheol. It stilled the
billows. It healed the sick. It conquered


3 John xi. 23-27. 4 Kipha-rock.

5 Mark xvi. 16. Note that Aphrahat here cites the dis-
puted conclusion of St. Mark's Gospel.

6 Matt. xxi. 22. ^ Matt. xiv. 31.
* Luke xvii. 5, and Matt. xvii. 19.; xxi. 21.

^ (Apocryphal.) ' ' Mark xvi. 17, 18.


352


APHRAHAT.


hosts. It overthrew walls. It stopped the
mouths of lions, and quenched the flame of
fire. It humiliated the proud, and brought
the humble to honour. All these mighty
works were wrought by faith.

§ 19. Now thus is faith; when a man
believes in God the Lord of all, Who made
the heavens and the earth and the seas and all
that is in them ; and He made Adam in His
image ; and He gave the Law to Moses ;
He sent of His Spirit upon the prophets ;
He sent moreover His Christ into the world.
Furthermore that a man should believe in
the resurrection of the dead ; and should
furthermore also believe in the sacrament of
baptism. This is the faith of the Church of
God. And (it is necessary) that a man
should separate himself from the observance
of hours and Sabbaths and moons and
seasons, and divinations and sorceries and
Chaldsean arts and magic, from fornication
and from festive music, from vain doctrines,
which are instruments of the Evil One, from
the blandishment of honeyed words, from
blasphemy and from adultery. And that a
man should not bear false witness, and that
a man should not speak with double tongue.
These then are the works of the faith which
is based on the true Stone which is Christ,
on Whom the whole building is reared up.

§ 20. Furthermore, my beloved, there is
much besides in the Holy Books about faith.
But these few things out of the much have I
written to recall them to thy love that thou
mayest know and make known and believe
and also be believed. And when thou hast
read and learned the works of faith, thou
mayest be made like unto that tilled land
upon which the good seed fell, and produced
fruit a hundred-fold and sixty-fold and
thirty-fold. And when thou comest to thy
Lord, He may call thee a good servant and
prudent and faithful, who on account of His
faith, that abounded, is to enter into the
Kingdom of his Lord.

Demonstration V. — Of Wars.

§ I. This reflection has befallen me at
this time concerning the shaking that is to


take place at this time, and the host that has
assembled itself for the sword. The times
were disposed beforehand by God. The
times of peace are fulfilled in the days of the
good and just ; and the times of many evils
are fulfilled in the days of the evil and trans-
gressors. For it is thus written : — Goo^
7ii2ist happen^ and blessed is he through whom it
shall come to pass ; and evil mnst happen^ hut
woe to hi??i through whom it shall come to pass. ^
Good has come to the people of God, and
blessedness awaits that man through whom
the good came. And evil is stirred up as
regards the host that is gathered together by
means of the evil and arrogant one who
glories ; and woe also is there reserved for
him through whom the evil is stirred up.
But do not, my beloved, reproach the evil
person who has inflicted evil upon many ;
because the times were beforehand disposed
and the time of their accomplishment has
arrived.

§ 2. Therefore because it is the time of
the Evil One, hear in mystery that which I
am writing for thee. For thus it is written :
— Whatsoever is exalted amongst men is des-
picable before God.'^ And again it is written :
— Everyone who exaltetli himself shall be
abased, and everyone who liiimbletli himself
shall be exalted.'^ Also Jeremiah said : — Let
not the mighty glory in his might, nor the
rich in his richest And again the blessed
Apostle said : — Whosoever glorieth, let him
glofy in the Lord.^ And David said : — / saw
the zvicked exalted and lifted up as the cedar
of Lebanon ; and when L passed by he zvas
710 1 J and L sought him and found him not.^

§ 3. For every one that glories shall be
humbled. Cain gloried over Abel his brother
and slew him. And he was cursed and
became a fugitive and a vagabond in the
earth. A^ain the Sodomites eloried over
Lot, and there fell upon them fire from
heaven and burned them up and their city
was overthrown upon them. And Esau


' Apocryphal ; see Ps. Clem., Homil. xii. 29.
2 Luke xvi. 15 ^ Luke xiv. 11.

4 Jer. ix. 23. 6 2, Cor. x. 17.

•5 Ps. xxxvii. 35, 36.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


353


gloried over Jacob and persecuted him, and
Jacob received the birthright and blessings
of Esau. And the children of Jacob gloried
over Joseph, and (afterwards) fell down and
worshipped him in Egypt. And Pharaoh
gloried over Moses and over his people ;
and Pharaoh and his host were drowned in
the sea. And Dathan and Abiram gloried
over Moses, and they went down alive to
Sheol. And Goliath threatened David, and
he fell before him and was crushed. And
again Saul persecuted David, and he fell by
the sword of the Philistines. And Absalom
exalted himself against him, and Joab slew
him in the battle. Again Benhadad gloried
over Ahab, and he was delivered into the
hand of Israel. And Sennacherib blas-
phemed against Hezekiah and his God, and
his host became dead carcases when one of
the Watchers went forth and slew in the
camp one hundred and eighty-five thousand
at the prayer of Hezekiah and at the prayer
of Prophet Isaiah, most glorious of the
Prophets. Ahab exalted himself over Micah,
and he went up and fell in Ramoth Gilead.
Jezebel gloried over Elijah, and the dogs
devoured her in the portion of Jezreel.
Ham an gloried over Mordecai, and his ini-
quity turned back upon his own head. The
Babylonians gloried over Daniel and cast
him into the den of lions, and Daniel came
up victorious, and they were cast instead of
him into the den. Again the Babylonians
gloried and accused Hananiah and his com-
panions, and they were cast into the furnace
of fire ; and they came up victorious and the
flame devoured the accusers.

§ 4. Now Nebuchadnezzar said : — / will
ascend to heaven and exalt my throne above the
stars of God and sit i?i the lofty mountai?is that
are in the borders of the North} Isaiah said
concerning him : — Because thy heart has thus
exalted thee^ therefore thou shall be brought down
to Sheol, and all that look upon thee shall be
astonished at thee} And Sennacherib also
said thus : — / ivill gc up to the summit of the
mountains a/id to the shoulders of Lebanon} I

1 Is. xiv. 13. 2 is_ xiv. 15, 16.

2 2 Kings xix. 23, 24 ; Is. xxxvii. 24, 25,

Vol Xiii. — 23


will dig and drink water and ivill dry up tvith
my horses^ hoofs all the deep rivers. And be-
cause he thus exalted himself, Isaiah again
said concerning him: — Why does the axe
boast itself against him that cutteth with it, or
the saw exalt itself against him that saiveth with
it, or the rod lift itself up against him that
wieldeth it P* For thou, Sennacherib, art the
axe in the hands of Him that cuts, and thou
art the saw in the hands of Him that saws,
and the rod in the hand of Plim that wields
thee for chastisement, and thou art the staff
for smiting. Thou art sent against the
fickle people, and again thou art ordained
against the stubborn people, that thou may-
est carry away the captivity and take the
spoil ; and thou hast made them as the
mire of the streets for all men and for all
the Gentiles. And when thou hast done all
these things, why art thou exalted against
Him Who holds thee, and why dost thou
boast against Him Who saw^s with thee, and
why hast thou reviled the holy city } and
hast said to the children of Jerusalem : —
Cafi your God deliver you fro7?t my hand ? ^
And thou hast dared to say: — Who is the
Lord that ILe shall deliver you from my hands ?
Because of this, hear the word of the Lord,
saying ; — / ivill crush the Assyrian in My land,
and on My mount aijis will L tread him dow7i}
And when he shall have been crushed and
trodden down, the Virgin, the daughter of
Zion, will despise him, and the daughter of
ferusalem will shake her head and say : — Whom
hast thou reviled and blasphe7ned, and against
whom hast thou lifted up thy voice ? Thou hast
lifted up thine eyes towards heaven against the
Holy One of Israel, and by the hands of thy mes-
sengers thou hast reviled the Lord. Now see
that the hook has been forced into thy nostj'ils,
and the bridle into thy lips, and thou hast turned
back ivith thine heart crushed, 7vho camest with
thine heart uplifted} And his slaying was by
the hands of his loved ones ; and in the
house of his confidence,^ there was he over-


* Is. X. 15. 5 2 Kings xviii. 35.

'Is. xiv. 25.

'' 2. Kings, xix, 21-23, 28; Is. xxxvii. 22-24, 29.
^ 2 Kings, xix. 37 ; Is. xxxvii. 38.


354


APHRAHAT.


thrown, and fell before his god. And
truly it was right, my beloved, that his body
should thus become a sacrifice and offering
before that god on whom he relied, and in
his temple, as a memorial for his idol.

§ 5. Again the ram was lifted up and ex-
alted, and pushed with its horns towards the
west, and towards the north, and towards
the south, and humbled many beasts. And
they could not stand before him, until the
he-goat came from the west and smote the
ram and broke his horns and humbled the
ram completely. But the ram was the King
of Media and Persia, that is, Darius ; and
the he-goat was Alexander, the son of
Philip, the Macedonian. For Daniel saw
the ram when he was /;/ the East before the
gate of Shushan the fortress that is ifi the
frovmce of Elam^ upoti the river Ulai. And he
was pushing towards the West and towards the
North and towards the South. And none of the
beasts could stand before hi?n.^ And the he-
goat of the goats came up from the region
of the Greeks, and exalted himself against
the ram. And he smote him and broke
both his horns, the greater and the lesser.
And why did he say that he broke both his
horns .? Clearly because he humbled both
the kingdoms which he ruled ; the lesser,
that of the Medes, and the greater, that of
the Persians. But when Alexander the
Greek came, he slew Darius, King of Media
and Persia. For thus the angel said to
Daniel, when he was explaining the vision
to him : — The ram that thou sawest was the
King of Media and Persia, and the he-goat the
King of the Greeks. ^ Now, from the time that
the two horns of the ram were broken, until
this time, there have been six hundred and
forty-eight years. ^

§ 6. Therefore, as for the ram, its horns
are broken. And though its horns are
broken, lo ! it exalts and uplifts itself
against the fourth beast, that is strong and


1 Dan. viii. 2, 4, ^ Dan. viii. 20, 21.

3 This Demonstration was therefore written in the
year 648 according to the "era of the Greeks," — i.e.,
reckoning from B.C. 311-312. This year accordingly
corresponds with the year 336-7 a.d. ; and the
" ram."


mighty and its teeth of iron and its hoofs of brass ^
a?id it shall devour and grind dowfiy and
trample ivith its feet whatsoever remaineth. * O
Ram, whose horns are broken, rest thou
from the beast, and provoke it not lest it
devour thee and grind thee to powder. The
ram could not stand before the he-goat ; how
shall it stand before that terrible beast,
whose mouth speaketh great things,^ and what-
soever it finds it couches over as a lion over
his prey.? Whoever provokes the lion be-
comes its portion ; and whoever stirs up that
beast, it shall devour him. And who is
there that shall escape out from under the
feet of that beast when it is trampling on
him .? For the beast shall not be slain until
the Ancient of Days shall sit upon the
throne, and the Son of Man shall come near
before Him, and authority shall be given to
Him." Then shall that beast be slain and
its carcase shall perish. And the Kingdom
of the Son of Man shall be established, an
eternal Kingdom, and His authority from
generation to generation.

§ 7. Be quiet, O thou that dost exalt thy-
self ; vaunt not thyself ! For if thy wealth
has lifted up thy heart, it is not more abun-
dant than that of Hezekiah, who went in
and boasted of it before the Babylonians,
(yet) it was all of it carried away and went
to Babylon. And if thou gloriest in thy
children, they shall be led away from thee
to the Beast, as the children of King Heze-
kiah were led away, and became eunuchs
in the palace of the King of Babylon. ' And
if thou dost glory in thy wisdom, thou dost
not in it excel the Prince of Tyre, whom
Ezekiel reproached, saying unto him : — Art
thou wiser than Daniel, or hast thou seen by
thy wisdom the things that are hid .^^ And if
thy mind is puffed up by thy years, that
they are many ; they are not more in num-
ber than those of the Prince of Tyre who
ruled the Kingdom during the days of
twenty-two Kings of the house of Judah,
that is, for four hundred and forty years.


4 Dan. vii. 19. ^ Dan. vii. 8.

^ Dan. vii. 9, 13, 14, 22. "^ 2 Kings, xx. 18 ; Is. xxxix 7.

s Ezek/ xviii. 3.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


355


And since the years of that King of Tyre
were many, all the time he thus said in his
heart, / am God and sit in the seat of God iji
the heart of the seas,' But Ezekiel said to
him : Thou art a man a7id thou art not God.
For while the Prince of Tyre was walking
without fault in the midst of the stones of
fire, there was mercy upon him. But when
his heart was lifted up, the cherub who over-
sJiadoweth, destroyed him^

§ 8. Now, what are the stones of fire,
but the children of Zion and the children of
Jerusalem? For in the ancient time, in
the days of David and of Solomon his son,
Hiram was a friend to those of the house of
Israel. But when they were carried away
captive from their place, he rejoiced over
them and spurned them with his feet, and
did not remember the friendship of the house
of David. And as to that which I said that
the children of Judah were called the stones
of fire, it was not of my own thought that I
said it, but Jeremiah the Prophet spake con-
cerning- them ; for when he was calling
forth tears for them in the Lamentations, he
said : — The children of Zion were 7nore excel-
lent than precious stones.^ And again he
said : — How are the stones of the Sanctuary
cast down at the head of all the streets ? * And
again He said by the Prophet : — Tlie stones
were holy that were cast down in his land.''
And as to these very stones, the fire was
burning in them, as Jeremiah said : — The
word of the Lord became in my heart like
burning fire and it was hot in my bones. ^
And again He said to Jeremiah : — Lo I I give
My tvord in thy mouth as fire, and this people
shall be as wood.'' And again He said : — Aly
words shall go forth as fire, and as iron that
ctdteth the stone.^ On this account the Pro-
phets, amongst whom Hiram the Prince of
Tyre was walking, were called stones of
fire.

§ 9. And again (God) said to him : — Thou
wast with the Cherub who was ajiointed and


^ Ezek. xxviii. 2.
3 Lam. iv. 2.
5 Zech. ix. 16.
' Jer. V. 14.


2 Ezek. xxviii. 14, 15.
'^ Lam. iv. i.
^ Jer. XX. 9.
^ Jer. xxiii. 29.


overshadowing.'^ For the king, who was
anointed with the holy oil, was called a
Cherub. And he was overshadowing all
his people, as Jeremiah said : — The anointed
of the Lord is the breath of our nostrils, he of
whom we said that in his shadow shall we live
amongst the Gentiles. ' For they were sitting
in the shadow of the king, while he was
standing at their head. And when the
crown of their head fell, they were without
shade. And if any one should say that this
word is spoken concerning Christ, let him
receive that which I write for him without
disputation, and thus he will be persuaded
that it was said with reference to the king.
For Jeremiah said in behalf of the people : —
Woe unto us, for the crown of our head has
fallen!'^ But Christ has not fallen, because
He rose again the third day. For the king
fell from the house of Judah, and never
again was their kingdom set up. And as
for that He said again : — / will destroy the
overshadowing Cherub."^ For the Cherub
that He will destroy is Nebuchadnezzar,
as it is written : — He performed a work in
Tyre, and there was given him by Tyre no
hire for his host., and in retur7i for the work
of Tyre there was given him the land of
Egypt."" And why was hire not given by
Tyre to Nebuchadnezzar ? Clearly because
its wealth went away in the sea, so that
Nebuchadnezzar did not receive it. And at
that time He destroyed the overshadowing
Cherub, which is Nebuchadnezzar. For
there are two Cherubs, one anointed and
overshadowing, and one overshadowing
but not anointed. For He said above : —
Thou wast with the Cherub anointed and over-
shadowing.^ And lower down He said : — /
will destroy thee the overshadowing Cherub /"
and did not say "anointed." For Nebu-
chadnezzar was not anointed, but David
and Solomon were, and the other kings who
arose after them. And how was Nebuchad-
nezzar called overshadowing ? Clearly on


9 Ezek. xxviii.
2 Lam. v. 16.
•* Ezek. xxix. 18, 19.
*> Ezek. xxviii.


14.


16.


^ Lam. iv. 20.
3 Ezek. xxviii. 16.
5 Ezek. xxviii. 14.


356


APHRAHAT.


account of the vision of the tree, when he
saw a tree in the midst of the earth, beneath
which dwelt all the beasts of the wilderness
and on its branches dwelt all the birds of
heaven, and from it all flesh was fed. When
Daniel interpreted his dream to him, Daniel
said to him : — Tlioii art the tree, that tree
which thou saiuest hi the viidst of the earth,
and beneath thee dwell all the nations. ^ On
this account he was the overshadowing
Cherub ; who destroyed the Prince of Tyre,
because he rejoiced over the children of
Israel, for that they were carried away cap-
tive from their land, and because his heart
was exalted. This Tyre also lay waste
seventy years like Jerusalem which sat in
desolation seventy years. For Isaiah said
concerning it : — Tyre shall wander seventy
years, as the days of one king, and shall
commit fornication with all the kingdoms that
are upo?i the face of the earths

§ lo. O thou that art exalted and lifted
up, let not the vaunting of thine heart mis-
lead thee, nor say thou, I will go up against
the rich land and against the powerful beast.
For that beast will not be slain by the ram,
seeing that its horns are broken. For the
he-goat broke the horns of the ram.^ Now
the he-goat has become the mighty beast.
For when the children of Japhet held the
kingdom, then they slew Darius, the king of
Persia. Now the fourth beast has swallowed
up the third. And this third consists of the
children of Japhet, and the fourth consists
of the children .of Shem, for they are the
children of Esau. Because, when Daniel
saw the vision of the four beasts, he saw
first the children of Ham, the seed of Nim-
rod, which the Babylonians are ; and sec-
ondly, the Persians and Medes, w^ho are the
children of Japhet ; and thirdly, the Greeks,
the brethren of the Medes ; and fourthly,
the children of Shem, which the children of
Esau are. For a confederacy was formed
between the children of Japhet and the chil-
dren of Shem. Then the government was
taken away from the children of Japhet, the

•— — — — — — >

^ Dan. iv. 17, 19. ^ Is. xxiii 15, 17, ^ x^-^x\. vii. 7.


younger, and was given to Shem, the elder ;
and to this day it continues, and will con-
tinue for ever. But when the time of the
consummation of the dominion of the chil-
dren of Shem shall have come, the Ruler,
who came forth from the children of Judah,
shall receive the kingdom, when He shall
come in His second Advent.

§ II. For in the vision of Nebuchadnezzar,
when he saw it, which Daniel made known
and showed to Nebuchadnezzar, when he
saw the image which stood over against
him, the head of the image was of gold, and
its breast and arms of silver, and its belly
and thighs of brass, and its legs and feet
of iron and potter s clay.*' And Daniel said
to Nebuchadnezzar : — Thou art the head of
gold.^ And why was he called the head of
gold.? Was it not because the word of Jere-
miah was fulfilled in him .? For Jeremiah
said '.—Babylon is a golden cup in the hand
of the Lord, that makes all the earth to drink
of its wine.^ And also Babylon was called
the head of all the kingdoms, as it is writ-
ten : — Babylon was the head of the kingdom
of Nimrod. ^

§ 12. And he said that the breast and the
arms of the image were of silver. This signi-
fied concerning a kingdom which was in-
ferior to it ; namely, Darius the Mede. For
(God) put the kingdom into the balance.
For the kingdom of the house of Nimrod
was weighed and was found wanting. And
since it was wanting, Darius received it.
Because of this he said that his kingdomwas
inferior.^ And because it was inferior, the
children of Media did not rule in all the earth.
Now the belly and thighs of the image were of
brass, and he said : — The third kingdom
shall rule in all the earth. ^ It is the kingdom
of the children of Javan, who are children
of Japhet. For the children of Javan came
in against the kingdom of their brethren.
For Madai and Javan are sons of Japhet. '
But Madai was foolish and incapable of gov-


4 Dan. ii. 31-33.
^ |er. li. 7.
s Dan. ii. 39.
' Gen. X. z


6 lb. ii. 38.
' Gen X. 10.
9 Ibid.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


357


erning the kingdom, until Javan, his brother,
came, who was wise and cunning, to destroy
the kingdom. For Alexander, son of Philip,
ruled in all the earth.

§ 13. And the legs and feet of the image
were of iron. This is the kingdom of the
children of Shem, who are the children of
Esau, which is strong as iron. And he
said : — As iron breaks a?id subdueth every-
thing, so also the fourth ki?igdo7n shall break
and bruise everything'.^ And he explained
with reference to the feet and toes, that
part of them was of iron and part of them
of potter's clay. For he said : — Thus they
shall be mingled with the seed of man,
and they shall not cleave one to another, as
iron cannot be mixed with clay.'^ This re-
ferred to the fourth kingdom. Because in
the kingdom of the children of Esau ^ there
was not a king, the son of a king, estab-
lished to govern the kingdom ; but when
the children of Esau were gathered together
into a powerful city, then they made a sen-
ate. And from thence they used to set up
as chief of the city a wise man to govern the
kingdom, lest when the Governor of their
kingdom should weigh them, they might be
found wanting, and the kingdom might be
taken away from them as the kingdom of the
children of arrogant Nimrod was taken away
and given to the children of foolish Madai.
And this king who was set up, the seed of
that former king was destroymg him ; and
they did not cleave one to another. But as
to the seed of man which is compared with
the clay, the meaning is this ; that when the
king was chosen for the kingdom, he min-
gled himself with the root of the kingdom of
iron.

§ 14. And he showed that in the days of
those kings ^ who shall arise in the kingdom^ the
God of heaven will set up a ki?igdom which shall
not be destroyed and shall not pass away /or
ever. ^ This is the Kingdom of King Messiah,
which is that which shall cause the fourth
kingdom to pass away. And above he


1 Dan ii. 40. 2 x^^x\. ii. 43.

■^ This passage describes the Roman Repubhc and
Empire. 4 j)^,! jj ^


said : — Thou sawest a stoJte which was cut out.,
but not by hands ; and it smote the image upon
its feet of iron and potter^ s clay and broke them
to pieces!' Now he did not say that it smote
upon the head of the iniage, nor on its
breast and arms, nor yet on its belly and
thighs, but on its feet ; because that, of the
whole image, that stone when it comes will
find the feet alone. And in the next verse
he said : — The iron and the brass and the silver
afid the gold were broken to pieces together. ^ For
after them, when King Messiah shall reign,
then He will humble the fourth kingdom,
and will break the whole image ; for by the
whole image the world is meant. Its head
is Nebuchadnezzar ; its breast and arms the
King of Media and Persia ; its belly and
thighs the King of the Greeks ; its legs and
feet the kingdom of the children of Esau ;
the stone, which smote the image and brake
it, and with which the whole earth was
filled, is the kingdom of King Messiah, Who
will bring to nought the kingdom of this
world, and He will rule for ever and ever.

§ 15. Again hear concerning the vision of
the four beasts which Daniel saw coming up
out of the sea and diverse one from another.
This is the appearance of them : — The first
was like a Hon., and it had the wings of an
eagle. And T saw that its wings were plucked
away., and it stood up like a man upon its feet,
and the heart of a ma?i 7v as given to it! And
the second beast was like a bear, and it raised
itself up upon one side and there were three ribs
in its mouth between its teeth. And the third
beast was like a leopard., aiid it hadfoicr wings
and four heads. And the fourth beast was
exceedingly terrible and strong and powerful, afid
it had great teeth. It devoured and brake to
pieces., and whatsoever remained, it stamped zuith
its feet. Now the great sea that Daniel saw ^
is the world : and these four beasts are the
four kingdoms signified above.

§ 16. Now as to the first beast, he said
concerning it, that it was like a lion, and it
had the wings of an eagle. For the first


^ Dan. ii. 34.
■' Dan. vii,^ 4-7.


6 Dan. ii. 35.
8 Dan. vii. 2.


358


APHRAHAT.


beast was the kingdom of Babylon, which
was like a lion. For thus Jeremiah wrote
saying : — Israel is a waiidcfing sheep. The
lions caused them to wander. First the king of
Assyria devoured him. And this last was
stronger tha?i he, Nebuchadnezzar king of Baby-
lon.^ So Jeremiah called him a lion. And
he said : — He has the wings of an eagle. For
thus it is written that, when Nebuchadnezzar
went out to the wilderness with the beasts,
he grew hair like (the plumage) of an eagle.
And he said : — / saw that its wings were
plucked away and it stood iip7 ight upon its feet
as a jnan, and a ma?i^s hea?'t was given to it?'
For first, in the vision of the image, he was
compared to gold which is more precious
than anything which is used in the world.
So in the vision of the beasts he is compared
to a lion which excels in its might all the
beasts. And again he was compared to an
eagle which surpasses every bird. What-
soever was written about him was fulfilled
in him. For the Lord said concerning him :
— / have placed a yoke of iron upon the neck of
all the nations^ and they shall serve the ki?ig of
Babylon seventy years. And also the beasts
of the desert and the birds of heave7i have I given
to him to se7^ve him. For since the king was
like the head of gold, men served him as a
king. And when he went out to the wilder-
ness, the beasts served him as a lion. And
when his hair was like (the plumage) of an
eagle, the birds of heaven served him as
an eagle. But when his heart was lifted up,
and he knew not that the power was given
to him from heaven, the yoke of iron was
'broken from the neck of men, and he went
forth with the beasts, and instead of the
heart of a king there was given him the
heart of a lion. And when he was lifted up
over the beasts, the heart of a lion was
taken away from him, and there was given
him tlie heart of a bird. And when wings
grew upon him like those of an eagle, he
exalted himself over the birds. And then
his wings also were plucked away and there
was given to him a humble heart. And


' Jer. 1. 17.

•^ Jer. xxviii. 14; xxv. Ii.


2 Dan. iv. 30.


when he knew that the Most High has
authority in the kingdom of man, to give it
to whomsoever He will, then as a man he
praised Him.

§ 17. And as for the second beast, he said
concerning him that it was like a bear and
raised itself 2ip upon one side. Because when
the kingdom of Media and Persia arose, it
arose in the east. And three ribs were in its
mouth. Because the ram was pushing to-
wards the West and towards the North and
towards the South, towards three winds of
heaven. These three winds it held, and
pushed against, like the three ribs that were
in the mouth of the bear ; until the he-goat
came forth from the west, and smote the
ram and took out the ribs that were in his
mouth.

S 18. And concernino^ the third beast he
said that it was like a leopard, and it had four
birds' wings on its back and that beast had
four heads. Now this third beast was Alex-
ander the Macedonian. For he was strong
as a leopard. And as for the four wings
and the four heads that the beast had, that
was because he gave the kingdom to his
four friends to govern after him, when he
had come and slain Darius and reigned in
his stead.

§ 19. And of the fourth beast he said that
it was exceedingly terrible and strong and
mighty, devouring and crushing and tramp-
ling with its feet anything that remained.
It is the kingdom of the children of Esau.*
Because after that Alexander the Mace-
donian became king, the kingdom of the
Greeks was founded, since Alexander also
was one of them, even of the Greeks. But
the vision of the third beast was fulfilled in
him, since the third and the fourth were
one. Now Alexander reigned for twelve
years. And the kings of the Greeks arose
after Alexander, being seventeen kings, and
their years were two hundred and sixty-nine
years from Seleucus Nicanor to Ptolemy.
And the Caesars were from Augustus to
Philip Caesar, seventeen kings. And their

4 The Romans are here signified, according to Rab-
binical doctrine, as descendants of Esau.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


359


years are two hundred and ninety-three
years ; ' and eighteen years of Severus.

§ 20. For Daniel said: — I was considering
the ten horns that were upon the head of the
beast. For the ten horns were te?t kings'^ who
arose at that time until Antiochus. And he
said : — A little horn arose from between those
ten and three fell before it.'' For when Anti-
ochus arose in the king-dom, he humbled
three kings, and he exalted himself against
the saints of the Most High and against
Jerusalem. And he defiled the sanctuary/
And he caused the sacrifice and the offer-
inofs to cease for a week and half a week,
namely, for ten and a-half years. And he
brought in fornicators into the house of the
Lord, and he caused the observances of the
Law to cease/ And he slew righteous men
and gave them to the birds of heaven and
to the beasts of the earth. For in his days
was fulfilled the word that David spoke : ^ —
O God, the Gentiles have come into thine ijiheri-
fance, and have defied Thy holy temple. They
have made feriisalem desolate. They have given
the dead bodies of Thy servants as food to the
birds of heaven^ and the flesh of Thy righteous
ones to the beasts of the earth. 'They have poured
out their blood like water round about ferusalem,
071 d there is none to bury them. For this was
accomplished at that time, when the vener-
able and aged Eleazar was slain, and the
sons of the blessed Samuna, seven in num-
ber,'' and when Judas (Maccabeus) and his
brethren were struggling on behalf of their
people, when they were dwelling in hiding-
places. ^ At that time the horn made war with
the saints,'^ and their power prevailed. And
the wicked Antiochus spake words against the
Most Hi gh.,a7id changed the times and the seasons.^
And he made to cease the covenant of Abra-


1 The •' kingdom of the Greeks " is here reckoned
from the "era of the Greeks," B.C. 311-12, in the reign
of Seleucus Nicanor, to the end of the Ptolemies ;
B.C. 43,— 2rx) years, as above. From B.C. 43 to the
death of the Emperor Phihp, a.d. 249, makes up (ap-
proximately) the 2Q3 years of the text. Philip was re-
puted to have been the first Christian Emperor,
(Euseb. H. E., VI. 34 ; Jerome, Chrouicon).

2 Dan. vii. 8, 24. ^ d^^,-, vjj ^

4 2 Mace. vi. 2-4. ^ 2 Mace. v. 26.

*' Ps. Ixxix. 1-3. ' 2 Mace. vi. 18-31 ; vii.

^ 2 Mace, v, 27. 9 D^n. vii. 21.

' Dan. vii. 25.


ham, and abolished the Sabbath of rest. ^
For he commanded the Jews that they
should not circumcise. Therefore, (the
Prophet) said concerning him; — He shall
think to change the times and the seasons and the
laws., and they were given into his hand for a
time., times., and half a time.'' Now the time
and half a time is the week and a half,
which is ten years and a half. Again he
said : — The judgment was set a?td they took away
his authority front him, to i?ijure and destroy him
ujttil the end of the kingdom.^ For the judg-
ment came upon Antiochus, a judgment
from heaven ; ^ and he became sick with a
grievous and evil sickness, and on account
of the smell of him as he rotted, no man
could approach him, for worms were crawl-
ing and falling from him and eating his
flesh because he oppressed the worm facob.^
Awd his flesh rotted in his lifetime, because
he caused the dead bodies of the sons of
Jerusalem to rot and they were not buried.
And he became defiled in his own eyes, be-
cause he had defiled the sanctuary of God.
And he prayed and was not heard, ^ because
he did not hearken to the groanings of the
righteous whom he slew. For he wrote a
letter and sent it to the Jews and called them
'^my friends,'' but God had not mercy on
him, but he died in his torment.

§ 21. He said again : — The saints of the
Most High shall receive th e King do ni. ^ \Miat
shall w^e say concerning this } Have the
children of Israel received the Kingdom of
the Most High.? God forbid. Or has that
people come upon the clouds of heaven }
This has passed away from them. For
Jeremiah said concerning them : — Call them
rejected silver, for the Lord has rejected th em. "^
Again he said : — He ivill not again regard
tJie77t.^ And Isaiah said concerning them :
— Pass by ; pass by ; approach not the de-
filed."^ And concerning the saints of the Most
High (Daniel) said thus : — They shall i?iherit


' 2 Mace. vi. 10, II.
4 Dan. vii 26.
6 Is. xli. 14.
^ Dan. vii. 27.
' Lam. iv. 16.


3 Dan. vii. 25.

5 2 Mace. ix. 5-12.

^ 2 Mace. ix. 13, 18, 19, 28.

9 Jer. vi. 30.

2 Is. hi. li.


36o


aPHRAHAT.


the King do 171 for ever^ For these rested a
little frotn the burden of kings and princes,'^
namely, from after the death of Antiochus
till the sixty-two weeks were fulfilled. And
the Son of Man came to free them and
gather them tog-ether, but they did not re-
ceive Him. For He came to obtain fruit
from them, and they did not give it to Him.
For their vines were of the vine of Sodom
and of the stock of Gomorrha, a vineyard^ in
which thorns grew, and which bore wild
grapes.'^ Their vine was bitter, and their
fruit sour. The thorns could not be soft-
ened, nor could the bitterness change to
the nature of wine, nor could the sour fruit
change to a sweet nature.

§ 22. For Isaiah first set men of Judah as
judges over them,^ and there was planted
amongst them a new and beloved planting.
But these are those judges who shall sit on
twelve thrones and judge their twelve tribes. ^
And thus He said to the judges : ' — fudge be-
tween Me and My vi7ieyard, what further, O
ye judges, should I have done to My vine-
yard, that I did not do P For lo I I planted
it with vine scions, and they became strange
vines / surrounded it with a fence of
heavenly Watchers and I built its tower, the
holy Temple. And I dug out its zvinepress,
the baptism of the priests. And I brought
down rain upon it, the words of My Pro-
phets. And I pruned it and trimmed it, from
the works of the Amorites. / looked that
it should produce grapes of righteousness,
and it produced wild grapes of iniquity and
sin. I looked for judgment and behold op-
pression, and for righteousness and there was
a cry. Hear, O ye judges, what I will do to
My vineyard. I will break open its fence,
and it shall be for dow7i-treading. And I
will tear down its tower, and it shall be for
pillage. And I will make it to become a des-
ert because it produced wild grapes. And it
shall 7iot be dressed and it shall not be pruned.
And thorns and weeds shall grow up in it.


^ Dan. vii. 27.
3 Deut. xxxii. 32.
5 Is. V. I. sqq.
' Is. V. 1-6.


^ Hos. viii. 10.

^ Is. V. 2.

6 Matt. xix. 28.


And I will command the clouds that they send
not down rain upo?i it. For the heavenly
Watchers departed from the fence of the vine-
yard ; and the mighty tower on which they
relied was torn down. The winepress, the
cleansing away of their offences, was over-
thrown. When the vine ivas without blemish,
it did not prove of service. Now that the fire
has devoured it and that it is laid waste, how
shall it prove of service j^ The fire has de-
voured its tivo branches and its inward parts
are wasted."" For its two branches are the
two kingdoms, and its inward part which is
laid waste is Jerusalem. Many servants
were sent to them by the Lord of the vine-
yard.^ And they slew them and did not
send the fruit to the Lord of the vineyard.
After the servants the beloved Son was
sent, to receive from them the fruit and
to bring it back to Him that sent Him.
And they seized Him and cast Him out of
the vineyard : and they cut spikes from the
thorns of the vineyard and fixed them in His
hands. And He was hungry and asked
"food of them ; and they took and gave Him
gall from the fruit of the vineyard. He
was thirsty and asked of them drink ; and
they gave Him vinegar and He would not
drink it. And they platted a crown of thorns
that had sprung up in the vineyard, and
placed it on the head of the Son of the Lord
of the vineyard. For from the time that the
vineyard was made, it displayed these fruits.
Therefore its Lord uprooted it and cast it in
the fire ; and planted good fruit-bearing
vines in the vineyard, and such as gladden
the husbandman. For Christ is the vine-
yard, and His Father is the husbandman ;
and they who drink of His cup are the vines.
Therefore vineyard was formed instead of
vineyard. And furthermore at His coming
He handed over the kingdom to the Ro-
mans, as the children of Esau are called.
And these children of Esau will keep the
kinofdom for its gfiver.

§ I'i^. And the holy People inherited an
eternal Kingdom ; the holy people who were


^ Ezek. XV. 4, 5.


3 Luke XX. 10 sqq.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


361


chosen instead of the People. For He pro-
voked them to jealousy ivith a people that was not
a people. And with a foolish people He angered
theni.^ And He set free the holy people.
For lo ! every covenant of God is freed from
the burden of kings and princes^ For even if a
man has served the heathen, as soon as ever
he draws nigh unto the covenant of God, he
is set free. But the Jews are toiling in bond-
age amongst the Gentiles. For thus he said
about the Saints ; — They shall inherit the
Kingdom that is beneath the heaven.^ But if he
had said it about them (the Jews), why are
they toiling in service amongst the Gentiles .''
And if they say that it has not taken place
as yet ; then (we ask) is the Kingdom that
shall be given to the Son of man, to be
heavenly or earthly } And lo ! the children
of the Kingdom are sealed, and they have
received their emancipation from this world.
For since it exists now, it will not be willing
to be subjected to tlie power of the King,
Who shall come and take to Himself His
Kingdom. But it will guard His pledges
with honour, that when He shall come to
bring to nought the Kingdom, he may come
upon them not in anger. For when He,
Whose is the Kingdoin,"" shall come in His
second coming, He will take to Himself
whatever He has given. And He Himself
will be King for ever and ever. And His
Kingdom shall not pass away, because
it is an eternal Kingdom.

§ 24. For first. He gave the Kingdom to
the sons of Jacob, and subdued to them the
children of Esau ; as Isaac said to Esau : —
Thou shall serve facob thy brother. ^ A n d w h e n
again they did not prosper in the Kingdom,
He took it away from the children of Jacob
and gave it to the children of Esau until
He should come Whose it is.^ And they will
deliver up the deposit to its Giver, and
will not deal fraudulently with it. And
the Guardian of the Kingdom is subject to
Him to Whom all things are subject. There-
fore this Kingdom of the children of Esau


1 Deut. xxxii. 21.
^ Dan. vii. 27.
^ Gen, XX vii. 40.


2 Hos. viii. 10.
4 Gen. xlix. 10.
^ Gen. xlix. 10.


shall not be delivered up into the hand of
the hosts that are gathered together, that
desire to go up against it ; because the
Kingdom is being kept safe for its Giver,
and He Himself will preserve it. And as
to this that I wrote to thee, beloved, that
the Kingdom of the children of Esau is being
kept safe for its Giver, doubt not about it,
that that Kingdom will not be conquered.
For a mighty champion Whose name is
Jesus shall come with power, and bearing
as His armour all the power of the Kingdom.
And search out and see that also by the poll-
tax ^ He was enrolled amongst them. And
as He was enrolled by the poll-tax amongst
them. He will also succour them. And His
standard abounds in that place, and they are
clothed in His armour, and shall not be
found wanting in war. And if thou should-
est say unto me : — '' In the years of the
Kings that preceded these, why did they
conquer and subdue the beast.?" It was
because the chiefs and kings who stood up
at that time in the Kingdom of the children
of Esau did not wish to lead with them to
the war the Man who was enrolled with them
in the poll-tax. Therefore the beast was
subdued a little, but was not slain.

§ 25. But concerning these things that I
have written for thee, my beloved, namely,
concerning that which is written in Daniel,
I have not brought them to an end, but
(have stopped) short of the end. And if any
man dispute about them, say thus to him,
that these words are not concluded, because
the words of God are infinite, nor will they
be concluded. For the foolish man says,
''Here unto (these) words reach." And
again, it is not possible to add to them or to
diminish from them. ® For the riches of God
cannot be computed or limited. For if thou
take away water from the sea, the deficiency
will be imperceptible. And if thou remove
sand from the sea-shore, its measure will
not be diminished. And if thou count the
stars of heaven, thou wilt not arrive at the
sum of them. And if thou kindle fire from


■^ Luke ii. i, 2.


^ Deut. iv. 2.


362


APHRAHAT.


a burning, it will not a whit be lessened.
And if thou receive of the Spirit of Christ,
Christ will not a whit be diminished. And
if Christ dwell in thee, yet He will not be
completed in thee. And if the sun enter
the windows of thy house, yet the sun in its
entirety will not come to thee. And all these
things that I have enumerated for thee w^ere
created by the word of God. Therefore know
thou, that, as concerning the word of God
no man has reached or will reach its end.
Therefore, have thou no disputiition about
these things, but say : — ''These things are
so. That is enough. " But hear these things
from me, and also enquire about them of
our brethren, children of our faith. But
whosoever shall mock at the words of his
brother, even if he say, ''mine are wise,"
yet hearken not to his words. And concern-
ing what I wrote to thee about these forces
that are being stirred up to war, it is not as
though anything has been revealed to me
that I have made known these things to thee,
but attend to the words at the head of the
letter : — Every one who exalteth hh?tself shall
be humbled. For even if the forces shall go
up and conquer, yet know that it is a chas-
tisement of God ; and though they conquer,
they shall be condemned in a righteous
judgment. But yet be thou assured of this,
that the beast shall be slain at its (appointed)
time. But do thou, my brother, at this
time be earnest in imploring mercy, that
there may be peace upon the people of
God.


Demonstration VI. — Of Monks.

§ I. Expedient is the word that I speak
and worthy of acceptance : — Let us now
awake from our sleep, ^ and lift up both our
hearts and hands to God towards heaven ;
lest suddenly the Lord of the house come,
that when He comes He may find us in watch-
fulness.'^ Let us observe the appointed time
of the glorious bridegroom,^ that we may

^ Rom. xiii. 11. 2 Luke xii. 37. ^ Matt, xxv. 4, 10.


enter with Him into His bride-chamber.
Let us prepare oil for our lamps that we
may go forth to meet Him with joy. Let
us make ready provision for our abiding-
place, for the way that is narrow and
strait. And let us put away and cast
from us all uncleanness, and put on wed-
ding garments. Let us trade with the silver
that we have received," that we may be
called diligent servants. Let us be constant
in prayer, that w^e may pass by the place
where fear dwells. Let us cleanse our heart
from iniquity, that we may see the Lofty
One in His honour. Let us be merciful, as
it is w^ritten, that God may have mercy upon
us. ^ Let there be peace amongst us, that
we may be called the brethren of Christ.
Let us hunger for righteousness, that we
may be satisfied ® from the table of His King-
dom. Let us be the salt of truth, that we
may not become food for the serpent. Let
us purge our seed from thorns, that we may
produce fruit a hundred-fold. Let us found
our building on the rock,^ that it may not be
shaken by the winds and waves. Let us be
vessels unto honour^ that we may be required
by the Lord for His use. Let us sell all our
possessions, and buy for ourselves the pearl,'
that we may be rich. Let us lay up our
treasures in heaven,^ that when we come we
may open them and have pleasure in them.
Let us visit our Lord in the persons of the
sick,^ that He may invite us to stand at His
right hand. Let us hate ourselves and love
Christ, as He loved us and gave Himself up
for our sakes. ^ Let us honour the spirit of
Christ, that we may receive grace from Him.
Let us be strangers to the world," even as
Christ was not of it. Let us be humble and
mild, that we may inherit the land of life.
Let us be unflagging in His service, that He
may cause us to serve in the abode of the-
saints. Let us pray His prayer in purity,
that it may have access to the Lord of


4 Matt. XXV. 21.

6 Matt. V. 6.

^ 2 Tim. ii. 21.

' Matt. vi.20.

3 John xii. 25 ; Eph. v.


2.


5 Matt. v. 7.
■^ Matt. vii. 24.
» Matt. xiii. 46.
2 Matt. xxv. 33-35.
4 John xvii. 14.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


363


Majesty. Let us be partakers in His suffer-
ing-, that so we may also rise up in His resur-
rection.' Let us bear His sign upon our
bodies, that we may be delivered from the
wrath to come. For fearful is the day in
which He will come, and who is able to en-
dure it ? ^ Furious and hot is His wrath, and
it will destroy all the wicked. Let us set
upon our head the helmet of redemption/
that we may not be wounded and die in the
battle. Let us gird our loins with truth,
that we may not be found impotent in the
contest. Let us arise and awaken Christ,
that He may still the stormy blasts from us.
Let us take as a shield against the Evil One,
the preparation of the Gospel of our Re-
deemer. Let us receive power from our
Lord to tread upon snakes and scorpions.''
Let us lay aside from us wrath, with all fury
and malice. Let no reviling proceed out of
our mouth, with which we pray unto God.
Let us not be cursers, that we may be de-
livered from the curse of the law. Let us
be diligent workers, that we may obtain our
reward with those of old. Let us take up
the burden of the day, that we may seek a
more abundant reward. Let us not be idle
workers, for lo ! our Lord has hired us for
His vineyard.^ Let us be planted as vines
in the midst of His vineyard, for it is the
true vineyard. Let us be fruitful vines, that
we may not be uprooted out of His vine-
yard. Let us be a sweet odour, that our
fragrance may breathe forth to all around.
Let us be poor in the world, and let us en-
rich many by the doctrine of our Lord.
Let us not call anyone our father in the
earth,'' that we may be the children of the
Father which is in heaven. Though we
have nothing, yet we possess all things.'^
Though no man know us, yet they that
have knowledge of us are many. Let us
rejoice in our hope at every time,* that He
Who is our hope and our Redeemer may re-
joice in us. Let us judge ourselves right-


1 2 Tim. ii. 11, 12.
3 Eph. vi. 14-17.
5 Matt. XX. I
■^ 2 Cor. vi. 9, 10.


' Joel, ii. II.
4 Luke X. 19.
6 Matt, xxiii. 9.
8 Rom. xii. 12.


eously and condemn ourselves, that we may
not hang down our faces before the judges
who shall sit upon thrones and judge the
tribes. '^ Let us take to ourselves, as armour
for the contest, ' the preparation of the Gospel.
Let us knock at the door of heaven,^ that
it may be opened before us, and we may
enter in through it.

Let us diligently ask for mercy, that we
may receive whatsoever is necessary for
us. Let us seek His Kingdom and His
righteousness,* that we may receive increase
in the land. Let us think upon the things
which are above/ on the heavenly things,
and meditate on them, where Christ has been
lifted up and exalted. But let us forsake
the world which is not ours, that we may
arrive at the place to which we have been
invited. Let us raise up our eyes on high,
that we may see the splendour which shall
be revealed. Let us lift up our wings as
eagles, that we may see the body there
where it is. Let us prepare as offerings for
the King desirable fruits, fasting and prayer.
Let us guard His pledge in purity, that He
may trust us over all His treasury. For
whosoever deals falsely with His pledge,
they suffer him not to enter into the trea-
sure-house. Let us be careful of the body of
Christ, that our bodies may rise at the sound
of the trumpet. Let us hearken to the
voice of the bridegroom, that we may go in
with Him into the bride-chamber. Let us
prepare the marriage-gift for His bridal day,
and let us go forth to meet Him with joy.
Let us put on holy raiment, that we may
recline in the chief place of the elect. Who-
soever puts not on wedding raiment,^ they
cast him out into outer darkness. Whoso-
ever excuses himself from the wedding shall
not taste the feast. ^ Whosoever loves fields
and merchandise, shall be shut oat of the
city of Saints. Whosoever does not bear
fruit in the vineyard, shall be uprooted and
cast out to torment. Whosoever has re-


9 Matt. xix. 28.
2 Matt. vii. 7.
4 Col. iii. I, 2.
6 Luke xiv. 18.


1 Eph . vi . 16.
3 Matt. vi. v^■
5 Matt. xxii. 13.


3^4


APHRAHAT.


ceived money from his Lord, let him return
it to its Giver with its increase. ^ Whosoever
desires to become a merchant, let him buy
for himself the field and the treasure that is
in it/ Whosoever receives the good seed,
let him purge his land from thorns.^ Who-
soever desires to be a fisherman, let him
cast forth his net at every time. Whosoever
is training for the conflict, let him keep him-
self from the world. Whosoever wishes to
gain the crown, let him run as a winner in
the race. Whosoever wishes to go down
into the course to contend, let him learn to
(contend) against his adversary. Whoso-
ever wishes to go down to the battle, let
him take unto him armour wherewith to
fight, and let him purify himself at every
time. Whosoever adopts the likeness of
angels, let him be a stranger to men, Who-
soever takes upon him the yoke of the saints,
let him remove from him getting and spend-
ing. Whosoever desires to gain himself, let
him remove from him the gain of the world.
Whosoever loves the abode that is in heaven,
let him not toil at the building of clay that
will fall. Whosoever is expectant of being
caught up in the clouds, let him not make
for himself adorned chariots. Whosoever is
expectant of the marriage-feast of the Bride-
groom, let him not love the feast of this
present time. Whosoever wishes to have
pleasure m the banquet reserved there, let
him remove drunkenness from himself.
Whosoever prepares himself for the supper,
let him not excuse himself,'' nor be a mer-
chant. Whosoever he be on whom the
good seed falls, let him not allow the Evil
One to sow tares in him. Whosoever has
begun to build a tower, let him count up all
the cost thereof.^ Whosoever builds ought
to finish, that he be not a laughing-stock to
them that pass by the way. Whosoever
sets his building on the rock, let him make
its foundations deep, that it may not be cast
down by the billows. Whosoever wishes
to fly from the darkness, let him walk while


1 Matt. XXV. i6.
'^ Matt. xiii. 7.
^ Luke xiv. 29.


2 Matt. xiii. 44.
4 Luke xiv. 18, 19.


he has light." Whosoever fears to fly in
winter,'' let him prepare himself from the
summer-time. Whosoever looks forward to
enter into rest,® let him make ready his pro-
vision for the Sabbath. Whosoever begs for-
giveness of his Lord, let him also forgive
his debtor.^ Whosoever does not demand
back a hundred dinars, his Lord forgives
him ten thousand talents. Whosoever casts
down his Lord's money on the banker's table/
will not be called an* unprofitable servant.
Whosoever loves humility, shall be heir in
the land of life. Whosoever wishes to make
peace, shall be one of the sons of God.'^
Whosoever knows the will of his Lord, let
him do that will, that he may not be beaten
much.^ Whosoever cleanses his heart from
deceits, His eyes shall behold the King in his
beauty.'^ \"\^hosoever receives the Spirit of
Christ, let him adorn his inner man. Who-
soever is called the temple of God, ^ let him
purify his body from all uncleanness. Who-
soever grieves the Spirit of Christ," shall not
raise up his head from griefs. Whosoever
receives the body of Christ, let him keep
his body from all uncleanness. Whosoever
casts off the f?/*;/ man,'' let him not turn back
to his former works. Whosoever puts on the
new man, let him keep himself from allfilthi-
ness. Whosoever has put on armour from
the w^ater (of baptism), let him not put off
his armour that he may not be condemned.
Whosoever takes up the shield ® against the
Evil One, let him keep himself from the darts
which he hurls at him. Whosoever shall
draw back^ his Lord has no pleasure in him.^
Whosoever thinks upon the Law of his
Lord, shall not be troubled with the thoughts
of this world. Whosoever meditates on the
Law of his Lord, is like a tree planted by
the waters.^ Whosoever again has trust in
his Lord, is like a tree that is set out by the
river. Whosoever puts his trust in man


*> John xii. 35.
s Hebr. iv. 11.
1 Matt. XXV. 27.
3 Luke xii. 47.
5 I Cor. iii. 16. 17.
' Eph. iv. 22.
9 Hebr. x.38.


■> Matt. xxiv. 20.
^ Matt, xviii. 24.
2 Matt. V. 9.
■* Is. xxxiii. 17.
** Eph. IV. 30.
^ Eph. vi. 16.
' Ps. i. 2, 3.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


3^5


shall receive the curses of Jeremiah. ^ Who-
soever is invited to the Bridegroom, let him
prepare himself. Whosoever has lighted
his lamp, let him not suffer it to go out.
Whosoever is expectant of the marriage-cry,
let him take oil in his vessel.^ Whosoever
is keeper of the door, let him be on the
watch for his Master. Whosoever loves
virginity, let him become like Elijah. Who-
soever takes up the yoke of the Saints, let
him sit and be silent. Whosoever loves
peace, let him look for his Master as the
hope of life.

§ 2. For, my beloved, our adversary is
skilful. He that contends against us is
crafty. Against the brave and the re-
nowned does he prepare himself, that they
may be weakened. Forthe feeble are his own,
nor does he fight with the captivity that are
made captive" to him. He that has wings
flees from him and the darts that he hurls
at him do not reach him. They that are
spiritual see him when he assails, and his
panoply has no power upon their bodies.
All the children of light are without fear of
him, because the darkness flies from before
the light. The children of the Good fear
not the Evil, for He hath given him to be
trampled by their feet. When he makes
himself like darkness unto them, they be-
come light. And when he creeps upon them
like a serpent, they become salt, whereof he
cannot eat. If he makes himself like the
asp unto them, then they become like
babes. If he comes in upon them in the lust
of food, they, like our Redeemer, conquer
him by fasting. And if he wishes to con-
tend with them by the lust of the eyes, they
lift up their eyes to the height of heaven.
If he wishes by enticements to overcome
them, they do not afford him a hearing. If
he wishes openly to strive with them, lo !
they are clothed in panoply and stand up
against him. If he wishes to come in
againsi, them by sleep, they are wakeful and
vigilan: and sing psalms and pray. If he
allures them by possessions, they give them


1 Jer. x^ ii. 5, 7, 8.


2 Matt. XXV. 6.


to the poor. If he comes in as sweetness
against them, they taste it not, knowing that
he is bitter. If he inflames them with the
desire of Eve, they dwell alone, and not
with the daughters of Eve.

§3. For it was through Eve that he came
in upon Adam,^ and Adam was enticed be-
cause of his inexperience. And again he
came in against Joseph through his master's
wife," but Joseph was acquainted with his
craftiness and would not afford him a hear-
ing. Through a woman he fought with
Samson,^ until he took away his Nazarite-
ship. Reuben was the first-born of all his
brethren, and through his father's wife," (the
adversary) cast a blemish upon him. Aaron
was the great high-priest of the house of
Israel, and through Miriam ^ his sister he
envied Moses. Moses was sent to deliver
the people from Egypt, and took with him
the woman who advised him to shameful
acts,® and the Lord met with Moses, and de-
sired to slay him, till he sent back his wife
to Midian. David was victorious in all his
battles, yet through means of a daughter of
Eve ^ there was found a blemish in him.
Amnon was beautiful and fair in counte-
nance, yet (the adversary) took him captive
by desire for his sister,-^ and Absalom slew
him on account of the humbling of Tamar.
Solomon was greater than all the kings of
the earth, yet in the days of his old age his
wives led his heart astray. ^ Through Jezebel,
daughter of Ethbaal, the wickedness of
Ahab was increased,^ and he became alto-
gether a heathen. Furthermore, the adver-
sary tempted Job through his children and
his possessions," and when he could not pre-
vail over him, he went and brought against
him his armour, and became, bringing with
him a daughter of Eve, who had caused
Adam to sink, and through her mouth he
said to Job, her righteous husband : — Curse
God.^ But Job rejected her counsel. King


3 Gen. iii. 6.
5 Judg. xvi. i%ff.
■' Num. xii. i,ff.
9 2 Sam. xi. 2yjf.
2 I Kin. xi. 1-4.
^Job.i. i3,#.


4 Gen. xxxix. 7,^.
6 Gen. XXXV. 22.

8 Exod. iv. 24 26.

' 2 Sam. xiii. i, ff.

3 I Kin. xvi. 31, xxi. 5,^.

5 Job ii. 9.


366


APHRAHAT.


Asa also conquered the Accursed-of-life,
when he wished to come in against him,
through his mother.^ For Asa knew his
craftiness and removed his mother from her
high estate, and cut in pieces her idol and
cast it down. John was greater than all
the prophets, yet Herod slew him because
of the dancing of a daughter of Eve/
Haman was wealthy and third in honour
from the King, yet his wife counselled him to
destroy the Jews.^ Zimri was head of the
tribe of Simeon, yet Cozbi, daughter of the
chiefs of Midian, overthrew him, and be-
cause of one woman twenty-four thousand
of Israel fell in one day/

§ 4. Therefore, my brethren, if any man
who is a monk or a saint, who loves the
solitary life, yet desires that a woman,
bound by monastic vow like himself, should
dwell with him, it would be better for him
in that case to take (to wife) a woman
openly and not be made wanton by lust.
So also again the woman, if she be not
separated from the solitary, it is better for
her to marry openly. Woman then ought
to dwell with woman, and man to dwell
with man. And also whatever man desir^
to continue in holiness, let not his spouse
dwell with him, lest he turn back to his
former condition, and so be esteemed an
adulterer. Therefore this counsel is becom-
ing and right and good, that I give to my-
self and you, my beloved solitaries, who do
not take wives, and to the virgins vvho do
not marry, and to those who have loved
holiness. It is just and right and becoming,
that even if a man should be distressed, he
should continue alone. And thus it be-
comes him to dwell, as it is written in the
Prophet Jeremiah : — Blessed is the man who
shall take tip Thy yoke in his youth, and sit
alo7ie and be silent, because he has taken jipon
him Thy yoke!' For thus, my beloved, it be-
comes him who takes up the yoke of Christ,
to preserve his yoke in purity.

§ 5. For thus it is written, my beloved,


' I Kings. XV. 13.
3 Esth. vi. 13.
^ Sam. iii. 27, 28


2 Matt. xi. II ; xiv. 6, sq.
* Num. XXV. 6-15.


concerning Moses, that from the time the
Holy One was revealed to him, he also
loved holiness. And from the time he was
sanctified, his wife ministered not to him.
But it is thus written : — Joshua, the son of
Nun, was the minister of Moses f'om his child-
hood! And of Joshua again it is thus written
concerning him, that he used not to depart
frofn the tabernacle! And the temporal taber-
nacle was not ministered to by a woman,
because the Law did not allow women to
enter the temporal tabernacle, but even
when they came to pray, they used to pray
at the door of the temporal tabernacle, and
then turn back. Moreover, he commanded
the Priests, that at the time of their ministry
they should continue in holiness, and should
not know their wives. And also concerning
Elijah it is thus written, that at one time he
dwelt in Mount Carmel, and at another he
dwelt at the brook Cherith, and was min-
istered to by his disciple ; and because his
heart was in heaven, the bird of heaven
used to bring sustenance to him ; and
because he took upon him the likeness
of the angels of heaven, those very angels
brought him bread and water when he was
fleeing from before Jezebel. ® And because he
set all his thought in heaven, he was caught
up in the chariot of tire to heaven,^ and
there his dwelling-place was established for
ever. Elisha also walked in the footsteps
of his Master. He used to dwell in the
upper chamber of the Shunamite, and was
ministered to by his disciple. For thus the
Shunamite said ; — He is a holy Prophet of God
and passes by us continually, for thus it becomes
his holiness that we should make for hint an
upper chamber and do for hijii the service that is
{necessary) in it! Now what was the service
necessary in the upper chamber of Elisha }
Clearly the bed and table and stool and
lamp-stand only. But what shall we say
of John .? He also used to dwell amongst
men, and preserved his virginity honour-
ably, and received the Spirit of God. ' More-


'^ Ex. xxxiii. II. ■'//?.
9 2 Kings ii. 11.


'^ I Kings xvii. 3-5 ; xix. 1-8.
' 2 KiniTs iv. 8-10.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


367


over, the blessed Apostle said concerning-
himself and concerning- Barnabas : — Had we
then not power to eat and to dri7ik and to
lead about wives with us ? But it was not he-


co filing or right. ^


§ 6. Therefore, brethren, because we know
and have seen that from the beginning it
was through woman that the adversary had
access unto men, and to the end he will
accomplish it by her — for she is the weapon
of Satan, and through her he fights against
the champions. Through her he makes
music at every time, for she became as a
harp for him frorii the first day. For be-
cause of her the curse of the Law was es-
tablished, and because of her the promise
unto death was made. For with pangs she
bears children and delivers them to death.
Because of her the earth was cursed, that it
should bring forth thorns and tares. Ac-
cordingly, by the coming of the offspring of
the Blessed Mary the thorns are uprooted,
the sweat wiped away, the fig-tree cursed,^
the dust made salt, ^ the curse nailed to the
cross,' the edge of the sword removed from
before the tree of life and it given as food to
the faithful, and Paradise promised to the
blessed and to virgins and to the saints.
So the fruit of the tree of life is given as
food to the faithful and to virgins, and to
those that do tlie will of God has the door
been opened and the way made plain. And
the fountain flows and gives drink to the
thirsty. The table is laid and the supper
prepared. The fatted ox is slain and the
cup of redemption mixed. The feast is pre-
pared and the Bridegroom at hand, soon to
take his place. The apostles have given
the invitation and the called are very many.
O ye chosen, prepare yourselves. The
light has shone forth both bright and fair,
and garments not made with hands are pre-
pared. The marriage cry is at hand. The
tombs will be opened and the treasures laid
bare. The dead shall rise and the living
shall fly to meet the King. The banquet is


^ I Cor ix. 4, 5.
3 Matt. V. 13.


2 Matt. xxi.
4 Col. ii. 14.


19.


laid, and the cornet shall encourage and
the trumpets shall hasten (them). The
Watchers of heaven shall speed, and the
throne shall be set for the Judge. He that
laboured shall rejoice, and he that was un-
profitable shall fear. He that did evil shall
not draw nigh unto the Judge. Those on
the right hand shall exult, and those on the
left shall weep and wail. Those that are
in the light shall be glorified, and those that
are in the darkness shall groan that they may
moisten their tongue. Grace has gone by,
and justice reigns. There is no repentance in
that place. Winter is at hand ; the summer
has passed away. The Sabbath of rest has
come ; toil has ceased. Night has passed
away ; the light reigns. As to death, its
sting is broken and it is swallowed up in
life. ^ Those that return to Sheol shall weep
and gnash their teeth, and those that go to
the Kingdom shall rejoice and exult and
dance and sing praises. For those that take
not wives shall be ministered to by the
Watchers of heaven. Those that preserve
chastity shall rest in the sanctuary of the
Most High. The Only Begotten Who is
from the bosom of His Father shall cause
all the solitaries to rejoice. There is there
neither male nor female, neither bond nor
free,*' but they all are the children of the
Most High. And all the pure virgins who
are betrothed to Christ shall light their lamps '
and with the Bridegroom shall they go into
the marriao-e chamber. All those that are
betrothed to Christ are far removed from
the curse of the Law, and are redeemed from
the condemnation of the daughters of Eve ;
for they are not wedded to men so as to re-
ceive the curses and come into the pains.
They take no thought of death, because they
do not deliver children to him. And in
place of a mortal husband, they are be-
trothed to Christ. And because they do not
bear children, there is given to the 771 the 7tame
that is better tha7i so7is a7id daughters.^ And
instead of the groans of the daughters of


5 I Cor. XV. S4, 55.
' Matt. XXV. \q.


6 Gal. iii. 28.
8 Is. Ivi. 5.


368


APHRAHAT.


Eve, they utter the songs of the Bridegroom.
The wedding-feast of the daughters of Eve
continues for but seven days ; but for these
(virgins) is the Bridegroom who departs not
for ever. The adornment of the daughters
of Eve is wool that wears out and perishes,
but the garments of these wear not out.
Old age withers the beauty of the daughters
of Eve, but the beauty of these shall be re-
newed in the time of the Resurrection.

§ 7. O ye virgins who have betrothed
yourselves to Christ, when one of the monks
shall say to one of you, " I will live with
thee and minister thou to me," thus shalt
thou say unto him : — ''To a royal husband
am I betrothed, and Him do I serve ; and
if I leave His service and serve thee, my
betrothed will be WToth with me, and will
write me a letter of divorce, and will send
me away from His house ; and while thou
seekest to be honoured by me, and I to be
honoured by thee, take heed lest hurt come
upon me and thee. Take not fire into thy
bosom, ^ lest it burn thy garments ; but be
thou in honour alone, and I also alone
will abide in my honour. And as concern-
ing these things which the Bridegroom has
prepared for the eternity of his marriage
feast, do thou make thee a wedding-gift and
prepare thyself to meet Him. And as for
me, I will make me ready oil, that I may
enter in with the wise virgins and may not
be kept outside the door with the foolish
virgins."

§ 8. Hearken then, my beloved, unto that
which I write unto thee, namely, whatsoever
things become solitaries, monks, virgins,
saints. Before all things it beseems the
m^n on whom the yoke is laid, that his faith
should be firm ; as I wrote to thee in the first
epistle ; that he should be zealous in fasting
and prayer ; that he should be fervent in
the love of Christ ; and should be humble
and mild and wise. And let his speech be
peaceful and pleasant, and his thought be
sincere with all. Let him speak his words
duly weighing them, and set a barrier to

^ Prov. vi. 27.


his mouth from harmful words, and let him
put far from him hasty laughter. Let him
not love the adornment of garments, nor
again does it become him to let his hair
grow long and adorn it, or to anoint it with
sweet-scented unguents. Let him not re-
cline at feastings, nor does it become him
to wear gorgeous apparel. Let him not
dare to exceed at wine. Let him put far
from him proud thoughts. It does not
become him to look upon gorgeous apparel,
or to wear fine raiment. Let him put away
from him a crafty tongue; let him drive
from him envy and wrath, and cast away
from him crafty lips. The w^ords that are
spoken about a man, when he about whom
they are spoken is not near, let him not
hear nor receive, that he sin not, until he
search them out. Mockery is a hateful
fault, and to bring it up upon the heart is
not right. Let him not lend and take inter-
est, and let him not love avarice. Let him
suffer wrong and not do wrong. Further-
more, let him put away from him turmoil,
and words of jesting let him not utter. Let
him not scorn any man who is repenting of
his sins, and let him not mock his brother
who is fasting, and him that cannot fast let
him not put to shame. Where he is received,
let him reprove, and where they receive him
not, let him understand his own honour.
In an acceptable time let him speak his
w^ord ; otherwise, let him be silent. Let him
not for his belly's sake make himself despised
by his begging, and to such an one as fears
God let him reveal his secret ; but let him
keep himself from the evil (man). Let him
not speak in complaisance v/ith a wicked
man, nor with his enemy. And so let hmi
contend as to have no enemy at all. When
men envy him in that which is good, let
him add to his -goodness, and let him not be
harmed because of envy. When he has,
and gives to the poor, let him rejoice ; and
when he has not, let it not grieve him.
With a wicked man let him have no converse
and with a contemptuous man let him not
speak, lest he give himself to contempt.
With a blasphemer let him not dispute, lest


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


369


his Lord be blasphemed on his account.
Let him depart from a slanderer, and let no
man please another man with speciousness
of words. These things beseem solitaries
who take up the heavenly yoke, and become
disciples of Christ. For thus it befits the
disciples of Christ to be like unto Christ
their Master.

§ 9. Let us take pattern, my beloved, from
our Saviour, Who though He was rich, made
Himself poor ; ^ and though He was lofty,
humbled His Majesty ; and though His
dwelling place was in heaven, He had no
place to lay His head ; ^ and though He is to
come upon the clouds, ^ yet rode on a colt and
so entered Jerusalem ; ^ and though He is God
and Son of God, He took upon Him the like-
ness of a servant ; ^ and though He was (for
others) rest from all weariness, yet was
Himself tired with the weariness of the
journey ; though He was the fountain that
quenches thirst, yet Himself thirsted and
asked for water ; ^ though He was abundance
and satisfied our hunger, yet He Himself
hungered when He went forth to the wilder-
ness to be tempted;^ though He was a Watch-
er that slumbers not. He yet slumbered
and slept in the ship in the midst of the sea ; ^
and though He was ministered to in the
Tabernacle of His Father, yet let Himself be
served by the hands of men ; though He was
the healer of all sick men, yet nails were
fastened into His hands; though His mouth
brought forth things that were good, yet
they gave Him gall to eat ; ^ though He
injured no man and harmed none, yet He
was beaten with stripes and endured shame ;
and though he was Saviour of all mortals,
He delivered Himself to the death of the
cross.

§ 10. All this humility did our Saviour
show us in Himself. Let us then also humble
ourselves, my beloved. When our Lord
went outside of His nature,^ He walked in


' 2 Cor. viii. 9.
3 Matt. xxvi. 64.
5 Phil. ii. 6, 7, 8.
^ Matt. iv. 2.
^ Matt, xxvii. 26, 34.
' I.e. when He took a nature which was not origin-
ally His. *

VOL. XIII. 24


2 Matt. viii. 20.
4 Matt. xxi. 2-7.
^ John iv. 6, 7.
8 Matt. viii. 24.


our nature. Let us abide incur nature, that
in the day of judgment He may cause us
to partake of His nature. Our Lord took
from us a pledge when He went, and He
left us a pledge of His own when he ascend-
ed. He that was without need, because of
our need devised this expedient. What was
ours was His even from the beginning, but
that which was His, who would have given
us.? But true is that which our Lord
promised us : — Whei-e I am ihereye also shall
he.'^ For whatsoever He took of ours, is
in honour with Him, and (as) a diadem is
bound upon His Head. So also that, which
of His we have received, we ought to honour.
That which is ours is held in honour with
Him who was not in our nature : let us
honour that which is His in His own nature.
If we honour Him, we shall go to Him,
Who took upon Him of our nature and so
ascended. But if we despise Him, He will
take away from us that which He has given
us. If w^e deal fraudulently with His pledge.
He viull there take away that which is His,
and will deprive us of all that He has pro-
mised us. Let us magnify gloriously the
King's Son Who is with us, because a host-
age for Him has been taken from us. Whoso
holds the King's Son in honour, shall obtain
many gifts from the King. That of ours,
that is with Him, has sat down in honour
and a diadem is bound upon His head, and
He has sat dow^n with the King. And we
who are poor, what shall w^e do to the
King's Son Who is with us .? He needs
nothing from us, but that we should adorn
our temples for Him ; that when the time is
accomplished and He goes to His Father,
He may give thanks to Him because of us,
because we have honoured Him. When
He came to us. He had nothing of ours, and
also we had nothing of His, though the two
natures were His and His Father's. For
when Gabriel made announcement to the
Blessed Mary who bore Him, the word from
on high set out and came, and the ivord
became flesh and dwell in us. ^ And when He


*2 John xiv. 3.


3 John i. 14.


370


APHRAHAT.


returned to Him that sent Him, He took
away, when He went, that which He had
not brought, as the Apostle said : — He has
taken us up and seated us with Himself in tlie
heavens. ' And when He went to His Father,
He sent to us His Spirit and said to us : —
I am with you till the world shall end. For
Christ sitteth at the right hand of His Father.
and Christ dwelleth among men. ^ He is suffi-
cient above and beneath, by the wisdom of
His Father. And He dwells in many, though
He is one, and all the faithful each by each
He overshadows from Himself, and fails
not, as it is written : — I will divide Him among
many."^ And though He is divided among
many, yet He sits at the right hand of His
Father. And He is in us and we are in Him,
as He said : — Ye are in Me and I am in you. *
And in another place He said : — / and J/y
Father are one.^

§ II. And if anyone, whose conscience
lacks knowledge, should dispute about this
and say: — ''Since Christ is one and His
Father is one, how does Christ dwell, and
His Father dwell, in faithful men } And
how do righteous men become temples for
God that He should dwell in them.? If
then it is thus, that to each several faithful
man there comes a several Christ, and God
Who is in Christ, — if it is so, there are for
them Gods many and Christs without num-
ber.^' But hear, my beloved, the defence
that is suited to this argument. From that
which is visible let him that has thus said
receive instruction. For every man knows
that the sun is fixed in the heavens, yet its
rays are spread out in the earth, and (light)
from it enters by many doors and w^indows
of houses ; and wherever the sunshine falls,
though it be but as (the measure of) the palm
of the hand, it is called the sun. And
though it fall in many places, it is thus
called, but the real sun itself is in heaven.
Therefore, if it is so, have they many suns.?
Also the water of the sea is vast, and when
thou takest one cup from it, that is called


1 Eph. ii. 6.
^ Is. liii. 12.
5 John X. 30.


2 Matt, xxviii. 20.
^ John xiv. 20.


water. And though thou shouldest divide it
into a thousand vessels, yet it is called water
by its name. Also when thou kindlest fire
from fire in many places, the place from
whence thou takest it, when thou kindlest it,
lacks not, and the fire is called by one
name. And because thou dividest it into
many places, it does not on that account
become possessed of many names. And
when thou takest dust from the earth, and
castest it into many places, it is not a whit
diminished, and also thou canst not call it
by many names. Thus also God and His
Christ, though they are One, yet dwell in
men who are many. And they are in
heaven in person, and are diminished in
nothing when they dwell in many ; as the
sun is not a whit diminished in heaven,
when its power is poured out in the earth.
How much greater then is the power of God,
since by the power of God the very sun itself
subsists.

§ 12. Again I will remind thee, my be-
loved, also of that which is written. For
thus it is written, that when it was a
grievous burden to Moses to lead the camp
alone, the Lord said to him : — Lo I 1 will
take away of the Spirit that is upon thee, and
will put it up07i seventy men, elders of Israel.'^
But when He took away some of the Spirit
of Moses, and the seventy men were filled
with it, Moses nothing lacked, nor could
it be known that anything was taken away
from his Spirit. Moreover the blessed
apostle also said : — God divided of the Spirit
of Christ and sent it into the Prophets. ^ And
Christ was in nothing injured, for it was not
by measure that His Father gave unto Him the
Spirit.^ By this reflection thou canst com-
prehend that Christ dwells in faithful men ;
yet Christ suffers no loss though He is
divided among many. For the Prophets
received of the Spirit of Christ, each one of
them as he was able to bear. And of the
Spirit of Christ again there is poured forth
to-day upon all flesh, '^ and the sons and the


6 Num. xi. 17.

' Cf. I Cor. xii. 11, 28, and Rom. xii. 36.

s John iii. 34. ^ Joel ii. 28, 29.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


371


daughters prophesy, the old men and the
youths, the men-servants and the hand-
maids. Something of Christ is in us, yet
Christ is in heaven at the right hand of His
Father. And Christ received the Spirit not
by measure, but His Father loved Him and
delivered all into His hands, and gave Him
authority over all His treasure. For John
said : — Not by measure did the Father give the
Spirit to His Son, hut loved Him and gave
all into His hands.^ And also our Lord
said : — All things have been delivered unto
Me by My Father.'^ Again he said: — The
Fattier will not judge any man, hut all judg-
ment will He give unto His Son.^ Again also
the Apostle said : — Everything shall be made
subject unto Christ except His Father Who
hath subjected all unto Him. And when
every tliiiig is made subject unto Him by the
Father, then He also shall he made subject to
God His Father Who subjected all to Him, and
God shall be all in all, and in every ijian.'"

§ 13. Our Lord testifies concerning John,
that he is the greatest of the Prophets. Yet
he received the Spirit by limit, because in
that measure in which Elijah received the
Spirit, (in the same) John obtained it. And
as Elijah used to dwell in the wilderness, so
also the Spirit of God led John into the
wilderness, and he used to dwell in the
mountains and caves. The birds sustained
Elijah, and John used to eat locusts that
fly. Elijah had his loins girded with a girdle
of leather ; so John had his loins girded with
a cincture of leather. Jezebel persecuted
Elijah, and Herodias persecuted John.
Elijah reproved Ahab, and John reproved
Herod. Elijah divided the Jordan, and
John opened up baptism. The spirit of
Elijah rested twofold upon Elisha, so John
laid his hand on our Redeemer, and He
received the Spirit not by measure. Elijah
opened the heavens and ascended ; and
John saw the heavens opened, and the
Spirit of God which descended and rested
upon our Redeemer. Elisha received two-


1 John iii.34,35.
3 John V. 22.


2 Matt. xi. 27.

■* I Cor. XV. 27, 28,


fold the Spirit of Elijah ; and our Redeemer
received that of John and that of heaven.
Elisha took the mantle of Elijah, and our
Redeemer the imposition of the hand of the
priests. Elisha made oil from water, and
our Redeemer made wine from water.
Elisha satisfied with a little bread a hundred
men only ; and our Redeemer satisfied with
a little bread five thousand men besides
children and women. Elisha cleansed
Naaman the leper, and our Redeemer
cleansed the ten (lepers). Elisha cursed the
children and they were devoured by bears,
but our Redeemer blessed the children.
The children reviled Elisha, but the children
glorified our Redeemer with Hosannas.
Elisha cursed Gehazi his servant, and our
Redeemer cursed Judas His disciple and
blessed all His (other) disciples. Elisha
raised to life one dead man only, but our
Redeemer raised up three to life. On the
bones of Elisha one dead man revived, but
when our Saviour descended to the abode
of the dead, He quickened many and raised
them up. x\nd many are the signs that the
Spirit of Christ wrought, which the Prophets
received from Him.

§ 14. Therefore, my beloved, we also have
received of the Spirit of Christ, and Christ
dwelletJi in us, as it is written that the Spirit
said this through the mouth of the Prophet :
— I will dwell in them and will walk in them.^
Therefore let us prepare our temples for the
Spirit of Christ, and let us not grieve it that
it may not depart from us. Remember the
warning that the Apostle gives us : — Grieve
not the Holy Spirit whereby ye have been
sealed unto the day of redemption. For from
baptism do we receive the Spirit of Christ.
For in that hour in which the priests invoke
the Spirit, the heavens open and it descends
and moves upon the waters.^ And those that
are baptized are clothed in it ; for the Spirit
stays aloof from all that are born of the flesh,
until they come to the new birth by water,
and then they receive the Holy Spirit. For
in the first birth they are born with an ani-


5 Levit. xxi. 12.


^ Gen. i, 2.


372


APHRAHAT.


mal souls which is created within man and
is not thereafter subject to death, as he said :
— Adam became a living souV But in the
second birth, that through baptism, they re-
ceived the Holy Spirit from a particle of the
Godhead, and it is not again subject to
death. For when m.en die, the animal spirit
is buried with the body, and sense is taken
away from it, but the heavenly spirit that
they receive goes according to its nature to
Christ. And both these the Apostle has
made known, for he said : — The body is
buried in animal wise, and rises again in spiri-
tual wise.'^ The Spirit goes back again to
Christ according to its nature, for the Apostle
said again : — When we shall depart from the
body we shall be with our Lord.^ For the
Spirit of Christ, which the spiritual receive,
goes to our Lord. And the animal spirit is
buried in its nature, and sense is taken
away from it. Whosoever guards the Spirit
of Christ in purity, when it returns to Christ
it thus addresses him : — " The body into
which I went, and which put me on from
the water of the baptism, has kept me in
holiness." And the Holy Spirit will be
earnest with Christ for the resurrection of
that body which kept Him with purity, and
the Spirit will request to be again conjoined
to it that that body may rise up in glory.
And whatever man there is that receives the
Spirit from the water (of baptism) and grieves
it, it departs from him until he dies, and re-
turns according to its nature to Christ, and
accuses that man of having grieved it. And
when the time of the final consummation
shall have come, and the time of the Resur-
rection shall have approached, the Ploly
Spirit, that was kept in purity, receives great
power from its nature and comes before
Christ and stands at the door of the tombs,
where the men are buried that kept it in
purity, and awaits the (resurrection) shout.
And when the Watchers shall have opened
the doors of heaven before the Kine/ then
the cornet shall summon, and the trumpets


1 Gen. ii. 7.
3 2 Cor. V. 8.


2 I Cor. XV. 44.
4 I Thess. iv. 16.


shall sound, and the Spirit that waits for the
(resurrection) shout shall hear, and quickly
shall open the tombs, and raise up the bod-
ies and whatsoever was buried in them, and
shall put on the glory that comes with it.
And (the Spirit) shall be within for the
resurrection of the body, and the glory
shall be without for the adornment of the
body. And the animal spirit shall be
swallowed up in the heavenly Spirit, and
the whole man shall become spiritual,
since his body is possessed by it (the
Spirit). And death shall be swallowed
up in life, ^ and body shall be swallowed up
in Spirit. And by the power of the Spirit,
that man shall fly up to meet the King and
He shall receive him with joy, and Christ
shall give thanks for the body that has kept
His Spirit in purity.

§ 15. This is the Spirit, my beloved, that
the Prophets received, and thus also have
we received. And it is not at every time
found with those that receive it, but some-
times it returns to Him that sent it, and
sometimes it goes to him that receives it.
Hearken to that which our Lord said : — De-
spise not one 0/ these little ones that believe
on Me, for their angels in heaven do always
behold the face of My Father.^ This Spirit
then goes frequently and stands before God
and beholds His face, and whosoever injures
the temple in which it dwells, it will accuse
him before God.

§ 16. I will instruct thee of that which is
written, that the Spirit is not at every time
found with those that receive it. For thus
it is written about Saul, that the Holy Spirit,
which he received when he was anointed,
departed from A/w,^ because he grieved it,
and God sent to him instead of it a vexing
spirit. And whenever he was afflicted by
the evil spirit, David used to play upon the
harp, and the Holy Spirit, which David re-
ceived when he was anointed, would come,
and the evil spirit that was vexing Saul,
would flee from before it. So the Holy


5 2 Cor. V. 4.
'^ I Sam. xvi.


14.^.


^ Matt, xviii. 10.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


373


Spirit that David received was not found
with him at every time. As long as he was
playing the harp, then it used to come.
For had it been with him always, it would
not have allowed him to sin with the wife
of Uriah. For when he was praying about
his sins, and was confessing his offences
before God, he said thus : — Take not Thy
holy spirit from me,^ Also concerning
Elisha it is thus written, that, while he
played upon his harp^ then the spirit came
to him and he prophesied and said : — Thus
saith the Lord, ye shall not see wind nor
rain, yet this valley shall he made many pits. "^
And also when the Shunamite came to him
because of her son that w^as dead, he said
thus to her : — The Lord hid it from Tne and
did cause me not to know it.^ Yet, when
the King of Israel sent against him to slay
him, the Spirit informed him before the mes-
senger came upon him, and he said : — Lo !
this son of iniquity has sent to take away
my hedd.'^ And again he made known about
the abundance that came about in Samaria
the day after. And again the Spirit in-
formed him when Gehazi stole the silver
and concealed it.

§ 17. Therefore, my beloved, when the
Holy Spirit departs from a man who has re-
ceived it, until it returns and comes to him,
then Satan draws near unto that man, to
cause him to sin, and that the Holy Spirit
may leave him altogether. For as long as
the Spirit is with a man, Satan fears to come
near him. And observe, my beloved, that
our Lord also. Who was born from the Spirit,
was not tempted by Satan until in baptism
He received the Spirit from on high. And
then the Spirit led him forth to be tempted
by Satan. This, then, is the way with man ;
that in the hour in which he perceives in
himself that he is not fervent in the Spirit,
and that his heart is inclining to the
thought of this world, he may know that
the Spirit is not with him, and may arise
and pray and keep vigil that the Spirit of


1 Ps. li. 13.

^ I Kin,s;s iv. 27.


^ 2 Kin.ijs iii. 15-17.
■* 2 Kin^s vi. 32.


God may come to him, that he be not over-
come by the adversary. A thief does not
dig into a house, until he sees that its master
is departing from it. Thus also Satan can-
not draw near to thai house which is our
body, until the Spirit of Christ departs from
it. And be sure, my beloved, that the thief
does not certainly know whether the master
of the house is within or not, but first he
applies his ear, and looks. If he hears the
voice of the master of the house within it
saying: — "I have a journey to go," and
when he has searched out and seen that the
master of the house has set out to perform
his business, then the thief comes and digs
into the house and steals. But if he hears
the voice of the master of the house ad-
monishing and commanding his household
to watch and guard his house, and saying
to them, " I also am within the house,"
then the thief will fear and flee, that he may
not be taken and captured. Thus also
Satan, he has not the knowledge before-
hand to know or see when the Spirit will
depart, that so he may come to rob the man ;
but he too listens and watches, and so as-
sails. But if he hears a man in whom Christ
dwells speaking shameful words, or en-
raged, or quarrelling, or contending, then
Satan knows that Christ is not with him,
and he comes and accomplishes his will in
him. For Christ dwells in the peaceful and
the meek, and lodges in those that fear His
word, as He says through the prophet : — On
whom shall L look, and in whom shall 1 d^vell,
l)ut in the peaceful and the meek ivho fear j\Iy
word? ^ And our Lord said : — Whoever walks
in My commandments and keeps My love, We
zvill come to him and make Our abode with
him.^ But if he hears from a man that he is
on his guard and is praying and meditating
in the Law of his Lord by day and by night,
then he turns back from him, for he knows
that Christ is with him. And if thou
shouldest say, " How manifold is Satan ! for
lo ! he fights with many;" then hear and
learn from that which I proved to thee above


5 Is. Ixvi. 2.


^ John xiv. 23.


374


APHRAHAT.


concerning Christ, that no matter to what
extent He is divided amongst many, yet He
is not a whit diminished. For, as the
house, through the window of which a
little sunlight enters, is altogether illumined,
so the man into whom a little of Satan
enters, is altogether darkened. Hear that
which the Apostle said : — If Saian is h^ans-
figured to an angel of light, it is no wonder
if his ministers also are transfigured to ?nin-
isters of righteousness. ^ And again our Lord
said to His disciples : — Lo, I have given you
autJioriiy to tread upon the pozver of the ad-
versary."^ And the Scriptures have made
known that he has power and also minis-
ters. Moreover Job said concerniiig him : —
God made him to wage his war.'^ These
ministers then that he has, he causes to run
in the world, to wage war. But be sure
that he will not fight openly ; because from
the time of the coming of our Saviour,
(God) has given authority over him. But
he will surely plunder and steal.

§ 1 8. But I will explain to thee, my be-
loved, concerning that word which the
Apostle said, by which can be weighed
the doctrines that are instruments of the
Evil One and doctrines of deceit. For the
Apostle said : — TJiere is an animal body and
there is a spiritual body, seeing that it is tJius
writte?! : — TJie first Ada^n beca7?ie a living soul
and the second Adam a quickening spirit.'^
So they ^ say that there will be two Adams.
But he said : — As ive have put on ttie image of
that Adam zvlio ivas from tJie earth, so ive shall
put on the image of that Adam wlio is from
heaven.'^ For Adam who was from the earth
was he that sinned, and the Adam who is
from heaven is our Saviour, our Lord Jesus
Christ. They then that receive the Spirit of
Christ, come into the likeness of the heavenly
Adam, Who is our Saviour, our Lord Jesus
Christ. For the animal shall be swallowed
up in the spiritual, as I wrote unto thee
above. And the man that grieves the spirit
of Christ, will be animal in his resurrection ;


' 2 Cor. xi. 14, 15.
•' Job xl. 14.
^ Sal., lierctics.


'■^ Luke X. 19.

4 I Cor. XV. 44, 45.

•^ I Cor. XV. 49.


because the heavenly spirit is not with him,
that the animal might be swallowed up in
it. But when he shall arise he shall con-
tinue in his natural state, naked of the
Spirit. Because he stripped off from him the
Spirit of Christ, he shall be given over to
utter nakedness. And whosocA'er honours
the Spirit, and it is guarded in him in purity,
in that day the Holy Spirit shall protect
him, and he shall become altogether spiri-
tual, and shall not be found naked ; as the
Apostle said : — And when we shall have
clothed ourselves, may ive iiot be found naked.''
And again he said : — We sliall all sleep, bid
in the resurrection ive shall not all be changed. ^
And aijain he said : — This which dies shall
put on that which dies not, and this wliicJi is
corruptible that which is incorruptible, and
wJien this which dies shall have put on tlial
whicli dies not, and this corruptible that
whicJi is incorruptible, then sliall be accom-
plished that word whicli is written that death is
swallowed up by victory. '' Again he said : —
Suddenly as the twinkling of an eye, the
dead shall rise incorruptible and ive shall be
changed.^ And they who shall be changed
shall put on the form of that heavenly
Adam and shall become spiritual. And
those who shall not be chano^ed, shall con-
tinue animal in the created nature of Adam,
namely, of dust ; and shall continue in their
nature in the earth below. And then the
heavenly shall be caught up to heaven and
the Spirit that they have put on shall cause
them to fly, and they shall inherit the king-
dom that was prepared for them from the
beginning. And they that are animal sliall
remain on the earth by the weight of their
bodies, and shall turn back to Sheol, and
there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

§ 19. \\\ writing this I have reminded my-
self, and also thee, my beloved ; therefore
love virginity, the heavenly portion, the
fellowship of the Watchers of heaven. For

" 2 Cor. V. 3.

^ I Cor. XV. 51. This transposition of the negative is
supported by many Greek and Latin authorities, but
not by the Peshittd.

^ I "Cor. XV. 53, 54. 1 I Cor. xv. 52.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


3/5


there is nothing comparable with it. And
in those that are thus, in them Christ dwells.
The time of summer is at hand, and the fig-
iree has budded and its leaves have come out ' —
the signs that our Redeemer gave have be-
gun to be fulfilled. For he said : — People
shall rise against people and kingdom against
kingdom. And there shall he famines and
pestilences and terrors from heaven."^ And
lo ! all these things are being accomplished
in our days.

§ 20. Therefore read in' this whatever I
have written unto thee, thou and the breth-
ren, the monks that love virginity. And be
on thy guard against scorners. For whoso-
ever scorns and mocks his brother, the
word that is written in the Gospel fitly ap-
plies to him ; namely, when our Lord
wished to take account with the avaricious
and with the Pharisees. For it is written :
— Because they loved money, they jnocked
Him^ So also now those that do not agree
with these things mock in the same way.
Read then and learn. Be zealous for read-
ing and for doing. And let the Law of
God be thy meditation at every time. And
when thou hast read this epistle, on thy
life (I adjure thee), my beloved, arise and
pray, and remember my sinfulness in thy
prayer.

Demonstration VIII. — Of the Resurrec-
tion OF THE Dead.

§ I. At all times controversies arise on
this matter, how the dead shall rise and with
zuJiat body they shall come ? * For lo ! the
body wears out and is corrupted ; and the
bones also, no doubt, as time lengthens out
over them, waste away and are not to be
recognised. And when thou enterest a tomb
in which a hundred dead men are buried,
thou findest not there an handful of dust.
And thus say those that reflect on these
things : — " We know of course that the dead
shall rise ; but they will be clothed in a
heavenly body and spiritual forms. And if


1 Matt. xxiv. 32.
^ Luke xvi. 14.


2 Luke xxi. 10, 11.
'I I Cor. XV. 35.


it is not so, these hundred dead that were
buried in one tomb, of whom after a long
time elapses there remains nothing at all
there, when the dead shall be quickened,
and shall be clothed in a body and rise, un-
less they shall be clothed in a heavenly
body, from whence shall their body come.''
For lo ! there is nothing in the tomb."

§ 2. Whosoever reflects thus is foolish,
and without knowledge. When the dead
were brought in, they were something ; and
when they wxre there for a long time, they
became nothing. And, when the time shall
have come that the dead shall rise, that
nothing shall become something according
to its former nature, and a change shall be
added to its nature. O thou unwise who re-
flectest thus, hear that which the blessed
Apostle said when he was instructing a
foolish man like thee ; for he said : — TJiou
fool, the seed which thou sowest unless it die
is not quickened ; and that which tJiou soivest
is iiot like that which grows up into its
blade, but one bare graiii of wheat or barley
or some other seedling. And to each one oj
the seeds is given its own body. But God
clothes thy seed with its body as He ivills. ^

§ 3. Therefore, O fool, be instructed by
this, that each of the seeds is clothed in its
own body. Never dost thou sow wheat
and yet reap barley, and never dost thou
plant a vine and yet it produced figs ; but
everything grows according to its nature.
Thus also the body that was laid in the earth
is that which shall rise again. And as to
this, that the body is corrupted and wastes
away, thou oughtest to be instructed by the
parable of the seed ; that as the seed, when
it is cast into the earth, decays and is cor-
rupted, and from its decay it produces and
buds and bears fruit. For the land that is
ploughed, into which seed is not cast, pro-
duces not fruit, even if that land drinks in
all the rain. So the grave in which the
dead are not buried, from it men shall not
issue forth in the quickening of the dead,
though the full voice of the trumpet should

5 1 Cor. XV. 36-38.


37^


APHRAHAT.


sound within it. And if, as they say, the
spirit of the just shall ascend into heaven
and put on a heavenly body, they are in
heaven. And He Who raises the dead
dwells in heaven. Then when our Saviour
shall come, whom shall He raise up from
the earth ? And why did He write for us :
— The hour shall come, and now is, that the
dead also shall hear the voice of the Son of
Man, and they shall live and come forth from
their tombs P^ For the heavenly body will
not come and enter into the tomb, and
again go forth from it.

§ 4. For thus say those who are stubborn
in folly : — Why did the Apostle say, — Dif-
ferent is the body which is in heaven from
that which is on eartJi P"^ But he that hears
this, let him hear also the other thing that
the Apostle said : — TJiere is an animal body,
and tJiere is a spiritual body.'^ And again he
said : — We shall all sleep, ,but we shall not all
be changed.'^ And again he said : — This tliat
shall die must clothe itself ivith that that shall
not die, and this which is corruptible must
clothe itself with tJiat ivhicji is incorruptible. ^
Again he said : — We must all stand before the
judgment-seat of Christ, that every man may
be rewarded in his body for everything that
before time was done by him, whether good
or evil, ^ Again he said : — What shall those do
that are baptized for the dead P For if the
dead rise not, ivliy are they baptized for
themP'' Again he said : — If there is no re-
surrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen,
and if Christ is not risen then your faith is
vain, and our preachiiig. And if so we are
found false witnesses in that we testified of
God, that He raised up Christ, WJioin He
raised not up .^ Therefore, if the dead rise
not, there is no judgment. And if there is
no judgment, then let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we shall die. Be not deceived ;
evil communicatio7is corrupt good pur poses."^
Now as to this that the Apostle said : — The
body that is in heavefi is different from that


' John V. 25, 28, 29.
^ I Cor. XV. 44.
5 Ih. V. 53.
■^ I Cor. XV. 29.
» lb. V. 32, 33.


^ I Cor. XV. 40.
4 lb. XV. 51.
*> 2 Cor. V. 10.
8 lb. V. 13-15.


which is 071 the earth, let this word be thus
understood by thee. When the body of the
just shall arise and be changed, it is called
heavenly. And that which is not changed
is called earthly, according to its earthly
nature.

§ 5. But hear, my beloved, another word
like this, which the Apostle has spoken.
For he said: — TJie spiritual manjudgeth every-
thing, and he is judged by no one} And again
he said : — They that are spiritual are spiritually
minded, and they that are carnal are carnally
minded.'^ And again he said: — When ive were
in the flesh, the weaknesses of sins were work-
ing in our members that we might becorne
fridts for death. '^ Again \\esci\d:— If tJie Spirit
of Christ is in you, ye are spiritual. ^ All these
things the Apostle said, while he was
clothed in the flesh but was doing the works
of the Spirit. Thus also in the Resurrection
of the dead, the righteous shall be changed,
and the earthly form shall be swallowed up
in the heavenly, and it shall be called a hea-
venly body. And that which shall not be
changed, shall be called earthly.

S 6. Concerning" then this Resurrection of
the dead, ixiy beloved, according to my
power I \N\\\ instruct thee. For from the
beginning God created Adam ; moulded him
from the dust of the earth, and raised him up.
For if, while Adam was not. He made him
from nothing, how much easier now is it
for Him to raise him up ; for lo ! as a seed
he is sown in the earth. For if God should
do those things that are easy for us, His
works would not appear mighty to us. For
lo ! there are amongst men artificers who
make wonderful things, and those who are
not artificers of the works stand and won-
der how they were done ; and the work of
their fellows is difficult in their eyes. How
much more should not the works of God be
as a marvel ! But for God this was no great
thing, that the dead should be quickened.
Before seed was sown in the earth, the
earth produced that which had not been cast


' I Cor. ii. 15.
^ Rom. vii. 5.


2 Rom. viii. 5.
^ Rom. viii. 9.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


377


into it. Before it had conceived, it bore in
its virginity. How then is this difficult, that
the earth should cause to spring up again
what had been cast into it, and after con-
ception should bear ? And lo ! her travail-
pains are near; as Isaiah said, Who ha/h seen
anything like this and who hath heard sucli
things as ihese P that the earth should travail
in one day, and a people should he horn in one
hourp^ For Adam unsown sprang up ; un-
conceived he was born. But lo ! now his
offspring are sown, and wait for the rain,
and shall spring up. And lo ! the earth
teems with many, and the time of her
bringing forth is at hand.

§ 7. For all our fathers, in hope of the
Resurrection and the quickening of the dead,
were looking forward and hastening ; as the
blessed Apostle said, 1/ the righteous had
heen looking forivard to that city from which
Abraham went /or th, they would have had an
opportunity of again turning back and going
to it; hut they showed that they were looking
forward to one hetter than it, namely that which
is in heaven. "^ They were looking forward to
be released and to go.speedily thither. And
from that which I am writing unto thee, un-
derstand and observe that they were looking
forward to the Resurrection. For Jacob our
father, when he was dying, bound Joseph
his son with an oath, and said to him, Bury
me in the tomb of my fattier s, witJi Abraham
and Sarah and Isaac and Rebecca."^ And
why, my beloved, did Jacob not wish to be
buried in Egypt, but with his fathers? He
showed beforehand, that he was looking
forward to the quickening of the dead ;
that, when the Resurrection shout should be
raised and the sound of the trumpet (heard),
he might rise up near to his fathers, and
might not at the time of the Resurrection be
mingled with the wicked who shall return to
Sheol and to punishment.

§ 8. Thus also Joseph bound his brethren
by an oath,'' and said to them : — When God
shall remember you, take up my bones from


1 Is. Ixvi. 8.

2 Gen. xlix. 29, 31.


'■^ Heb. ix. 15, 16.
^ Gen. 1. 24.


hence ivilh you. And according to the word
of Joseph his brethren did, and kept the oath
a hundred and twenty-five years. At that
time when the hosts of the Lord went out
from the land of Egypt, then Moses took up
the bones of Joseph when he went forth. ^
And the bones of the righteous man were
more precious and better in his estimation
than the gold and the silver that the children
of Israel took from Egypt when they spoiled
them. And the bones of Joseph were forty
years in the wilderness ; and at that time
when Moses fell asleep, he gave them in
inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun. The
bones of Joseph his father were better in his
estimation than all the spoil of that land
which he subdued. And why did Moses
give the bones of Joseph to Joshua .? Clearly,
because he was of the tribe of Ephraim the
son of Joseph. And he buried them in the
land of promise, that there might be in that
land a treasure, (even) that of the bones of
Joseph (that were) buried therein. And also
at the time that Jacob was dying, he blessed
his tribes, and showed them what would
happen to them in the latter days, and said to
Reuben : — Reuben, Ihou art my firstborn, my
fnight and the beginning of my strength.
Jhou hast gone astray ; as water, thou shall
not abide, because thou wentest up to thy
fathers bed. Truly tliou defilest my couch and
wentest up. ^ From the time that Jacob fell
asleep until the time that Moses fell asleep
two hundred and thirty-three years elapsed.
Then Moses wished by his priestly power to
absolve Reuben from his transgression and
sin, in that he had lain with Bilhah, his
father's concubine; that when his brethren
should rise, he might not be cut off from
their number. So he said in the beginning
of his blessing : — Reuben shall live and not
die, and shall be in the number. '

§ 9. And also when the time came that
Moses should sleep with his fathers, he was
grieved and distressed, and he sought of his
Lord and entreated that he might pass over


^ Exod. xiii. 19.
■^ Deut. xxxiii. 6.


6 Gen. xlix. 3, 4.


378


APHRAHAT.


to the land of promise. And why, my be-
loved, was the righteous Moses grieved
because he did not enter into the land of
promise ? Clearly, because he wished to go
and be buried with his fathers, and not be
buried in the land of his adversaries, in the
land of Moab. For the Moabites hired
Balaam the son of Beor to curse Israel.
Therefore Moses wished not to be buried
in that land, lest the Moabites should come
and take vengeance on him by taking up
and casting forth the bones of that righteous
man. And the Lord performed an act of
grace towards Moses. For He brought him
forth to Mount Nebo, and showed him all
the land, making it pass before him. And
as Moses gazed upon all the land, and gazed
upon the mountain of the Jebusites where the
Tabernacle was to dwell, he was grieved
and wept when he saw the tomb in Hebron
where his fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
were buried, that he should not be buried
with them, nor his bones cast upon their
bones, that he might rise along with them in
the Resurrection. But when he had seen all
the land, his Lord encouraged him and said
to him, ''I myself will bury thee and hide
thee, and none shall know thy tomb." So
Moses died according to the word of the month
of the Lord, and He buried hiiii in a valley in
the land of Moah over against Beth-Peor, where
Israel had sinned, and no man has knoivn
his sepulchre unto tJiis day.^ Two goodly
benefits did his Lord accomplish for Moses
in not making known his tomb to the chil-
dren of Israel. He rejoiced that his adver-
saries should not know it, and cast forth
his bones from his tomb ; and in the second
place, that the children of his people should
not know it^ and make his tomb a place of
worship, for he was accounted as God in
the eyes of the children of his people. And
understand this, my beloved, from hence,
that when he left them and went up to the
mountain, they said: "^ — As for this Moses who
brought us up from tlie land of Egypt we
know not ivJiat has become of him. So they


1 Deut. xxxiv, 5, 6.


2 Ex. xxxii. I.


made them a calf and worshipped it, and
they remembered not God Who brought
them up from Egypt by means of Moses
ivith a mighty haiidand an uplifted arm. ^ Be-
cause of this, God had respect unto Moses,
and did not make known his tomb ; lest, if
He should make known his tomb, the chil-
dren of his people might go astray, and
make them an image, and worship it and
sacrifice to it, and so by their sins disquiet
the bones of the righteous man.

§10. And Moses again proclaimed clearly
the Resurrection of the dead, for he said as
from the mouth of his God : — // is I that
cause to die and it is I that make alive. * Again
also Hannah said thus in her prayer : — The
Lord causeth to die and quickeneth ; He bring-
eth down to Sheol and bring eth up {ihere-
froni). ^ The Prophet Isaiah also said thus :
— Thy dead shall live, O Lord, and their
bodies shall rise, and they that sleep in the
dust shall awake and praise thee. ^ David also
proclaimed, saying: — For lo I for the dead
Thou workest wonderful things, and the
mighty ones shall rise and make confession
unto Thee, and those that are in tJie to??ibs shall
; ecount Thy graced And how in the tombs shall
WiQj recount the grace of God .? Clearly, when
they shall hear the sound of trumpet sum-
moning them, and the cornet sounding forth
from on high, and the earthquake that shall
be, and the tombs that shall be opened, then
the mighty ones shall arise in glory, and re-
count one to another in the tombs, saying,
" Great is the grace that is performed towards
us. For our hope was cut off; yet (another)
hope has arisen for us. We were impri-
soned in darkness, and have come forth to
the light. We were sown in corruption,
and have risen in glory. We were buried
naturally, and we have risen spiritually.
Again we were sown in weakness, and have
risen in power." This is the grace that they
shall tell of in the tombs.

§ II. And it was not only in words, my


3 Deut. V. 15. 4 Deut. xxxii. 39.

^ I Sam. ii. 6. ^ Is. xxvi. 19.

' Ps. Ixxxviii. 10, II, 12. (Pesh.)


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


379


beloved, that God said : — ' ' I quicken the
dead," but also in deeds He showed it to
us by many testimonies ; that we might
have no hesitation (concerning- it). He
showed it beforehand plainly ; for through
Elijah a wonder was manifested, (in proof)
that the dead shall live and that they that
sleep in the dust shall arise. For when the
son of the widow died, Elijah raised him
up and gave him to his mother. And Elisha
again, his disciple, raised up the son of the
Shunamite ; that the testimony of two might
be established and confirmed for us. And
also again when the children of Israel cast
a dead man on the bones of Elisha, that
dead man revived and arose. And the
witness of three is certain.

§ 12. And also through the Prophet Eze-
kiel, the Resurrection of the dead was mani-
festly shown, when God brought him forth
to the valley and showed him many bones,
and made him pass by them round about
them, and said to him : — Son of Mail, will
these hones live? And Ezekiel said to Him : ^ —
Thou kiioivest, O Lo?'d of lords. And the
Lord said to him : — Prophesy, O Son of
Man, over these bones ; prophesy and say to the
dry bones, Hear the word of the Lord of lords.
And when he had caused them to hear those
words, there was a shaking and a noise,
and the bones were gathered together, even
those that were crushed into pieces and
broken. And when the Prophet saw them,
he was astonished, for they came together
from all sides, and each bone received its
fellow, and each joint approached its fellow-
joint, and they ordered themselves, one on
another. And their dryness was made
moist, and the joints were united by the
ligatures, and the blood grew warm in the
arteries, and skin was stretched over the
flesh, and hair grew up according to its na-
ture. But they lay prostrate and there was
no breath in them Then agfain He com-
manded the Prophet, and said to him : —
Prophesy nnto the spirit and say to it, Come, O
spirit, from the four winds, and breathe upon

' Ez. xxxvii. i-io.


these slain men that they may live. And when
he caused them to hear this second word,
the spirit entered into them, and they 7rvived
and stood up upon their feet, a vejy great host,

§ 13. But why, my beloved, was it that
those dead did not rise because of the one
word (spoken) through Ezekiel, and why
was not their resurrection, both of bones
and spirit, accomplished (through that one
word) } For lo ! by one word the bones
were fitted together, and by another the
spirit came. It was in order that full per-
fection might be left for our Lord Jesus
Christ, Who with one utterance and one
word will raise up at the last day every body
of man. For it was not the word that was
insufficient, but its bearer was inferior.
And with regard to this, understand and
observe that when Elijah also, and Elisha
his disciple, raised the dead, it was not with
one word that they raised them up, but
after they had prayed and made intercession
and delayed no little time, then they arose.

§ 14. And our Lord Himself, in that His
first Coming raised up three that were dead,
that the testimony of three might be made
sure. And He raised up each one of them
with two vroids each. For when He raised
up the widow's son. He called him twice,
saying to him, Young man, young man,arise.'^
And he revived and arose. And again. He
twice called the daughter of the chief of the
synagogue, saying to her. Damsel, damsel,
arise^ And her spirit returned and she
arose. And after Lazarus died, when He
came to the place of burial, Fle prayed
earnestly and cried with a loud voice and
said, Lazarus, come forth.'^ And he revived
and came out of his tomb.

§ 15. And concerning all this that I have
explained to thee, that those dead persons
were raised with two words each, it was
because for them two resurrections take
place ; that former one, and the second, that
which is to come. For in that resurrection
in which all men shall rise, none shall fall
again ; and by one word of God, sent forth


2 Luke vii. 14.


3 Mark v. 47.


^ John xi.43.


38o


APHRAHAT.


through Christ, all the dead shall rise in the
twinkling of an eye, speedily. For He Who
brings it to pass is not feeble or insufficient.
For with one word of summons He will
cause all the ends (of the world) to hear,
and all that are laid (in the grave) shall
leap forth and rise up ; and no word shall
return void to Him that sent it forth, but as
it is written in the Prophet Isaiah,^ who com-
pares the word to rain and snow ; for he
said : — As the rain and the snoiv come down
from heaven and return not thither, but fertilize
the earth and cause it to bf^ifig forth and give
seed to the sower and bread for food, so shall
the word be that goes forth from My mouth, and
it shall not return to Me void, but shall accom-
plish whatsoever I desire and shall accomplish
that for which I shall have sent it. For the
rain and the snow do not return to heaven,
but accomplish in the earth the will of Him
that sends them. So the word that He
shall send through His Christ, Who is Him-
self the Word and the Message, shall return
to Him with great power. For when He
shall come and bring it, He shall comedown
like rain and snow, and through Him all
that is sown shall spring up and bear
righteous fruit, and the word shall return to
His sender; but not in vain shall His going
have been, but thus shall He say in the
presence of His sender : — Behold, I and the
children that the Lord has given Me ^ And
this is the voice through which the dead
shall live. Concerning it our Redeemer
testifies, saying : — The hour shall come when
even the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
Man and shall come forth from their tombs ; ^
as it is written, In tJie beginning was the
voice, that is tlie Word.* Again He said,
IVie IVord became a body and dwelt amongst us. ^
And this is that voice of God which shall
sound from on high and raise up all the
dead.

§ 1 6. Again, our Lord explained to the
Sadducees with regard to the resurrection of
the dead, when they brought forth to Him


1 Is. Iv. 10, II.

* John i. I.


2 Is. viii. i8.
5 John i. 14.


John V. 25.


the parable of the woman who was married
to seven husbands, and said to Him : — Lo !
the woman was wife of them all ; in the Resur-
rection of the dead, to which of them shall she
he wife?^ Then our Lord said to them : —
Ye do greatly err, and ye know not the Scrip-
tures nor the power of God. For they who are
worthy of that world and of that Resicrrection
from the dead, they that are men do not take
wives, nor are the women married to husbands,
for they cannot die, for they aj'e as the angels of
God and children of the Resurrection. But
concerning the Resurj^ection, that the dead shall
rise, have ye not read in the Scripture that God
said to Moses out of the bush, '' / am the God
of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob.'''' And lo f
He is not God of the dead, for they all are alive
unto Him.''

§ 17. And there are those who even while
they live are dead unto God. For He laid
a commandment on 'Adam and said to him,
In the day that thou shall eat of the ti^ee,
thou shall surely die.^ And after he had trans-
gressed the commandment, and had eaten,
he lived nine hundred and thirty years ; but
he was accounted dead unto God because
of his sins. But that it may be made cer-
tain for thee that a sinner is called dead
even when he lives, I will make it clear to
thee. For thus it is written in Ezekiel the
Prophet, As I live, saith the Lord of lords, I
desire not the death of the dead sinjier. ^

§ 18. Moreover our Lord said to that man
who said to Plim : — Let me go and bury my
father, and L will come to Thee} An dour Lord
said to him, Let the dead bury their dead, but
go thou, preach the Kingdom of God. But how
is this word understood by thee, my be-
loved.? Didst thou ever see the dead bury-
ing their dead.? Or how shall a dead man
arise to bury another dead man t But re-
ceive this explanation from me, that a sin-
ner, while he is living, is dead unto God ;
and a righteous man, though dead, is alive
unto God. For such death is a sleep, as


« Matt. xxii. 28.
" Gen. ii. 17.
' Luke ix 59, 60.


" Matt, xxiii. 29-32.

9 Ez. xviii. 23, 32 ; xxxiii. 11.


I


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


381


David said, I lay down and slept, and awoke. ""
Again Isaiah said, They that sleep in the dust
shall awake? And our Lord said concerning
the daughter of the chief of the synagogue,
The damsel is not dead, but sleeping a slufnber.^
And concerning Lazarus, He said to His
disciples : — Our f?'iend Lazarus has fallen
asleep ; but I go to waken him.^ And the Apostle
said : — We shall all sleep, but 7ve shall not all
be changed. ^ And again he said : — Concerning
those that sleep, be ye not grieved?

§ 19. But it is right for us to be afraid of
the second death, '' that which is full of weep-
ing and gnashing of teeth, and of groanings
and miseries, that which is situated in outer
darkness. But blessed shall be the faithful
and the righteous in that Resurrection, in
which they expect to be awakened and 10
receive the good promises made them.
But as for the wicked who are not faithful,
in the Resurrection woe to them, because of
that which is laid up for them! It would
be better for them according to the faith
which they possess, were they not to arise.
For the servant, for whom his Lord is pre-
paring stripes and bonds, while he is sleep-
ing desires not to awake, for he knows that
when the dawn shall have come and he
shall awake, his Lord will scourge and bind
him. But the good servant, to whom his
Lord has promised gifts, looks expectantly
for the time when dawn shall come and he
shall receive presents from his Lord. And
even though he is soundly sleeping, in his
dream he sees something like what his Lord
is about to give him, whatsoever He has
promised him, and he rejoices in his dream,
and exults, and is gladdened. As for the
wicked, his sleep is not pleasant to him, for
he imagines that lo ! the dawn has come
for him, and his heart is broken in his
dream. But the righteous sleep, and their
slumber is pleasant to them, in the day-time
and the night-time, and they take no
thought of all that long night, and like one


^ Ps. iii. 4.

3 Matt. ix. 26.

^ I Cor. XV. 51.

■^ Rev. ii. II; XX. 14; xxi. 18.


2 Is. XX vi. 19.
4 John xi. II.
^ I Thess. iv. 13.


hour is it accounted in their eyes. Then
in the watch of the dawn they awake with
joy. But as for the wicked, their sleep lies
heavy upon them, and they are like a man
who is laid low by a great and deep fever,
and tosses on his couch hither and thither,
and he is terrified the whole night long,
which lengthens itself out for him, and he
fears the dawn when his Lord will con-
demn him.

§ 20. But our faith thus teaches, that
v^'hen men fall asleep, they sleep this slum-
ber without knowing good from evil. And
the righteous look not forward to their
promises, nor do the wicked look forward
to their sentence of punishment, until the
Judge come and separate those whose place
is at His right hand from those whose
place is at His left. And be thou instructed
by that which is written, that when the
Judge shall sit, and the books be opened
before Him and the good and evil deeds re-
cited, then they that have wrought good
works shall receive good rewards from Him
Who is good ; and they that have done evil
deeds shall receive evil penalties from the
just Judge. For towards the good, He
changes not His nature ; and He proves
Himself just because He justly condemns
many. But towards the evil He changes
His nature, in that world where grace is lost
in justice ; and He proves Himself just to
all. And grace will not be joined with
justice towards them. Like as grace avails
not (to remedy) detriment, so justice (avails
not to assist) grace. For grace is far from
the judge, but justice urges the judge. If
grace be nigh to any one, let him turn him-
self towards it, and not deliver himself into
the hands of justice, lest it condemn him, ex-
acting for his shortcomings the penalty at his
hands. And if grace be far from any one,
justice will bring him to the trial, and by it
he will be condemned, and go away to the
torment.

§ 21. But hear, my beloved, this proof
that retribution shall take place at the end.
For when the Shepherd divides His flock and
sets some on His right hand and some on His


382


APHRAHAT.


left/ until He shall have acknowledged the
service of the good, then He will cause them
to inherit the kingdom ; and until He shall
have rebuked the evil and they are con-
demned, then He will send them to the
torment. And as to them that sent mes-
sengers after the King, saying, This 'jnan
shall not he king over tcs,^ when He shall re-
ceive the kingdom and return, then His ad-
versaries shall be slain before Him. And
the labourers w^ho hastened and were wearied
in the vineyard, shall not receive the re-
ward till the labour shall cease. And the
traders w^ho received the money, when the
Lord of the money shall come, then shall
He exact the usury. And the virgins who,
while waiting for the bridegroom, slumbered
and slept because He delayed to come,
when they shall hear the cry, then they
shall awake and trim their lamps ; and they
that are wise shall enter in ; and the foolish
shall be shut out. And they who were be-
fore us in entering the faith, without us
shall 7iot he made perfect. ^

S 22 From all these thincrs, understand
thou, my beloved, as it has been made cer-
tain for thee, that as yet no one has received
his reward. For the righteous have not in-
herited the kingdom, nor have the wicked
gone into torment. The Shepherd has not
as yet divided His flock. And lo ! the
workmen enter into the vineyard, and as
yet have not received the reward. And lo !
the merchants are trading with the money.
And as yet their Lord has not come to take
the account. And the King has gone to
receive the Kingdom, but as yet He has not
returned the second time. And those vir-
gins that are waiting the bridegroom are
sleeping up to the present time, and are
awaiting the cry when they will awake.
And the former men who toiled in the faith
until the last men shall come, shall not be
made perfect.

§ 23. But they who are babes in under-
standing say : — '' If no one has received his


1 Matt. XXV. y2,jf,

2 Hebr. xi. 40.


2 Luke XX. 9, if.


reward, why did the Apostle say. When we
shall depart from the hody, we shall be pre-
sent with the Lord .P " " But recollect, my be-
loved, that I instructed thee concerning this
matter in \\iQ Demonstration concerning Soli-
taries,^ that the spirit which the righteous
receive, according to its heavenly nature,
goes to our Lord until the time of the Re-
surrection, when it shall come to put on the
body in which it dwelt. And at every time
it has the memory of this in the presence of
God, and looks eagerly for the Resurrection
of that body in which it dwelt, as the
Prophet Isaiah said about the Church of the
Gentiles : — They that make mention of thee
shall he faithfid and stand hefore the Lord,
and thou shalt not give thein rest.^ But as
to the wicked, they have none to make
mention of them before the Lord, because
the Holy Spirit is far removed from them,
because they are animal, and are buried
after the manner of animals.

§ 24. And again, (the followers of) doc-
trines, which are instruments of the Evil One,
are offended by the word which our Lord
spake. No one has ascended up to hea'Den hut
ILe Who came down from heaven, the Son of
Man, Who was in heaven.'' And they say,
" Lo ! our Lord testified that no earthly
body has ascended to heaven." In their
ignorance they cannot apprehend the
force of this. For when our Lord in-
structed Nicodemus, he did not apprehend
the force of the saying. Then our Lord
said to him : — '^ No one has asceiided into
heaven, so as to come down and relate to you
whatsoever is there. For if L have spoken
unto you of those things that are in the earth,
and ye believe not, how shall ye believe ifL
shall speak unto you of those things which
are in heaven?^ For lo ! no other witness
besides Me has come down from thence, to
bear witness concerning those things which
are in heaven, so that ye should believe.


4 2 Cor. V. 8. 5 See Dcm. VI. 14.

^ Is. Ixii. .6, 7. This quotation differs widely from
the Peshitto, as well as from the Hebrew and the
Septuas^int.

'' Johli iii. 13. ^ John iii. 12.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


For Elijah went up thither, but he came not
down along- with Me to bear witness, that
the testimony of two might be sure."

§ 25. But as for thee, my beloved, have
no doubt as to the Resurrection of the dead.
For the living mouth (of God) testifies : —
/ cause to die and I make alive. ^ And both of
them proceeded out of one mouth. And as
we are sure that He causes to die, and we
see it ; so also it is sure and worthy of be-
lief, that He makes alive. And from all
that I have explained to thee, receive and
believe that in the day of the Resurrection
thy body shall arise in its entirety, and
thou shalt receive from our Lord the re-
ward of thy faith, and in all that thou hast
believed, thou shalt rejoice and be made
glad.

Demonstration X. — Of Pastors.

§ I. Pastors are set over the flock, and
give the sheep the food of life. Whosoever is
watchful, and toils in behalf of his sheep, is
careful for his flock, and is the disciple of
our Good Shepherd, who gave Himself in
behalf of His sheep. ^ And whosoever brings
not back his flock carefully, is likened to
the hireling who has no care for the sheep.
Be ye like, O Pastors, to those righteous
Pastors of old. Jacob fed the sheep of
Laban, and guarded them and toiled and
was watchful, and so received the re-
ward. For Jacob said to Laban : — Lo !
twenty years am I with thee. Thy sheep and
thy flocks I have not robbed and the males
of thy sheep I have not eaten. That
which was broken I did not bring unto
thee, but thou required it at my hands I In
the daytime the heat devoured me and the cold
by night. ^ My sleep departed from my eyes.
Observe, ye Pastors, that Pastor, how he
cared for his flock. He used to watch in
the night-time to guard it and was vigilant ;
and he used to toil in the daytime to feed
it. As Jacob was a pastor, so Joseph was a


^ Deut. xxxii. 39.
^ Gen. xxxi. 38, 40.


'^ John X. II, sq.


pastor and his brethren were pastors. Moses
was a pastor, and David also was a pastor.
So Amos was a pastor. These all were pas-
tors who fed the sheep and led them well.

§ 2. Now, why, my beloved, did these
pastors first feed the sheep, and were then
chosen to be pastors of men } Clearly that
they might learn how a pastor cares for his
sheep, and is watchful and toils in behalf of
his sheep. And when they had learned the
manners of pastors, they were chosen for
the pastoral office. Jacob fed the sheep of
Laban and toiled and was vigilant and led
them well ; and then he tended and guided
well his sons, and taught them the pattern
of pastoral work. And Joseph used to tend
the sheep along with his brethren ; and in
Egypt' he became guide to a numerous
people, and led them back, as a good pastor
does his flock. Moses fed the sheep of
Jethro his father-in-law, and he was chosen
from (tending) the sheep to tend his people,
and as a good pastor he guided them.
Moses bore his staff upon his shoulder, and
went in front of his people that he was lead-
ing, and tended them for forty years ; and
he was vigilant and toiled on behalf of his
sheep, a diligent and good pastor. When
his Lord wished to destroy them because of
their sins, in that they worshipped the calf,
INIoses prayed and besought of his Lord and
said : — Either pardon the people for their sins,
or else blot me out from Thy book that
Thou hast written.'^ That is a most diligent
pastor, who delivered over himself on be-
half of his sheep. That is an excellent
leader, who gave himself in behalf of his
sheep. And that is a merciful father who
cherished his children and reared them up.
Moses the great and wise shepherd, who
knew how to lead back the flock, taught
Joshua the son of Nun, a man full of the
spirit, who (afterwards) led the flock, even
all the host of Israel. He destroyed kings
and subdued the land, and gave them the
land as a place of pasturage, and divided
the resting-places and the sheepfolds to his

4 Ex. xxxii. 31, 32.


384


APHRAHAT.


sheep. Furthermore, David fed his father's
sheep, and was taken from the sheep to
tend his people. So he tended them in the
integrity of his heart and by the skill of his hands
he guided tJiem. ^ And when David numbered
the flock of his sheep, wrath came upon
them, and they began to be destroyed.
Then David delivered himself over on be-
half of his sheep, when he prayed, saying : —
O Lord God, I have sinned in that I have
nunibei^ed Israel. Let Thy hand be on me and
on my father's house. These innocent sheep,
i7i wJiat have they sinned P'^ So also all the
diligent pastors used thus to give them-
selves on behalf of their sheep.

§3. But those pastors who did not care for
the sheep, those were hirelings who used to
feed themselves alone. On this account
the Prophet ^ addresses them, saying to
them : — O ye pastors who destroy and scatter
the sheep of my pasture, hear the word of the
Lord. Thus saith the Lord: Lot I will visit
My sheep as the pastor visits his flock in the day
of the whirlwind, and I will 7equire My sheep at
your hands. O foolish pastors, with the wool
of the sheep do ye clothe yourselves and the flesh
of the fallings do ye eat, and the sheep ye do not
feed. That which was sick ye did not heal,
and that which was broken ye did not bind up.
The weak ye did not strengthen, and the lost
and the scattered ye did not gather together.
The strong ones and the fatlings ye did not
guard, but with harshness ye subdued them.
The good pastures ye yourselves graze upon, and
what remains ye trample with your feet. The
pleasant zvaters do ye drink, and whatever re-
mains ye defile with your feet. And My sheep
have eaten the trampled (herbage) which yoiir
feet have trainpled, and they have di'unk the
zvaters which your feet have defiled. These
are the greedy and base pastors and hire-
lings, who did not feed the sheep, or guide
them well, or deliver them from the wolves.
But when the Great Pastor, the chief of
pastors, shall come, He will -call and visit
His sheep and will take knowledge of His


' Ps. Ixxviii. 72.


Ezek, xxxiv. 2-4, 9, 10-12, 18, 19,


2 2 Sam. xxiv. 17.


flock. And He will bring forward those
pastors, and will exact an account from
them, and will condemn them for their
deeds. And those who fed the sheep well,
them the Chief of Pastors will cause to
rejoice and to inherit life and rest. O stupid
and foolish pastor^ to whose right hand and to
whose right eye I committed my sheep. Because
thou didst say concemiing the sheep^ let that
which dieth, die, aud let that which perisheth
perish, and whatever is left, let them devour the
flesh of one another ; therefore, behold I zvill
make blind thy right eye and I will wither up
thy right arm. Thy eye which regarded a
bribe shall he blinded, and thy hand which
did not rule in righteousness shall waste
away."" And as for you, my sheep, the sheep of
my pasture, ye are men ; but I am the Lordy our
God.^ Behold henceforth I will feed you in a
good and rich pasture.^

§ 4. The good shepherd giveth himself for the
sake of his sheep." And again He said : —
I have other sheep and I must bri7ig them also
hither. And the whole flock shall be one, and one
shepherd, and My Father because of this
loveth Me ; that I give Myself for the sake of the
sheep.^ And again He said ; — I a7n the door
of the sheep. Eve7y one that e7ite7'eth by Me
shall live a7id shall go in a7id go out a7id
find pasture."^ O ye pastors, be ye made like
unto that diligent pastor, the chief of the
whole flock, who cared so greatly for his
flock. He brouj^ifht nisfh those that were
afar off. He brought back the wanderers.
He visited the sick. He strengthened the
weak. He bound up the broken. He
guarded the fatlings. He gave himself up
for the sake of the sheep. He chose and
instructed excellent leaders, and committed
the sheep into their hands, and gave them
authority over all his flock. For He said to
Simon Cephas : — Feed My sheep and My
lai7ihs and My eives.^ So Simon fed His
sheep ; and he fulfilled his time and handed
over the flock to you, and departed. Do ye


4 Zech. xi. 9, 17.
^ Ezek. xxxiv. 14.
^ John X. 16, 17.
^ John xxi. 15-17.


5 Ezek. xxxiv. 31.
"' John x. II.
9 John X. 9.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


385


also feed and guide them well. For the
pastor who cares for his sheep engages in
no other pursuit along with that. He does
not make a vineyard, nor plant gardens,
nor does he fall into the troubles of this
world. Never have we seen a pastor who
left his sheep in the wilderness and became
a merchant, or one who left his flock to
wander and became a husbandman. But
if he deserts his flock and does these things
he thereby hands over his flock to the
wolves.

§ 5. And remember, my beloved, that I
w^rote to thee concerning our fathers of old
that they first learned the ways of tending
sheep and in that received trial of careful-
ness, and then were chosen for the office of
guides, that they might learn and observe
how much the pastor cares for his flock, and
as they used to guide the sheep carefully,
so also might be perfected in this office of
guidance. Thus Joseph was chosen from
the sheep, to guide the Egyptians in the
time of affliction. And Moses was chosen
from the sheep, to guide his people and tend
them. And David was taken from follow-
ing the sheep, to become king over Israel.
And the Lord took Amos from following the
sheep, and made him a prophet over his
people. Elisha likewise was taken from
behind the yoke, to become a prophet in
Israel. Moses did not return to his sheep,
nor did he leave his flock that was com-
mitted to him. David did not return to his
father's sheep, but guided his people in the
integrity of his heart. -^ Amos did not turn
back to feed his sheep, or to gather (the fruit
of) trees, but he guided them and performed
his office of prophecy. Elisha did not turn
back to his yoke, but served Elijah and filled
his place. And he" who v/as for him as a
shepherd, because he loved fields and mer-
chandise and vineyards and oliveyards and
tillage, did not wish to become his disciple ;
and (therefore) he did not commit the flock
into his hand.

§ 6. I beseech you, ye pastors, that ye


^ Ps. Ixxviii. 72.

VOL. XIII. — 25


2 Sc. Gehazi.


set not over the flock, leaders who are foolish
and stupid, covetous also and lovers of pos-
sessions. Every one who feeds the flock
shall eat of their milk.^ And every one who
guides the yoke shall be ministered to from
his labour. The priests have a right to par-
take of the altar, and the Levites shall re-
ceive their- tithes. Whoever eats of the milk,
let his heart be upon the flock ; and let
him that is ministered to from the labour of
his yoke, take heed to his tillage. And let the
priests who partake of the altar serve the
altar with honour. And as for the Levites
who receive the tithes, they have no portion
in Israel. O pastors, disciples of our great
Pastor, be ye not like hirelings ; because
the hireling cares not for the sheep. Be ye
like our Sweet Pastor, Whose life was not
dearer to Him than His sheep. Rear up the
youths and bring up the maidens ; and love
the lambs and let them be reared in your
bosoms ; that when ye shall come to the
Chief Pastor, ye may offer to Him all your
sheep in completeness, and so He may give
you wdiat He has promised : Where I afn,
ye also shall be^ These things, brief as they
are, will be sufficient for the good pastors
and leaders.

§ 7. Above, my beloved, I have written to
remind thee of the character that becomes
the whole flock. And in this discourse I
have written to thee about the pastors, the
guides of the flock. These reminders I have
written to thee, beloved, as thou didst ask
of me in thy dear letter.

S 8. The Steward brousfht me into the

o o

King's treasury and showed me there many
precious things ; and when I saw them my
mind was captivated with the great treasury.
And as I looked upon it, it dazzled my eyes,
and took captive my thoughts, and caused
my reflections to wander in many ways.
Whosoever receives thereof, is himself en-
riched, and enriches (others). It lies open
and unguarded before all that seek it ; and
though many take from it there is no defi-
ciency ; and when they give of that which


3 I Cor. ix. 7. sq.


"* John xii. 26.


386


APHRAHAT.


they have received, their own portion is
greatly multipHed. They that receive freely
let them give freely * as they have received.
For (this treasure) cannot be sold for a price,
because there is nothing equivalent to it.
Moreover the treasure fails not ; and they
that receive it are not satiated. They drink,
and are still eager ; they eat, and are hun-
gry. Whosoever is not thirsty, finds not
ought to drink ; whoever is not hungry,
finds nothing to eat. The hunger for it
satisfies many, and from the thirst for it
flow forth water-springs. For the man who
draws nigh to the fear of God is like the
man who in his thirst draws near to the
water-spring and drinks and is satisfied, and
the fountain is not a whit diminished. And
the land that needs to drink in water,
drinks of the fountain, but its waters fail
not. And when the land drinks, it needs
again to drink, and the spring is not les-
sened by its flowing. So is the knowledge
of God. Though all men should receive of
it, yet there would come no lack in it, nor
can it be limited by the sons of flesh. He
that takes from it, cannot take away all ;
and when he gives, he lacks nothing. When
thou takest fire with a candle from a
flame, though thou kindle many candles at
it, yet the flame does not diminish when
thou takest from it, nor does the candle
fail, when it kindles many. One man can-
not receive all the King's treasure, nor when
a thirsty man drinks of the fountain, do its
waters fail. When a man stands on a lofty
mountain, his eye does not (equally) com-
prehend the near and the distant ; nor, when
he stands and counts the stars of heaven,
can he set limits to the hosts of the heavens.
So when he draws nigh unto the fear of
God, he cannot attain to the whole of it ;
and when he receives much that is precious,
it does not seem to be diminished ; and
when he gives of that which he has re-
ceived, it is not exhausted, nor has it come
to an end for him. And remember, my be-
loved, w^hat I wrote to thee, in the first dis-

1 Matt. X. 8.


course, about faith, that whoever has freely
received ought to give freely as he has re-
ceived, as our Lord said : — Freely ye have re-
ceived, freely give."^ For whosoever keeps
back part of anything he has received,^ even
that which he has obtained shall be taken
away from him. Therefore, my beloved,
as I have been able to obtain now from that
treasure that fails not, I have sent unto thee
from it. Yet though I have sent it to thee,
it is all with me. For the treasure fails not,
for it is the wisdom of God ; and the steward
is our Lord Jesus Christ, as He testified when
He said : — All iJiings have bee?i committed to
Me by My F^.ther.'^ And while He is the
steward of the wisdom, again, as the Apos-
tle said : — Christ is the power of God and His
wisdom. ^ This wisdom is imparted to many,
yet nothing is lacking, as I explained to
thee above ; the Prophets received of the
spirit of Christ, yet Christ was not a whit
diminished.

§ 9. Ten treatises have I written unto
thee, my beloved. Whatsoever thou hast
asked of me, I have explained to thee with-
out (receiving) ought from thee. And that
which thou enquiredst not of me, I have
given unto thee. I have asked thy name and
written unto thee. I have asked of myself
thy question, and I have answered thee as I
was able, for thy persuasion. W^hatsoever I
have written unto thee, meditate in these
things at every time ; and labour to read
those books which are read in the church of
God. These ten little books that I have
written for thee, they borrow one from an-
other, and depend one upon another.
Separate them not one from another. From
Olaph to Yud I have written for thee, each
letter after its fellow. Read thou and learn
thou and the brethren, the monks, and the
faithful, they from whom mocking is far re-
moved ; as I wrote unto thee above. And
remember that which I pointed out to thee,
that I have not brought these matters to an
end, but short of the end. Nor are these


2 Matt. X. 8.
4 Matt. xi. 27.


3 Matt. XXV. 29.
5 I Cor. i. 24.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


387


things sufficient ; but hear thou these things
from me without wrangling, and enquire
concerning them with brethren who are apt
for persuasion. Whatsoever thou hearest
that assuredly edifies, receive ; and what-
ever builds up strange doctrines, overthrow
and utterly demolish. For wrangling can-
not edify. But I, my beloved, as a stone-
cutter have brought stones for the building,
and let wise architects carve them out and
lay them in the building ; and all the
labourers that toil in the building shall receive
reward from the Lord of the house.


Demonstration XVII. — Of Christ the Son
OF God.

§ I. (This is) a reply against the Jews,
who blaspheme the people gathered from
among the Gentiles ; for they say thus, "Ye
worship and serve a man who was begotten,
a son of man who was crucified, and ye
call a son of men, God. And though God
has no son, ye say concerning this crucified
Jesus, that He is the Son of God." And they
brino- forward as an arsrument, that God
said: — "/ am God and there is ?ione else
beside Me." ^ And again he said: — "■Thou
shalt not worship another God. " "^ Therefore,
(say they), ye are opposing God in that ye
call a man, God.

§ 2. Concerning these things, my beloved,
so far as I, in my insignificance, can com-
prehend, I will instruct thee about them,
that while we grant to them that He is man,
and (while) we at the same time honour
Him and call Him God and Lord, yet it is
not in any novel fashion, that we have so
called Him, nor that we have applied to
Him a novel name, which they themselves
did not employ. Yet it is a sure thing with
us, that Jesus our Lord is God, the Son of
God, and the King, the King's Son, Light of
light, Creator and Counsellor, and Guide,
and the Way, and Redeemer, and Shepherd,
Gatherer, and the Door, and the Pearl, and
the Lamp ; and by many (such) names is


^ Deut xxxii. 39.


2 Exod. xxxiv. 14.


He surnamed. But we shall leave aside all
(the rest) of them, and prove concerning
Him, that He Who came from God is the
Son of God, and (is) God.

§ 3. For the venerated name of Godhead
has been applied also to righteous men, and
they have been held w^orthy to be called by
it. And the men with whom God was well
pleased, them He called. My sons, and My
friends. When He chose Moses His friend
and His beloved and made him chief and
teacher and priest unto his people he called
him God. For He said to him : — / have
made tJiee a God unto Pliaraoh. ^ And He gave
him His priest for a prophet, And Aaron thy
brotlier shall speak for thee unto Pharaoh, and
thou shalt be unto him as a God, and he shall be
unto tliee an interpreter.'' Thus not alone to
the evil Pharaoh did He make Moses God,
but also unto Aaron, the holy priest, He
made Moses God.

§ 4. Again, hear concerning the title Son
of God, by which we have called Him.
They say that "though God has no son, ye
make that crucified Jesus, the firstborn son
of God." Yet He called Israel " J/y first-
bor7i," when Pie sent to Pharaoh through
Moses and said to him, Israel is Illy first-
born ; I have said unto thee, let My Son go to
se7ve Me, and if thou art not willing to let
{Jiini) go, lo / I will slay thy son, thy firstborn.^
And also through the Prophet® He testified
concerning this, and reproved them and said
to the people. Out of Egypt have I called
My son. As I called them, so they went and
worshipped Baal and offered incense to the
graven images. And Isaiah said^ concern-
ing them. Children have I reared aiid brought
up, and th-ey have rebelled against Me. And
again it is written, Ye are the children of the
LordyourGod.^ And about Solomon He said.
He shall be to Me a son, and I will be to him a
Father.^ So also w^e call the Christ, the Son
of God, for through Him we have gained the
knowledge of God ; even as He called Israel


^ Ex. vi. I

^ Ex, iv. 22,2^.

Us.i.2.

9 2 Sam. viii, 14,


4 Ex. vii. I.
^ Hos. xi. I, 2.
® Deut. xiv. I.


388


APHRAHAT.


My fir sth or 71 son, and as He said concerning
Solomon, He shall he to Me a son. And we
call Him God, even as He surnamed Moses
by His own Name. And also David said
concerning- them : — Ye are Gods and children
of the Highest, all of you. ^ And when they
amended not themselves, therefore He said
concerning them : — As men shall ye die, and
as one of the princes shall ye fall?'

§ 5. P'or the name of Divinity is given for
the highest honour in the world, and with
whomsoever God is well pleased, He applies
it to him. But however, the names of God
are many and are venerable, as He delivered
His names to Moses, saying to him : — I am
the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham
and the God of Isaac and the God of facob.
This is My Name for ever, and this is My memo-
rial unto generations.'^ And He called His
name Ahiyah ashar Ahiyah, HI Shaddai and
Adonai Sahaoth.^ By these names is God
called. The great and honourable name of
Godhead He withheld not from His righteous
ones ; even as, though He is the great King,
without grudging He applied the great and
honourable name of Kingship to men who
are His creatures.

§ 6. For by the mouth of His prophet God
called the heathen King Nebuchadnezzar,
King of Kings. For Jeremiah said : —
Every people and kingdom that shall not put his
neck into the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar y King of
Kings, My servant, with famine a?id with sword
and with pestilence will I visit that people.^
Though He is the great King, He grudges
not the name of Kingship to men. And (so),
though He is the great God, yet He grudged
not the name of Godhead to the sons of
flesh. And though all fatherhood is His, He
has called men also fathers. For He said
to the congregation : — Hstead of thy father s ,
shall he thy children. ® And though authority
is His, He has given men authority one over


^ Ps. Ixxxii. 6. 2 Ih. 7. 3 Exod. iii.6, 15.

^ Gen. xvii. i ; Exod. iii. 14 ; Jer. xxxii. 18. The He-
brew has "Jehovah Sabaoth."

^ Jer. xxvii. 8. The Hebrew has " King of Babylon"
and so the Peshitto. But Nebuchadnezzar is ad-
dressed as " King of Kings," Daniel ii. 37.

^ Ps. xlv. 17.


another. And while worship is His unto
honour. He has yet allowed it in the world,
that one man should honour another. For
even though a man should do worship' be-
fore the wicked and the heathen andthem that
refuse grace, yet is he not censured by God.
And concerning worship He commanded
His people. Thou shall not tvorship the sun or
the moon or all the hosts of heaven ; and also
ye shall not desire to worship any creatiLre that
is upon the earth. ^ Behold the grace and the
love of our good Maker, that He did not
grudge to men the name of Godhead and
the name of worship, and the name of King-
ship, and the name of authority ; becau&e
He is the Father of the created things that
are over the face of the world, and He has
honoured and exalted and glorified men
above all creatures. For with His holy hands
He fashioned them ; and of His Spirit He
breathed into them, and a dwelling-place did
He become unto them from of old. ** In them
doth He abide and amongst them doth He
walk. For He said through the prophet, /
will divell in them, and walk in them. ' Further-
more also the Prophet Jeremiah said : — Ye
are the temple of the Lord, if ye make fair your
ways and your deeds.'^ And of old David said:
— Thou, Lord, hast been a dwelling-place unto us
for generations ; before the fuountains wei'e con-
ceived and before the earth travailed, and befo?'e
the zvorld was framed ; from age to age Thou
art God. ^

§ 7. How dost thou understand this .? P'or
one prophet says : — Lord, Thou hastheen our
dwelling-place. And another said : — / will
dwell in them and walk in them. First, He
became to us a dwelling-place, and after-
wards He dwelt and walked in us. For the
wise both things are true and simple. For
David says : — Thou, Lord, hast heen our
dwelling-place for generations, before the moun-
tains were conceived and before the earth
travailed, and befoi'e tJie 7vorld was framed.
And thou knowest, my beloved, that all cre-


'^ I.e., homage, outward reverence.

^ Deut. iv. 17. ^ Gen. ii. 7 ; Ps. xc. i.

^ Lev. xxvi. 12. Jer. vii. 4, 5.

3 Ps. xc. I, 2.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


389


ated things that are above and that are be-
neath were created first, and after them all,
man. For when God determined to create
the world with all its goodly things, first
He conceived and fashioned man in His
mind ; and after that Adam was conceived
in His thought, then He conceived the cre-
ated things ; as he said : — Before the moun-
tains were conceived and the earth travailed ;
because man is older and more ancient in
conception than the creatures, but in birth
the creatures are older and more ancient
than Adam. Adam was conceived and
dwelt in the thought of God ; and while in
conception he (man) was held in His (God's)
mind, He (God) by the word of His mouth
created all the creatures. And when He
had finished and adorned the world, when
nothing was lacking in it, then He brought
forth Adam from His thoughts, and fash-
ioned man by His hands ; and Adam saw
the world completed. And He (God) gave
him authority over all that He had made,
just as a man who has a son and desires to
make for him a marriage feast, betroths to
him a wife and builds for him a house, and
prepares and adorns all that is needed for
his son ; then he makes the marriage feast
and gives his son authority over his house.
So after the conception of Adam, He brought
him forth and gave him authority over all
his creation. Concerning this the Prophet
said : — Thou, Lord, hast been our habitation
for generations, before the mountains were con-
ceived, and before the earth travailed, and be-
foi'C the world was frafned. From age unto
age Tliou art the Lord. That no one should
suppose that there is another God, either
before or afterwards, he said : — From age
and unto age^ just as Isaiah said : — / am
the first and L am the last.^ And after that
God brought forth Adam from within His
thought, He fashioned him, and breathed
into him of His Spirit, and gave him the
knowledge of discernment, that he might
discern good from evil, and might know
that God made him. And inasmuch as man

1 Is. xliv. 6 ; xlviii. 12.


knew his Maker, God was formed and con-
ceived within his thought, and he became a
temple for God his Maker, as it is written,
Ye are the temple of God, And (so) He
Himself said : — I will dwell in them and walk
in them. But as for the sons of Adam, who
do not recognise their Maker, He is not
formed within them, and does not dwell in
them, and is not conceived in their thought ;
but they are accounted before Him as the
beasts, and as the rest of the creatures.

§ 8. Now by these things the stubborn
w^ill be convinced, that it is nothing strange
that we call Christ the Son of God. For be-
hold. He (God) conceived all men and
brought them forth from His thoughts. And
they will be forced to own that the name of
Godhead also belongs to Him (Christ), for
He (God) associated the righteous also in
the name of God. And as to this, that we
worship Jesus through Whom we have
known God, let them be ashamed, inasmuch
as they fall down and worship and honour
even the heathen of the unclean Gentiles, if
they possess authority ; and (for this) there
is no blame. And this honour of worship
God has given to the sons of Adam, that by
it they might honour one another — especi-
ally those who excel and are worthy of
honour amongst them. For if they wor-
ship, and honour with the name of worship,
the heathen — those who in their heathen
wickedness deny even the name of God —
and yet do not worship them as their maker,
as though they worshipped them alone, and
so do not sin ; how^ much more does it be-
come us to worship and honour Jesus, Who
converted our stubborn minds from all wor-
ship of vain error, and taught us to worship
and serve and minister to the one God, our
Father and our Maker. And (taught us) to
know that the kings of the world call them-
selves Gods by the name of the great God,
and are infidels and force men to infidelity,
and men fall down and worship before them
and serve and honour them, like carven im-
ages and idols, yet the law never censured
these, and there is no sin. As Daniel also
used to do worship to Nebuchadnezzar,


390


APHRAHAT.


King of Babylon, the infidel and compeller
to infidelity, and was not censured. Joseph
also gave worship to Pharaoh, and it is not
written that it was a sin for him. But as
for us, we are certain that Jesus is God, the
Son of God, and through Him we know His
Father, and (have) all of us (turned away)
from all other worship. Therefore it is im-
possible for us to repay Him Who bore these
things for us. But by worship let us pay
Him honour in return for His affliction that
was on our behalf.

§ 9. Furthermore, we must prove that
this Jesus was beforehand promised from
ancient times in the Prophets, and was
called the Son of God. David said : — Thou
art My Son ; to-day have I begotten Tliee}
Again he said : — In the gtories of holiness,
from the wonib^from of old, have I begotten thee,
a child.'^ And Isaiah said : — Unto us a child
is born, iinto ns a Son is given, and His gov-
ernment was upon His shoulder, and His Name
shall be called Wondeifil, and Counsellor, and
mighty God of the ages, and Prince of peace.
And to the increase of His government and to
His peace there is no end.^ Therefore tell
me, O wise doctor of Israel, who is He that
was born and whose name was called Child
and Son and Wonderfid 2i\\dL Counsellor , the
7nighty God of the ages, ^nd Prince of peace,
to the increase ^ whose government and to
whose peace (he said), there is no end ? For
if we call Christ the Son of God, David
taught us (this) ; and that we call Him God,
this we learned from Isaiah. And His gov-
ernment was laid upon His shoidder ; for He
bare His cross, and went out from Jerusa-
lem. And that He was horn as a child,
Isaiah again said : — Lo, the virgin shall
conceive and bear ; and His name shall
be called Immanuel, which is, our God with
us*

§ 10. And if thou shouldest say that Christ
has not yet come, I will grant this also to
thy contentiousness. For it is written that
when He shall come, the Gentiles shall ex-


^ Ps. ii. 7.
2 Is. ix. 6, 7.


« Ps. ex. 3 (Pesh.).

4 Is. vii. 14 ; Malt. i. 23.


pect Him.^ Lo ! I, one of the Gentiles, have
heard that Christ is to come. And when as
yet He had not come, I beforehand have be-
lieved on Him ; and through Him I wor-
ship the God of Israel. When He comes,
will He then blame me because before His
coming I beforehand believed on Him .^
But, thou fool, the prophets suffer thee not
to say that Christ has not yet come; for
Daniel confutes thee,® saying : — After sixty-
two zveeks shall Messiah come and shall be
slain. And in His coming shall the Holy
City he laid waste, and her end shall he with a
flood. And until the accomplishment of the
things that ai'e determined, shall she continiie in
desolation. Thou expectest and hopest that,
at the coming of Christ, Israel shall be
gathered together from all regions, and
Jerusalem shall be built up and inhabited.
But Daniel testifies that, when Christ comes
and is slain, Jerusalem shall be destroyed,
and shall continue in desolation until the
accomplishment of the things which are de-
termined, forever. And concerning the suf-
fering of Christ, David said : — They pierced
my hands and my feet, and all my hones
cried out. They gazed and looked upon me,
and divided my ga7'ments amongst them, and
2ipon my vesture did they cast the lot.''
And Isaiah said : — Lo / My servant shall he
knoivn and shall he revealed and shall he
lifted up, so that many shall he astonished
at Him. As for this man, His visage shall he
marred more than that of man, and His aspect
7nore than that of the sons of men.^ And
he said : — He will purify 7nany iiations, and
kings shall he a77iazed at Hi7n.^ And he said
in that passage : — He came up as a little
child before Hi77i, a7id as a root f 7-0771 the dry
grou7id.^ And in the end of the passage he
said : — He shall he slai7ifor our sins ; He sliall
be humiliated for our i7iiquity ; the chastise7nent
of our peace is upo7i Hi/n, and by His b7'uises
shall we he healed.'^ By what wounds were
men healed.'^ David was not slain ; for he


^ Gen. xlix. 10. So in Peshitto ; and similarly in
Septuagint.

•5 Dan. ix. 26, 27. '^ Ps. xxii. 17-19.

*^ Is lii. 13, 14. ^ Is. Hi. IS-

1 Is. liii. 2. 2 Is. liii. 5.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


391


died in a good old age, and was buried in
Bethlehem. And if they should say that it
is spoken of Saul, for Saul was killed in the
mountains of Gilboa in the battle with the
Philistines, and if they should say that they
pierced his hands and his feet, when they
fastened up his body on the wall of Beth-
shan ; yet it does not fitly apply to Saul.
When the limbs of Saul were pierced, his
bones were not conscious of suffering, be-
cause he was dead. It was after Saul died,
that they hanged his body and those of his
sons on the wall of Bethshan. But when
David said, They pierced my hands and my
feet, and all my hones cried out, he said in
the next verse : — O God, abide for my help,
and deliver my soid from the sword. -^ Now
Christ was delivered from the sword, and
ascended from out of Sheol, and revived and
rose the third day, and so God abode for
His help. But Saul called upon the Lord
and He did not answer him ; and he asked
through the Prophets, but no answer was
given to him. And he disguised himself
and inquired by soothsayers, and learned
from thence. He was worsted before
the Philistines, and he slew himself with
his own sword, when he saw that the
battle had overcome him. Moreover in
this passage David said : — I will declare Thy
name unto my brethren, aiid in the midst of the
congregation will I glorify Thee.'^ How can
these things apply to Saul } And again
David said : — Thou didst not give Thy holy
one to see corruption."^ But all these things
fitly apply to Christ. When He came to
them, they did not receive Him ; but
wickedly judged Him by false witness.
And He was hung upon the tree by His
hands, and they pierced His hands and His
feet with the nails which they fastened in
him ; and all His bones cried out. And on
that day a great prodigy happened, namely,
that the light became dark in the middle of
the day, as Zechariah prophesied, saying : —
The day shall be known unto the Lord. It


1 Ps. xxii. 17, 18.
^ Ps. xvi. 10.


2 Ps. xxii. 23.


shall not be daytijne, and it shall not be night ;
and at the evening time thei'e shall be light.''
Now what is the day that was distinguished
by the prodigy, that it was neither day-
time nor night, and that at the evening
time there was light.'* Evidently the day
on which they crucified Him, for in the
midst of that day there came darkness, and
at the eveningtime there was light. And
again he said : — That day there shall be cold
and frost.'" — As thou knowest, on that day
on which they crucified Him, it was cold,
an.d they had made them a fire to warm
themselves when Simon came and stood
with them. And again he said : — The
spear shall arise against the shepJierd, and
against the man, My friend ; " and it shall
smite the shepherd, and the sheep of his flock
shall be scattered ; and I will turn back My
hand 2ipon the pastor.'' And furthermore
David said concerning His Passion : — For
My meat they gave gall, and for My tliirst did
they give Me vinegar to drink. ^ — Again he
said in that passage : — They have persecuted
Him JVhom Thoic hast smitten ; and have added
to the affliction of Him that was slain. For
they added many (afflictions) to Him, much
that was not written concerning Him, curs-
ings and revilings, such as the Scripture
could not reveal, for their revilings were
hateful. But, however, the Lord was pleased
to humiliate Him and afllict Him.^ And He
was slain for our iniquity,^ and was hu?niliated
for our sins, and was made sin in His own
person.^

§ II. We worship those mercies, and bow
the knee before the Majesty of His Father,
Who converted our worship to Him. We call
Him God, just as Moses (was called God) ;
and Firstborn, and Son, just as Israel (was
called) ; and Jesus (Joshua), just as Joshua


4 Zech. xiv. 7.

5 Zech. xiv. 6. So in Peshitto ; also in Septuagint.
Cp. margin of Revised Version.

''This is so read in one Syriac MS. ; for " the sheep,
mv fyiciids," which the other gives.
"^ "Zech. xiii. 7 ; S. Matt. xxvi. 31 ; S. Mark, xiv. 27.
8 Ps. Ixix. 22, 27. ^ Is. liii. 10.

1 //). liii. 5.
'-' 2 Cor. v. 21.


392


APHRAHAT.


the son of Nun was so called ; and Priest,
like Aaron, and King, like David ; and great
Prophet, like all the Prophets ; and Shep-
herd, like the shepherds who tended and
guided Israel. And so did He call children,
as He said: — Strange children shall hearken
unto Me} And He has made us brothers
unto Himself, He said :• — I will declare Tliy
name tmto My brethren.^ And we have be-
come friends unto Him, as Pie said to His
disciples : — / have called y on friends,'^ even
as His Father called Abraham My friend."
And He said unto us : — / am the good
Shepherd, the Door, the Way, the Vine, the
Sower, the Bridegroom, the Pea7'l, the Lamp, the
Light, the King, God, Saviour, and Redeemer.
And by many names is He surnamed.

§ 12. This brief argument have I written
unto thee, my beloved, that thou mayest
make defence against the Jews, concerning
this that they say, that God has no son, and
concerning this that we call Him God, the
Son of God, King, and Firstborn of all
creatures. ^


Demonstratio7i XXL. — Of Persecution.

§ I. I have heard a reproach, which has
greatly vexed me. The unclean (the hea-
then) say, that this people, which is gath-
ered together out of all nations, has no
God. And thus say the impious: — "If
they have a God, why does He not avenge
His people.? " And darkness more exceed-
ingly has thickened upon me, because the
Jews also reproach us, and magnify them-
selves over the children of our people. It
happened one day, that a man, who is called
wise amongst the Jews, questioned me, say-
ing : — Jesus, Who is called your Teacher,
wrote for you, that Lf there shall he in you
faith like one grain of mustard, ye shall say to
this 7nountain, Remove, and it shall remove f^om
before you ; and (ye shall say^ even, Be lifted


^ Ps. xxiii. 45.
3 John XV. 15.
sCol.i. 15.


2 Ps. xxii. 23.

4 Is. xli. 8.


/// and fall into the sea, and it shall obey you.^
So apparently there is in all your people not
one wise man, whose prayer is heard, and
who asks of God that your persecutors
should cease from you. For clearly it is
written for you in that passage, There is
nothing which ye shall not be able to do.

§ 2. And when I saw that he was blas-
pheming and speaking much against the
Way (the Christian religion), my mind was
disturbed, and I understood that he would
not admit the interpretation of the words
that he quoted to me. Then I also ques-
tioned him on sayings from the Law and
from the Prophets, and said to him : — Do ye
trust that even when ye are dispersed God
is with you.'' And he professed to me,
*'God is with us, because that God said
unto Israel : — Eveji in the lands of their enemies,
L yet did not forsake them, nor did L make
void My covenant with them.'''' In answer I
said to him: — "Right good is this that I
have heard from thee, that God is with you.
Against thy words will I also speak unto
thee. For I said the Prophet said unto
Israel, as from the mouth of God : — Lf thou
shall pass through the sea, L will be with thee,
and the rivers shall not overflow thee ; and if
thou shall walk upon fire, thou shall not be
burned, and the flame shall not scorch thee; be-
cause the Lord thy God is with thee. ^ Thus
there is not one righteous and good and
wise man out of all your people, who could
pass through the sea and live and not be
drowned ; or (through) the river without its
overflowing him ; or who could walk over
fire and see whether he would not be
scorched and whether the flame would not
burn him. And if thou shalt bring to me
an explanation, I will not be persuaded by
thee, just as thou also dost not accept from
me the interpretation of the words as to
which thou hast questioned me."

§ 3. Furthermore I questioned him about
another saying that is written in Ezekiel ;
namely, that he said to Jerusalem : — Sodofn


6 Matt. xvii. IQ ; xxi. 22.
■^ Lev. xxvi. 44.


*Is. xliii. 2, 3.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


393


and her daughters shall be built up as of old,
and thou and thy daughters shall become as of
old.^ So he explained this saying to me, and
began to make a defence, and said to me,
"As to this that God said to Jerusalem by
the Prophet, Sodom and her daughters shall
be built up as of old, and thou and thy daughters
shall become as of old ; this is the force of the
passage, that Sodom and her daughters shall
be in their place as of old, and shall be
made subject to Israel; and Jerusalem and
her daughters shall be in the splendour of
royalty as of old. " When I heard this de-
fence from him. it was very contemptible
in my eyes, and I said to him : — " Inasmuch
as the words of the Prophet were said in
wrath, is the whole passage wrathful, or is
part of it wrathful and part of it gracious } "
He answered : — " A wrathful passage is al-
together wrath, and there is no peace in it."
And I said to him: — "Since thou hast in-
structed me that there is no peace in that
wrathful passage, hear without contention
and blaspheme not, and I will instruct thee
about this .saying. For from the top to the
bottom the whole passage is said in wrath.
For he said to Jerusalem : — As I live, saith
the Lord God, Sodom and her daughters did not
do at all as thou and thy daughters have done?'
And he said to her (Jerusalem) : — Be abashed
and accept thy shame, that thou hast overcome
thy sisters in thy sins, and they are justified
rather than thou? Since he says that Sodom
and her daughters were justified rather than
Jerusalem and her daughters, and that
Jerusalem overcame Sodom in her sins, it is
right that when Israel shall be gathered to-
gether, its seat should be in Sodom and
Gomorrha. For their vine is of the vine of
Sodom, and of the plantijig of Gojnorrha.
Their grapes are bitter and their clustef^s gall
unto them? And Isaiah also calls them
rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrha?
For if Israel is gathered together, in Sodom
and Gomorrha ought they to dwell with the
rulers of Sodom and with the people of


1 Ezek. xvi. 55.

2 Ezek. xvi. 52.
^ Is. i. 10.


2 Ezek. xvi. 48.
^Deut. xxxii. 32.


Gomorrha ; and on the vine of Sodom and
planting of Gomorrha to eat bitter grapes
and gather clusters of gall; and to eat the
eggs of the basilisk and to clothe themselves
with spiders' webs,*' to be used with wild
grapes of the vineyard,'' and to be turned into
reprobate silver.'' And Sodom and her
daughters, who were justified rather than
Jerusalem, shall be built up as of old. And
Jerusalem, that surpassed Sodom in her sins,
shall continue in her sins, and shall remain
in desolation until the accomplishment of the
things determined for ever?

§ 4. And Ezekiel said : — This is the ini-
quity of Sodom and of her daughters, that they
did not take by the hand the poor and needy ;
and when I saw these things in them, I over-
threw them? And consider and see that,
from the time that Sodom was overthrown
until Jerusalem was built, there were eight
hundred and ninety-six years. From the
time that Abraham was informed by God
through the Angel that at this time nextyear
I will rett/Tn to thee, a?id Sarah thy wife shall
haveaso7i,'^ from that time till Jacob entered
Egypt was a hundred and ninety-one years :
and the children of Jacob were in Egypt
two hundred and twenty-five years. So all
the years from the time that Isaac was con-
ceived and Sodom overthrown were four
hundred and sixteen years, and from the
Exodus of Israel from Egypt till the great
edifice of Jerusalem was built up by
Solomon, and the temple was built, there
were four hundred and eighty years. There-
fore all the years from the conception of
Isaac and the overthrow of Sodom till the
great building of Jerusalem, were eight
hundred and ninety-six years. And from
the great building of Jerusalem until the
destruction of Jerusalem there were four
hundred and twenty-five years. The sum
of all the years from the time of the over-
throw of Sodom until Jerusalem was laid
w^aste, was one thousand three hundred and
twenty-one. These are all the years that


6 Is. lix. 5.
^Jer. vi. 30.
' Ezek. xvi. 49.


''Is V. 2.
^Dan. ix. 27.
2 Gen. xviii, 14,


394


APHRAHAT.


Sodom and her daughters were laid waste
before Jerusalem. And she that was more
just than Jerusalem is not yet inhabited.
Therefore the whole sum of the years from
the overthrow of Sodom till the six hundred
and fifty-fifth year of the Kingdom of Alex-
ander, the son of Philip of Macedon,^ is
two thousand two hundred and seventy-six
years. And from the time that Jerusalem
was laid waste by the Babylonians until the
present time is nine hundred and fifty-five
years. And Jerusalem has been inhabited,
after the Babylonians laid it waste, during
those seventy weeks about which Daniel
testified. Then it was laid waste in its last
destruction by the Romans, and it shall not
be inhabited again for ever, for // abideth in
desolation until the accomplishment of the things
determined^ So then, all the years of the
former and latter desolation of Jerusalem
have been four hundred and sixty-five years,
and when thou dost deduct from them the
seventy years of Babylon, they have been
three hundred and ninety-five years.

S S. All this arofument have I written to
thee, because the Jews pride themselves,
(saying), "It has been covenanted to us,
that we shall be gathered." For if Sodom,
whose iniquity was not so great as that of
Jerusalem, is not as yet inhabited, and if
we say thus, that it will not be restored for
ever, how shall Jerusalem be restored,
whose iniquity is greater than that of Sodom
and her daughters } As for Sodom God has
not had mercy on her for two thousand
two hundred and seventy-six years ; and
shall we say that He will have mercy on
Jerusalem } For up to the present there are
but three hundred and ninety-five years
from the day that she was laid waste, ac-
cording to the calculation that has been
written above. But as to this that he said,
Sodom and her danghtei's shall be possessed as
of old,^ and with regard to Jerusalem he
said, Thou and thy daughters shall become
as of old, this is the force of the passage ;


' I.e., A.D. 344, in which year this was written. Cp.
De;;7. XXII. 25.

'•^ Dan. ix. 27. ^ Ezek. xvi. 55.


that they shall not be inhabited for ever ;
for the Lord also thus cursed the land
against which He was wroth : — // shall not
be sown, nor shall it produce, nor shall any
herb sp7'-ing up in it, but it shall be like Sodom
aiid Gofnorrha, against which the Lord was
wroth and towards which He was 7iot appeased,^
Therefore be sure, my hearer, that Sodom
and her daughters shall not be inhabited
for ever ; but they shall be as of old,
namely, as in that time when they were not
as yet inhabited, and as in the time when
the Lord was wroth with them and was not
appeased towards them. And Jerusalem
and her daughters shall be as of old, (that
is) as in the former time when the moun-
tain of the Amorites lay in desolation,
whereon Abraham built the altar, when he
bound upon it Isaac his son ; and as it was
desolate when David bought the threshing-
floor from Araunah the Jebusite, and built
there the altar. For consider and see that
this mountain whereon Abraham offered his
son is the mountain of Jebus, which is
Jerusalem. And this place of the threshing-
floor that David bought of Araunah is that
whereon the Temple was built. Thus
Jerusalem shall be in desolation as of old.
And consider that when Ezekiel prophesied
this passage, Jerusalem still was sitting
in her greatness, and those who were in
her were rebelling against the King of
Babylon. And that which the Prophet
spoke, he said in wrath and reproach against
Jerusalem.

§ 6. Consider and observe, my hearer,
that if God had given a hope to Sodom and
to her fellows. He would not have over-
thrown them with fire and brimstone, the
sign of the last day of the world, but would
have delivered them over to one of the
kingdoms to be chastised. As it is written
that when Jeremiah caused the nations and
kingdoms to drink the cup of wrath, he said
concerning each one of the cities, that after
they shall drink the cup, I will turn back the


4 Deut. XXIX. 23.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


395


captivity of Elam, of Tyre, of Zidon, of the
children of Amnion, and of Moah, and of
Edom. ^ Concerning each one of these king-
doms he said : — I?i the last days I will turn
back her captivity. Now we see that Tyre
was inhabited, and was opulent after she
had voandered seventy years, '^ and after she
had received the reward of her harlotries
and after she had committed fornication with
all kingdoms. And she took the harp^ and
flayed it sweetly, and multiplied her music.
And also the region of Elam is inhabited
and opulent. And with regard to Babylon
Jeremiah said : — Babylon shall fall, and shall
7iot rise."^ And lo ! unto this day does it
continue in desolation, and will do so for
ever. And also about Jerusalem he said : —
The virgin of Israel shall fall, and shall not
rise again. She is forsaken itpon the ground
and there is none to raise her up.'^ For if the
prophecy is true which Jeremiah spake
about Babylon, also that about Jerusalem
is true and worthy of faith. And Isaiah
said unto Jerusalem : — / will not again he
wroth with thee, nor will I reprove thee.^ Of
a truth He will not again be wroth with
her, nor will He reprove her for ever; for
that which is in desolation He will not re-
prove, nor will she provoke him to wrath.
§ 7. As to those that reproach us (say-
ing) : — "Ye are persecuted and are not de-
livered," let them be ashamed themselves,
that at every time they have been perse-
cuted, even for many years before they were
delivered. They were made to serve in
Egypt two hundred and twenty-five years.
And the Midianites " made Israel serve in
the days of Barak and Deborah.' The Mo-
abites ruled over them in the days of Ehud ; '
the Ammonites in the days of Jephthah ; ^
the Philistines in the days of Samson,^ and
also in the days of Eli and of Samuel the
Prophet ; ^ the Edomites in the days of Ahab ;
the Assyrians in the days of Hezekiah.^

^ Jer. XXV. 15-27 ; xlviii. 47 ; xlix. 6, 39.

2 Is, xxiii. 15, 16, 17. '^ Jer. li. 64.
^ Amos V. I, 2. ^ Is. liv. 9.

6 Rather, the Canaanites. ' Judges iv. 2.

^ Judges iii. 12. ^ Judges xi. 5,

' Judges xiii. 1-24. 2 i Sam. iv. i. sq,

3 I Kings XX. II.


The king of Babylon uprooted them from
their place and dispersed them ; * and after
he had tried and persecuted them much,
they did not amend, as He said to them : —
Jji vain have I smitte7i your sons, for they did
not accept chastisement.^ And again He
said : — / have cut off the Prophets, and slain
them by the word of My mouth.^ And to
Jerusalem He said : — By afflictions and
scourges be instructed, O ferusalem, lest thy life
depart from thee.'' But they forsook Him,
and worshipped idols, as Jeremiah said con-
cerning them \^ — Go to the distant isles, a7id
send to Kedar, and consider well and see,
whether there has been {anything) like this,
whether the nations change their gods, those
that are no gods. But My people has changed
My hono2cr for that which is not pi^ofitable. Be
astonished, ye heavens, at this ; and quake and
fear greatly, saith the Lord: because My people
have done two wickednesses ; they have aban-
doned Me, the fountain of the water of life, and
they have gone and dug for themselves cisterns,
broken cisterns which cannot hold water. For
the broken cisterns are the fear of images
and idols. And He calls the heavens to
astonishment, because they worshipped the
hosts of the heavens. And the heavens
shall receive as a penalty, that they shall be
rolled up as a scroll, and all the host of them
shall fall down.^

§ 8. All this discourse that I have written
unto thee, my beloved, from the beginning,
was because the Jew reproached the chil-
dren of our people ; but now, as far as I
can comprehend, I will instruct thee about
the persecuted, that they have received a
great reward, while the persecutors have
come to scorn and contempt.

§ 9. Jacob was persecuted, and Esau was
a persecutor. Jacob received the blessings
and the birthright, while Esau was cast out
from both. Joseph was persecuted, and
his brothers were persecutors ; Joseph was
exalted and his persecutors bowed down


4 2 Kings xviii. 9, 13 ; xxv. I. sq.
6 Hos. vi. 5.
8 Jer. ii. 10-13.


^ Jer. ii. 10.
^ Jer. vi. >, 8 .
8 Is. xxxiv.4.


39^


APHRAHAT.


before him, and so his dreams and his
visions were fulfilled. Joseph who was
persecuted was a type of the persecuted
Jesus. His father clothed Joseph in a tunic
of divers colours ; and His Father clothed
Jesus with a body (taken) from the Virgin.
His father loved Joseph more than his
brethren, and Jesus is the dear and beloved
one of His Father. Joseph saw visions and
dreamed dreams ; Jesus fulfilled the visions
and the Prophets. Joseph was a shepherd
with his brethren ; and Jesus is the Chief of
Shepherds. When his father sent Joseph to
visit his brethren, they saw him coming and
plotted to kill him ; and when His Father
sent Jesus to visit His brethren, they said : —
This is the heir ; come, let us kill hirn.^ His
brethren cast Joseph into the pit ; and His
brethren brought down Jesus into the abode
of the dead. Joseph ascended from the pit ;
and Jesus arose from the abode of the dead.
Joseph, after he arose from the pit, had
authority over his brethren ; and after Jesus
arose from the abode of the dead. His Father
gave Him a great and excellent name,^ that
His brethren should serve Him, and His
enemies be put beneath His feet. After
that Joseph w^as made known to his breth-
ren, they were abashed and feared and were
amazed at his greatness ; and when Jesus
shall come at the last time, when He shall
be revealed in His Majesty, His brethren
will be abashed and fear and be dismayed
before Him, because they crucified Him.
Moreover, Joseph, by the counsel of Judah,
w^as sold into Egypt ; and Jesus, by the
hands of Judas Iscariot, was delivered over
to the Jews. When they sold Joseph, he
answered nothing to his brethren ; Jesus
also spake not and gave no answer to the
judges who judged Him. His master
wrongfully delivered over Joseph to the
prison ; and His countrymen wrongfully
condemned Jesus. Joseph delivered over
his two garments, one into the hand of his
brethren, and the other into the hand of his
master's wife ; and Jesus delivered over


' Matt xxi. 38.


2 Phil. ii. 9.


His garments and divided them between
the soldiers. Joseph, w^hen thirty years
old, stood before Pharaoh and became lord
of Egypt ; and Jesus, when about thirty
years old, came to the Jordan to be bap-
tized, and received the spirit, and went
forth to preach. Joseph nourished Egypt
with bread ; and Jesus nourished the whole
world w^ith the bread of life. Joseph took
to wife the daughter of the wicked and un-
clean priest ; and Jesus espoused to Him-
self the Church (taken) from the unclean
Gentiles. Joseph died and was buried in
Egypt ; and Jesus died and was buried in
Jerusalem. Joseph's bones his brethren

*

brought up from Egypt ; and Jesus His
Father raised from the abode of the dead,
and took up His Body with Him to heaven
uncorrupted.

§ 10. Moses also w^as persecuted, as Jesus
was persecuted. When Moses was born,
they concealed him that he might not be
slain by his persecutors. When Jesus was
born they carried Him off in flight into
Egypt that Herod, His persecutor, might not
slay Him. In the days when Moses was
born, children used to be drowned in the
river; and at the birth of Jesus the children
of Bethlehem and in its borders were slain.
To Moses God said : — " The men are dead
who were seeking thy life ; ^ and to Joseph the
angel said in Egypt : — Arise, take up the child,
and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead
who were seeking the life of the child to take it
away.'^ Moses brought out his people from
the service of Pharaoh ; and Jesus delivered
all nations from the service of Satan.
Moses grew up in Pharaoh's house ; and
Jesus grew up in Egypt when Joseph
brought Him there in flight. Miriam ^ stood
on the edge of the river when Moses was
floating in the water ; and Mary bare Jesus,
after the Angel Gabriel had made the annun-
ciation to her. When Moses sacrificed the
lamb, the firstborn of Egypt M^ere slain ;
and when they crucified Jesus the true


^ P2x. iv. IQ. 4 Matt. ii. 20.

^ Miriam, Mariam, Maria, Mary, are all of them forms
of the same name.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


397


Lamb, the people who slew Him perished
through His slaying. Moses brought down
manna for his people ; and Jesus gave His
Body to the nations. Moses sweetened the
bitter waters by the wood ; and Jesus
sweetened our bitterness by His cross, by
the wood of the tree of His crucifixion.
Moses brought down the Law to his people ;
and Jesus gave His covenants to the nations.
Moses conquered x^malek by the spreading
out of his hands ; and Jesus conquered
Satan by the sign of His cross. Moses
brought out water from the rock for his
people ; and Jesus sent Simon Cephas (the
rock) to carry His doctrine among the
nations. Moses lifted up the veil from his
face and spake with God ; and Jesus lifted
up the veil from the face of the nations, that
they might hear and receive his doctrine.
Moses laid his hand upon his messengers
(apostles), and they received priesthood ;
and Jesus laid His hand upon His apostles,
and they received the Holy Spirit. Moses
ascended the mountain and died there;
and Jesus ascended into heaven and
took his seat at the right hand of His
Father.

§ II. Also Joshua the son of Nun was
persecuted as Jesus our Redeemer was per-
secuted. Joshua the son of Nun was per-
secuted by the unclean nations ; and Jesus
our Redeemer was persecuted by the foolish
people. Joshua the son of Nun took away
the inheritance from his persecutors and
gave it to his people ; and Jesus our Re-
deemer took away the inheritance from His
persecutors and gave it to strange nations.
Joshua the son of Nun caused the sun to
stand still in the heavens, and took ven-
geance on the nations his persecutors; and
Jesus our Redeemer caused the sun to set
in the midst of the day, that the persecuting
people which crucified Him might be
ashamed. Joshua the son of Nun divided
the inheritance unto his people ; and Jesus
our Redeemer has promised to give to the
nations the land of life. Joshua the son of
Nun caused Rahab the harlot to live ; and
Jesus our Redeemer gathered together and


gave life to the Church, though polluted by
the harlotry (of idolatry). Joshua the son
of Nun on the seventh day overthrew and
cast down the walls of Jericho; and Jesus
our Redeemer^ on His seventh day, on the
Sabbath of the rest of God, this world shall
be dissolved and fall. Joshua the son of
Nun stoned Achor, because he stole of the
accursed thing ; and Jesus our Redeemer
separated Judas from the disciples, His
friends, because he stole of the money of
the poor. Joshua the son of Nun, when he
was dying, laid down a testimony among
his people ; and Jesus our Redeemer, when
He was taken up, laid down a testimony
among His apostles.

§ 12. Also Jephthah was persecuted, as
Jesus was persecuted. Jephthah, his breth-
ren drove out from the house of his father ;
and Jesus, His brethren drove out and lifted
up and crucified. Jephthah though perse-
cuted arose as leader to his people ; Jesus
though persecuted arose and became King
of the Nations. Jephthah vowed a vow
and offered up his firstborn daughter as
a sacrifice ; and Jesus was lifted up as
a sacrifice to his Father for all the Gen-
tiles.

§ 13. Also David was persecuted, as
Jesus was persecuted. David was anointed
by Samuel to be king instead of Saul who
had sinned ; and Jesus was anointed by
John to be High Priest instead of the priests,
the ministers of the Law. David was per-
secuted after his anointing ; and Jesus was
persecuted after His anointing. David
reigned first over one tribe only, and after-
wards over all Israel ; and Jesus reigned
from the beginning over the few who be-
lieved on Him, and in the end He will reign
over all the world. Samuel anointed
David when he was thirty years old ; and
Jesus when about thirty years old received
the imposition of the hand from John.
David wedded two daughters of the king ;
and Jesus wedded two daughters of kings,
the congregation of the People and the con-
gregation of the Gentiles. David repaid
good to Saul his enemy ; and Jesus taught.


398


APHRAHAT.


Pray for your ejiernies? David was the
heart of God ; ^ and Jesus was the Son of
God. David received the kingdom of Saul
his persecutor ; and Jesus received the king-
dom of Israel His persecutor. David wept
with dirges over Saul his enemy when he
died ; and Jesus wept over Jerusalem, His
persecutor, which was to be laid waste.
David handed over the kingdom to Solomon,
and was gathered to his people ; and Jesus
handed over the keys to Simon, and ascended
and returned to Him who sent Him. For
David's sake, sins were forgiven to his pos-
terity ; and for Jesus' sake sins are forgiven
to the nations.^

§ 14. Elijah also was persecuted as Jesus
was persecuted. Jezebel the murderess
persecuted Elijah ; and the persecuting and
murderous congregation persecuted Jesus.
Elijah restrained the heavens from rain be-
cause of the sins of Israel ; and Jesus by
His coming restrained the Spirit from the
prophets, because of the sins of the people.
Elijah destroyed the servants of Baal ; and
Jesus trampled upon Satan and his hosts.
Elijah raised to life the son of the widow ;
and Jesus raised to life the son of the widow,
as well as Lazarus and the daughter of the
ruler of the Synagogue. Elijah sustained
the widow with a little bread ; and Jesus
satisfied thousands with a little bread.
Elijah was taken up in a chariot to heaven ;
and our Redeemer ascended and took His
seat on the right hand of His Father. Elisha
received the spirit of Elijah ; and Jesus
breathed upon the faces of His Apostles.

§ 15. Also Elisha was persecuted as Jesus
was persecuted. Elisha was persecuted by
the son of Ahab, the son of the murderer ;
and Jesus was persecuted by the murderous
people. Elisha prophesied, and there came
about abundance in Samaria ; and Jesus
said : — Whosoever eateth of My body and
drinkeih of My blood shall live for ever.
Elisha satisfied a hundred men with a little
bread ; and Jesus satisfied four thousand


' Luke vi. 28.

'^ I Kings xi. 12, 36 ; xv. 4, etc.


'•^ I Sam. xiii. 14.


men, besides women and children, with five
loaves. Elisha made oil out of water ; and
Jesus made wine out of water. Elisha de-
livered the widow from her creditor ; and
Jesus delivered the indebted nations. Elisha
made the iron to swim and the wood to
sink; and Jesus raised up that which was
sunk in us, and sank that which was light.
A dead man (laid) upon the bones of Elisha
recovered life ; and all the nations, who
were dead in their sins, were cast upon the
bones of Jesus and recovered life.

§ 16. Hezekiah also was persecuted as
Jesus was persecuted. Hezekiah was per-
secuted, and was reproached by Sennacherib
his enemy ; Jesus also was reproached by
the foolish people. Hezekiah prayed and
overcame his adversary ; and by the cruci-
fixion of Jesus was our Adversary overcome.
Hezekiah was king of all Israel ; and Jesus
is King of all the nations. Because Heze-
kiah was sick, the sun turned backwards ;
and because Jesus suffered, the sun was
darkened from its light. The enemies of
Hezekiah became dead corpses ; and Jesus,
His enemies shall be cast down beneath
His feet. Hezekiah was of the family of
the house of David ; and Jesus was, in the
flesh, the son of David. Hezekiah said : —
Peace and Iruth shall be in my days z*' and
Jesus said to His disciples : — HI}' peace I leave
withy ou. ^ Hezekiah prayed, and was healed
of his sickness ; Jesus prayed, and arose
from the abode of the dead. Hezekiah after
he arose from his sickness added to his
years ; and Jesus after His Resurrection re-
ceived great glory. Hezekiah, after the pro-
longation of his life, death was given do-
minion over him ; but Jesus, after that He
rose, death shall not again have dominion
over Him for ever.

§ 17. Josiah also was persecuted as Jesus
was persecuted. Josiah. was persecuted,
and Pharaoh the Lame'' slew Him ; ^ and
Jesus was persecuted, and the people that
were made lame by their sins slew Him.


^ 2 Kings XX. 19. ■■' Job xiv. 27.

^ I.e., Pharaoh Nechoh., — a Rabbinical interpretation
of the surname. '' 2 Kings xxiii. 29.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


399


Josiah cleansed the land of Israel from un-
cleanness ; and Jesus cleansed and caused
to pass away uncleanness from all the earth.
Josiah hallowed and glorified the name of
his God ; and Jesus said : — / have glorified
a7id ivill glorify {His Name)} Josiah because
of the iniquity of Israel rent his clothes ; ^ and
Jesus because of the iniquity of the people
re7Lt the vail of the Holy Temple.'^ Josiah
said : — Great is the wrath that shall come upon
iliis people ;■ and Jesus said : — There shall
come wrath upon this people ^ and they shall fall
by the edge of the sword.*' Josiah cast out
uncleanness from the Holy Temple ; and
Jesus cast out the unclean traders from His
Father's house. For Josiah the daughters
of Israel mourned and wailed, as Jeremiah
said : — O daughters of Israel, weep for fosiah;^
and over Jesus did the daughters of Israel
weep and mourn, as Zechariah said : — The
land shall mourn, fa 77ti lies over fa77iilies.^

§ i8. Daniel also was persecuted as Jesus
was persecuted. Daniel was persecuted
by the Chaldeans, the congregation of hea-
then men ; Jesus also the Jews, the congre-
gain of wicked men, persecuted. Daniel
the Chaldeans accused ; and Jesus the Jews
accused before the governor. Daniel they
cast into the pit of lions, and he was de-
livered and came up out of its midst unin-
jured ; and Jesus they sent down into the pit
of the abode of the dead, and He ascended,
and death had not dominion over him.
Concerning Daniel they expected that when
he had fallen into the pit he would not
come up again ; and concerning Jesus they
said, Since He has falle7i, He shall 7iot rise
agai7i.'' From (harming) Daniel the mouth
of the ravenous and destructive lions was
closed ; and from (harming) Jesus was
closed the mouth of death, (though) raven-
ous and destructive of (living) forms. They
sealed the pit of Daniel, and guarded it with
diligence ; and the grave of Jesus did they
guard with diligence, as they said. Set

^ John xii. 28. 2 2 Kings xxii. 11, 13.

^ Matt, xxvii. 51. ■^ Luke xxi. 23, 24.

^ 2 Chron. xxxv.25 ; Lam. iv. 20.
•^ Zech. xii. 12 ; Luke xxiii. 27, 28.
' Ps. xii. 9.


guards to watch at the tomb.^ When Daniel
came up, his accusers were ashamed ; and
when Jesus rose, all they who had crucified
Him were ashamed. The King who judged
Daniel was greatly grieved'"* at the wicked-
ness of his accusers the Chaldeans ; and
Pilate who judged Jesus was greatly grieved
because he knew thatybr 7nalice the fews
were accusi7ig Hi77i.^ At the prayer of Daniel,
the captivity of his people went up from
Babylon ; and Jesus by His prayer turned
back the captivity of all the nations.
Daniel interpreted the visions and dreams
of Nebuchadnezzar ; and Jesus explained
and interpreted the visions of the Law and
the Prophets. When Daniel explained the
vision of Belteshazzar, he received author-
ity over the third part of the kingdom ; and
when Jesus fulfilled the visions and the
Prophets, His Father delivered unto Him
all authority in heaven and in earth.
Daniel saw wonders and uttered secrets ;
and Jesus revealed secrets and fulfilled
what is written. Daniel was led away
among the hostages in behalf of his people ;
and the body of Jesus was a hostage in be-
half of all nations. For Daniel's sake the
wrath of the King was appeased from
the Chaldeans, so that they were not slain ;
and for Jesus' sake the wrath of His Father
was appeased from all nations, so that they
were not slain and died not because of their
sins. Daniel besought of the ki7ig, a7id he
gave his brethren authority over the affairs of
the provi7iceofBabylofi;^ and Jesus besought
of God, and He gave His brethren, His
disciples, authority over Satan and his host. ^
Daniel said concerning Jerusalem, that un-
til the things determined, she should remain
in desolation ; and Jesus said concerning
Jerusalem, There shall 7iot be left i7i her sto7ie
upo7i sto7ie, because she k7iew 7iot the day of her
greatness.* Daniel foresaw the weeks that
should remain over for his people ; and
Jesus came and fulfilled them.

§ 19. Hananiah also and his brethren


s Matt, xxvii. 64.

1 Matt, xxviii. 18, 24.

3 Matt. X. I ; Luke x. 17, 18.


^ Dan. vi 14.
'' Dan. ii. 49.
"* Luke xix. 44.


400


APHRAHAT.


were persecuted as Jesus was persecuted.
Hananiah and his brethren were persecuted
by Nebuchadnezzar ; and Jesus, the people
of the Jews persecuted. Hananiah and his
brethren were cast into the furnace of fire,
and it was cold as dew upon the righteous.
Jesus also descended to the place of dark-
ness, and burst its gates and brought forth
its prisoners. Hananiah and his brethren
came up from the furnace of fire, and the
flame burned their accusers ; and Jesus re-
vived and came up from the midst of dark-
ness, and His accusers and they that cruci-
fied Him shall be burned in flames at the
end. When Hananiah and his brethren
came up from the furnace, Nebuchadnezzar
the King trembled and was amazed ; and
when Jesus arose from the abode of the
dead, the people that crucified Him were ter-
rified and trembled. Hananiah and his
brethren worshipped not the image of the
King of Babylon ; and Jesus restrained the
nations from the worship of dead images.
Because of Hananiah and his brethren, the
nations and languages glorified God Who had
delivered ihemixom. the fire ; ' and because of
Jesus, the nations and all languages shall
glorify (God) Who delivered His Son, so
that He saw no corruption. On the gar-
ments of Hananiah and his brethren the fire
had no power ; and on the bodies of the
righteous, who have believed in Jesus, the
fire shall have no power at the end.^

§ 20. Mordecai also was persecuted as
Jesus was persecuted. Mordecai was perse-
cuted by the wicked Haman ; and Jesus
was persecuted by the rebellious People.
Mordecai by his prayer delivered his people
from the hands of Haman ; and Jesus by
His prayer delivered His people from the
hands of Satan. Mordecai was delivered
from the hands of his persecutor ; and Jesus
was rescued from the hands of His perse-
cutors. Because Mordecai sat and clothed
himself with sackcloth, he saved Esther and
his people from the sword ; and because
Jesus clothed Himself with a body and was

1 Dan. iii. 28, 29. '-^ Ps. xvi. 10 ; Acts iii. 31 ; xiii. 37.


illuminated, He saved the Church and her
children from death. Because of Mordecai,
Esther was well pleasing to the king, and
went in and sat instead of Vashti, who did
not do his will ; and because of Jesus, the
Church is well pleasing to God, and has gone
in to the king, instead of the congregation
which did not His Will. Mordecai admon-
ished Esther that she should fast with her
maidens, that she and her people might be
delivered from the hands of Haman ; and
Jesus admonished the Church and her chil-
dren (to fast), that she and her children
might be delivered from the wrath. Mor-
decai received the honour of Haman, his
persecutor ; and Jesus received great glory
from His Father, instead of His persecutors
who were of the foolish People. Mordecai
trod upon the neck of Haman, his perse-
cutor ; and as for Jesus, His enemies shall
be put under His feet. Before Mordecai,
Haman proclaimed, Thus shall it be done to
the man, in honouring whom the king is pleased ; ^
and as for Jesus, His preachers came out of
the People that persecuted Him, and they
said : — This is ^esus the Son of God.'' The
blood of Mordecai was required at the hand
of Haman and his sons ; ^ and the blood of
fesus, His persecutors took upo?i themseh^es
and upon their children.^

§ 21. These memorials that I have written
unto thee, my beloved, concerning Jesus
Who was persecuted, and the righteous who
were persecuted, are in order that those
who to-day are persecuted for the sake of the
persecuted Jesus, may be comforted, for He
wrote for us and comforted us Flimself; for
He said : — If they have persecuted Me, they will
also persecute you. And because of this they
will persecute you, that ye are not of the world,
even as I was not of it. ' For He wrote before
for us : — Your fathers and your brothers and
your family will deliver you up, and all 77ien
shall hate you for My name's sake. ^ And again
He taught us : — When they shall b?'i?ig you
before 7-ulei's and before magistrates, and before


3 Esth. vi. II.

^ Esth. vii. 10 ; ix. 10.

'' John XV. 20, 19 ; xvii. 14.


4 Matt, xxvii. 54.
^ Matt, xxvii. 25.
^Luke xxi. 16, 17.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


401


kings that hold the world, meditate not before
the time what' ye shall say, and how ye shall
make defence ; and I will give you a mouth and
wisdom, that your enemies may not be able to
■overcome you, because it is not ye that speak, but
the Holy Spirit of your Father ; He shall speak
in you^ This is the spirit which spoke by
the mouth of Jacob to Esau, his persecutor ;
and the spirit of wisdom which spoke before
Pharaoh by the mouth of the persecuted
Joseph ; and the spirit which spoke by the
mouth of Moses in all the prodigies which
he did in the land of Egypt, and the spirit
of knowledge which was given to Joshua,
the son of Nun, when Moses laid his hand
upon him, so that the nations which perse-
cuted him came to a complete end before
him ; and the spirit that uttered psalms by
the mouth of the persecuted David, by
which lie used to sing psalms and soothe
Saul his persecutor from the evil spirit ; and
the spirit which clothed Elijah, and through
him reproved Jezebel and Ahab his persecu-
tor ; ai::d the spirit which spoke in Elisha,
and prophesied and made known to the
king his persecutor about all that was to
happen thereafter ; and the spirit which was
fervent in the mouth of IMicaiah when he
reproved Ahab his persecutor saying : — If
thou shall at all 7'eturn back, the Lord hath 7iot
spokeii by me ; ^ and the spirit which strength-
ened Jeremiah, so that he stood boldly, and
by it reproved Zedekiah ; and the spirit that
preserved Daniel and his brethren in the
land of Babylon ; and the spirit that de-
livered Mordecai and Esther in the place of
their captivity.

§ 22. Hear, my beloved, these names of
martyrs, of confessors, and of the perse-
cuted. Abel was murdered, and his blood
cried out from the earth. Jacob was per-
secuted, and fled and became an exile.
Joseph was persecuted, and sold and cast
into the pit. Moses was persecuted, and
fled to Midian. Joshua the son of Nun was
persecuted, and made war. Jephthah and


^ Matt. V. 19, 20 ; Luke xi. 11 ; xxi. 14, 15.
2 I Kings xxii 28.

VOL. XIII. 26


Samson and Gideon and Barak, these also
were persecuted. These are they of whom
the blessed Apostle said : — Time fails me to
narrate their victories.'^ David also was per-
secuted at the hands of Saul, and he walked
in the mountains and in dens, and in caves.*
Samuel also was persecuted, and mourned
over Saul. Furthermore Hezekiah was per-
secuted, and bound up in affliction. Elijah
w^as persecuted, and walked in the desert.
Elisha was persecuted and became an exile ;
and Micaiah was persecuted, and cast into
prison. Jeremiah was persecuted, and they
cast him into the pit of mire. Daniel was
persecuted, and cast into the pit of lions.
Hananiah also and his brethren were perse-
cuted, and cast into the furnace of fire.
Mordecai and Esther and the children of
their people were persecuted, at the hands
of Haman. Judas Maccabseus and his
brethren were persecuted, and they also
endured i:eproach. The seven brethren,
sons of the blessed woman, endured tor-
ments by bitter scourgings,^ and were con-
fessors and true martyrs, and Eleazar, aged
and advanced in years as he was, proved
a noble example and made (his) confession
and became a true martyr.^

§ 23. Great and excellent is the martyr-
dom of Jesus. He surpassed in affliction
and in confession all who were before or
after. And after Him was the faithful mar-
tyr Stephen whom the Jews stoned. Simon
(Peter) also and Paul were perfect martyrs.
And James and John walked in the footsteps
of their Master Christ. Also (others) of the
apostles thereafter in divers places confessed
and proved true martyrs. And also con-
cerning our brethren who are in the West,
in the days of Diocletian there came great
affliction and persecution to the whole
Church of God, which was in all their
region. The Churches were overthrown
and uprooted, and many confessors and
martyrs made confession. And (the Lord)
turned in mercy to them after they were


3 Heb. xi. 32, sq.
5 2 Mace. vii. i, sq.


5 Heb. xi. 38.

^ 2 Mace. vi. 18, sq.


402


APHRAHAT.


persecuted. And also in our days these
things happened to us also on account of
our sins ; but also that what is written
mig-ht be fulfilled, even as our Redeemer
said : — These things are to he. -^ The Apostle
also said : — Also over us is set this cloud of
co?i/ession ;'^ which (is) our honour, wherein
many confess and are slain.


Demonstration XXII. — Of Death and the

Latter Times.

§ I. The uprig-ht and righteous and good
and wise fear not nor tremble at death, be-
cause of the great hope that is before them.
And they at every time are mindful of death,
their exodus, and of the last day in which
the children of Adam shall be judged.
They know that by the sentence of judg-
ment death has held sway, because Adam
transgressed the commandment ; as the
Apostle said: — Death ruled frovi Ada7n unto
Moses even over those who sinned not, so that
also upon all the children of Adam it passed^
even as it passed upon Adam. And how
did death rule from Adam unto Moses }
Clearly, when God laid down the command-
ment for Adam, He warned him, and said :
— On the day that thou shall eat of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the death.""
So when he transgressed the commandment
and ate of the tree, death ruled over him
and over all his progeny. Even over those
who had not sinned, even over them did
death rule through Adam's transgression of
the commandment.

§ 2. And why did he say : — From Adam
unto Moses did Death rule ? And who is so ill-
furnished with knowleds^e as toimao-ine that
only from Adam to Moses has death had do-
minion.? Yet let him understand from this
that he said : — Upon all men it passed. Thus,
upon all men it passed from Moses until the
world shall end. Yet Moses preached that
its kingdom is made void. For when Adam


' Matt. xxiv. 6 ; Luke xxi. 9. 2 Heb. xi, i.

^^ Rom V. 14, 12. ^ Gen. ii. 17,


transgressed the commandment whereby
the sentence of death was passed upon his
progeny, Death hoped that he would bind
fast all the sons of man and would be king-
over them for ever. But when Moses came,
he proclaimed the resurrection, and Death
knew that his kingdom is to be made void.
For Moses said : — Reuben shall live atid not
die, and shall be in jiumber.^ And when the
Holy One called Moses from the bush he
said thus to him : — I am the God of Abraham,
of Isaac^ and of fa cob!" When Death heard
this utterance, he trembled and feared and
was terrified and was perturbed, and knew
that he had not become king for ever over
the children of Adam. From the hour that
he heard God saying to Moses : — / am the
God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of facob,T)eix\\i
smote his hands together, for he learned
that God is King of the dead and of the
living, and that it is appointed to the chil-
dren of Adam to come forth from his dark-
ness, and arise with their bodies. And ob-
serve that our Redeemer Jesus also, when
He repeated this utterance to the Sadducees,
when they were disputing with Him about
the Resurrection of the dead, thus said : —
God is not (God) of the dead, for all are alive
unto HimJ

§ 3. And that God might make known
to Death that his authority is not for ever
over all the progeny of the world, He trans-
lated Enoch to Himself, because he was
well-pleasing, and made him deathless. And
again He took up Elijah to heaven, and
Death had no dominion over him And
Hannah said : — Tlie Lord rnaketh to die and
causeth to live ; He biingetJi down to Sheol and
raiseth up. ^ Furthermore Moses said as from
the mouth of God : — I make to die and I cause
to live.^ Again the Prophet Isaiah also said :
— Thy dead shall live, and their dead bodies
shall rise again ; and the sleepers of the dust
shall he awakened, and shall glorify Thee. '
When Death heard all these things, amaze-


•^ Deut. xxxiii.6.
'' Luke XX. 38.
39-


^ Deut. xxxii.


6 Ex. iii. 6.
^ I Sam. ii. 6.
^ Is. XX vi. 19.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


403


ment seized him, and he sat him down in
mourning.

§ 4. And when Jesus, the slayer of Death,
came, and clothed Himself in a Body from
the seed of Adam, and was crucified in His
Body, and tasted death ; and when (Death)
perceived thereby that He had come down
unto him, he was shaken from his place
and was agitated when he saw Jesus ; and
he closed his gates and was not willing to
receive Him. Then He burst his gates, and
entered into him, and began to despoil all
his possessions. But when the dead saw
light in the darkness, they lifted up their
heads from the bondage of death, and looked
forth, and saw the splendour of the King
Messiah. Then the powers of the darkness
of Death sat in mourning, for he was de-
graded from his authority. Death tasted the
medicine that was deadly to him, and his
hands dropped down, and he learned that
the dead shall live and escape from his
sway. And when He had afflicted Death by
the despoiling of his possessions, he wailed
and cried aloud in bitterness and said, " Go
forth from my realm and enter it not. Who
then is this that comes in alive into my
realm .? " And while Death was crying out
in terror (for he saw that his darkness was
beginning to be done away, and some of the
righteous who were sleeping arose to ascend
with Him), then He made known to him
that when He shall come in the fulness of
time, He will bring forth all the prisoners
from his power, and they shall go forth to
see the light. Then when Jesus had fulfilled
His ministry amongst the dead, Death sent
Him forth from his realm, and suffered Him
not to remain there. And to devour Him
like all the dead, he counted it not pleasure.
He had no power over the Holy One, nor
was He given over to corruption.

§ 5. And when he had eagerly sent Him
forth and He had come forth from his realm,
He left with him, as a poison, the promise
of life ; that by little and little his power
should be done away. Even as when a man
has taken a poison in the food which is given
for (the support of) life, when he perceives


in himself that he has received poison in the
food, then he casts up again from his belly
the food in which poison was mingled ; but
the drug leaves its power in his limbs, so
that by little and little the structure of his
body is dissolved and corrupted. So Jesus
dead was the bringer to nought of Death ; for
through Him life is made to reign, and
through Him Death is abolished, to whom it
is said : — O Death, where is ihy victory P '

§ 6. Therefore, ye children of Adam, all
ye over whom Death has ruled, be mindful
of Death and remember life ; and transgress
not the commandment as your first father
did. O Kings, crowned with the diadem,
remember Death, which will take away the
diadems that are set upon your heads, and
he shall be king over you till the time, when
ye shall rise again for the judgment. O ye
haughty and uplifted and proud, remember
Death, which shall destroy your haughti-
ness, and dissolve the limbs, and separate
the joints, and the body and its forms shall
be given over to corruption. The lofty ones
shall be brought low^by Death, and the fierce
and stern ones shall be buried away in his
darkness. He shall take away all the pride,
and they shall corrupt away and become
dust, until the judgment. O ye rich, remem-
ber Death ; for when the time shall come
and ye shall draw nigh to him there, ye shall
not use your wealth and possessions. He
will not place dainty viands before you, nor
will he prepare for you a rich banquet.
There the body of the gluttons who used to
live delicately shall be corrupted. They
shall cease from their luxury and shall not
remember it. There the worm shall con-
sume their bodies, and they shall clothe
themselves in darkness over their fair ap-
parel. They remember not the ending of
this world, that Death shall confound them
when they descend to him. So they shall
sit in oppression and in the shadow of death,
and shall not remember this world, until the
end shall be and they shall rise again for the
judgment. O ye rapacious and extortioners

^ I Cor. XV. 55.


404


APHRAHAT.


and plunderers of your fellows, remember
Death, and multiply not your sins ; for in
that place sinners repent not ; and he who has
plundered his fellows' goods shall not pos-
sess his own, but shall go to the place where
man shall make no use of wealth. And he
shall come to nought and pass away from
his honour, but his sins shall be laid up
against the day of judgment.

§ 7. O ye that trust in this world, let this
world be despised in your eyes ; for ye are
sojourners and aliens in the midst of it, and
ye know not the day that ye shall be taken
out of it. For suddenly shall Death come,
and separate and lead away the loved chil-
dren from their parents, and the parents
from their darling children. He leads
away for himself the precious only-begotten
children, and their parents shall be deprived
of them and shall come into contempt. He
separates precious friends unto himself, and
their beloved weep for them lamentably.
He leads away and takes prisoners unto him-
self them that are desired for their beauty,
that he may put to shame their forms and
corrupt them. And those that are glorious
in aspect he leads away to himself, and
they become dust until the judgment. He
leads away betrothed maidens from their
spouses, and binds them captive in his
bridal-chamber, in his place of gloom. He
leads away and separates betrothed hus-
bands from the virgins who were designed
for them and betrothed in their name ; and
these shall sit in bitter mourning over them.
He leads away and separates unto himself
all the beautiful youths who supposed that
even unto old age they would not see death.
He leads away and gathers unto himself
the loved infants of days, with whom their
parents were not satiated. He leads away
to himself the wealthy, the sons of luxury ;
And they leave their possessions as the waves of
the sea.'^ He leads away to himself the skil-
ful artificers, who were raising up the world
by their wonderful works. He leads away
to himself the subtle and the wise, and they


^ Ecclus. xxix. 18.


become simple, not distinguishing good
from evil. He leads away to himself the
richly endowed of this world, and their en-
dowments are destroyed and shall not be
established for ever. He leads away to
himself the mighty and the great ones, and
their might is brought low and weakened,
and comes to an end. Them that were con-
fident that their might would not be brought
lower, in the day of death, men that are
of lower degree than theirs gather together
their bodies. They that trust that in their
death they shall be buried with honour,
it befalls them that the dogs devour them.
And they that trust that they shall be
buried in the place wherein they were born,
know not but that in the land of their cap-
tivity they shall even be gathered (to the
grave) with insult. They that trusted in
their possessions, that they should give
them in inheritance to their children, from
them it is hidden that they shall be plun-
dered by their enemies. Death leads away
to himself the brave and the warriors, who
thought to lay waste the great world. Death
leads away them that adorn themselves
with all pleasant things, and the burial of
an ass befalls them when they are buried.
Death rules over the unborn, and takes them
captive to himself before they are born.
Death leads away to himself them that are
honoured with pomps, and they come into
contempt when they descend to him^ to the
realm of darkness, where there is no light.
He is not ashamed before Kings (that are)
crowned with the diadem. He is not
abashed before the lofty and the fierce ones
who lay waste the lands. Death respects
not the persons of the honourable, nor does
he receive a bribe from the rich. Death de-
spises not the poor, nor does his soul scorn
him that has nothing. Death honours not
them that live in magnificence, nor with
him are the good distinguished from the bad.
He takes no account of the aeed, rather than
of children in respect of honour. The lords
of prudence he makes without understand-
ing, and them that used to make haste
and vex themselves, in acquiring possessions


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


405


}


there with him, these are stripped of their
gains. He leads away to himself slaves
and their masters ; and there the masters
are not honoured more than their servants.
Sma// and great are there, and they hear not
the voice of the oppressor. The slave who is
freed from his master ' there pays no regard
to him who used to oppress him. Death
binds and makes captive to himself the
keepers of prisoners, and the prisoners who
were shut up. By means of Death the pri-
soners are released, and fear not again be-
cause of their oppressors.

§ 8. They that live daintily fear death;
but the afflicted look forward with hope that
they shall be speedily taken away. All
the rich tremble because of death ; but the
poor desire it, that they may rest from their
labour. Death terrifies the mighty when
they remember him ; but the sick look for-
ward with hope to him that through him
they may forget their pains. Again the
young children are afraid of death, for when
it comes upon them they shall leave their
pleasures ; but the old men advanced in
years pray for it, they that are in need of
daily bread.

§ 9. The sons of peace remember death ;
and they forsake and remove from them
wrath and enmity. As sojourners they
dwell in this world, and prepare for them-
selves a provision for the journey before
them. On that which is above they set
their thoughts, on that which is above they
meditate ; and those things which are be-
neath their eyes they despise. They send
away their treasures to the place where
there is no peril, the place where there is
no moth, nor are there thieves. They
abide in the world as aliens, sons of a far
land ; and look forward to be sent out
of this world and to come to the city, the
place of the righteous. They afflict them-
selves in the place of their sojourning ; and
they are not entangled or occupied in the
house of their exile. Ever day by day their
faces are set upwards, to go to the repose

' Job iii. 18, 19.


of their fathers. As prisoners are they in
this world, and as hostages of the King are
they kept. To the end they have no rest in
this world, nor is (their) hope in it, that it
will continue for ever. They that acquire
possessions, rejoice not in them, and they
that beget children, death fills them with
sorrow. They that build cities, shall not
be left in them ; and those that hasten and
toil for anything, are in no wise to be dis-
tinguished from fools. O man without
sense, whosoever he be whose trust is in
this world !

§ 10. Remember, my beloved, and com-
pare and consider in thy mind, who is there
of former generations who has been left in
this world so as to continue for ever } Death
has led away the former generations, the
great ones and the mighty and the subtle.
Who is there that acquired great posses-
sions, and at the time when he departed took
them with him .? That which was gathered
together from the earth returns back into its
bosom ; and naked does a man depart from
his possessions. The wise, when they ac-
quire goods, send some of them before
them, as Job said : — My wiiiiesses are in
heaven ; and again : — 3fy brethren and my
lovers are with God."^ And our Lord com-
manded them that acquire possessions to
make for themselves friends in heaven, and
also to lay up treasures there. ^

§ II. Do thou also remember death, O
wise scribe, that thy heart be not lifted up,
so that thou shouldest forget the sentence
of judgment. Death leaves not aside the
wise, nor respects the persons of the subtle.
Death leads away to himself the wise
scribes, so that they forget that which they
have learned, until the time comes in which
all the righteous shall rise again.

§ 12. \\\ that place they shall forget this
world. There they have no want ; and
they shall love one another with an abun-
dant love. \x\ their bodies there shall be
no heaviness, and lightly shall they fly as


2 Job xvi. 19 ; ih. xvi. 20.
•^ Matt, vi, 20 ; Luke xvi. 9.


4o6


APHRAHAT.


doves to their windows.^ In their thoughts
they shall not there remember wickedness at
all, nor shall anything of uncleanness arise
in their heart. In that place there shall be
no natural desire, for there they shall be
weaned from all appetites. There shall not
arise in their heart anger or lasciviousness ;
also they shall remove from them all things
that render sins. Fervent in their heart
will be the love of each other ; and hatred
will not be fixed within them at all. They
shall have no need there to build houses,
for they shall abide in light, in the mansions
of the saints. They shall have no need of
woven raiment, for they shall be clothed in
eternal light. They shall have no need of
food, for they shall recline at His table and
be nurtured for ever. The air of that reeion
is pleasant and glorious, and its light shines
out, and is goodly and gladsome. Planted
there are beautiful trees, whose fruits fail
not, and whose leaves fall not. Their
boughs are glorious, their perfume delight-
ful, and of their taste no soul shall grow
weary forever. Spacious is the region, nor
is it limited ; yet its inhabitants shall see its
distance even as that which is near. There
the inheritance shall not be divided, and no
man shall say to his fellow: — "This is
mine and that is thine." They shall not be
bound there in the desire of covetousness,
nor shall they go astray there concerning
remenibrance. There a man shall not love
his neighbour with especial reverence, but
abundantly shall they all love one another
after one fashion. They shall not marry
wives there, nor shall they beget children ;
nor shall there the male be distinguished
from the female ; but all shall be sons of
their Father Who is in heaven ; as the Pro-
phet said : — Is there not one Father of ns all ;
is there not one God Who created us ? '^

§ 13. And as regards that which I said;
that there they shall not take wives, nor is
male distinguished from female, our Lord
and His Apostles have taught us. For our
Lord said : — 'They that are ivorthy of that


1 Is. Ix. 8.


2 Mai. ii. 10.


world, and of that insurrection from the abode
of the dead, shall not take wives, nor shall
(women) becoine wives to men ; for they cannot
die ; but they are as the angels i?i heaven, and are
the children of God^ And the apostle said : —
Thei'e is neither male nor female, neither bond
nor free ; but ye are all one in Jesus Christ.''
For, as for Eve, to spread abroad generation,
God took her out from Adam, that she
might become the mother of all living ; but
yet in that world there is no female ; even as
in heaven also there is no female, nor gene-
ration, nor use of concupiscence. In that
place there is no deficiency, but fulness and
perfection. The aged shall not die and the
young shall not grow old. And it is in ex-
pectation of growing old and dying that
young men take wives and beget children,
that when the fathers shall have died the
children may rise up in their stead. Now
all these things have their use only in this
world, for in that place there is no want,
nor any deficiency, nor concupiscence, nor
generation, nor ending, nor failure, nor
death, nor termination, nor old age. There
is neither hatred, nor wrath, nor envy, nor
weariness, nor toil, nor darkness, nor night,
nor falsehood. There is not in that place
any want at all ; but it is full of light, and
life, and grace, and fulness, and satisfaction^
and renewal, and love, and all the good
promises that are written but not yet sealed.
For there is there that which eye hath not seen
and ear hath not heard, and which hath not
come up into the heart of man,^ that which is
unspeakable and which a man cannot utter.
And the Apostle said : — That which God hath
prepared for them that love Him.^ Though
men shall say much, they shall not be able
to express it. That w^hich eye hath not
seen, they are unable to relate ; and that
which ear hath not heard, it is not right to
speak of in such wise as to compare it with
anything that the ear has heard and the eye
has seen. And that which has not come up
unto the heart, who is there dares to speak


Luke XX. 35, 36.
^ I Cor. ii. g.


4 Gal. iii, 28.
«/6.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


407


of it, as though it was like anything; that
has come up into the heart ? But this is
right for a speaker, to liken and call that
place the 'abode of God, and the place of
life, the perfect place, the place of light, the
place of glory, the Sabbath of God, the day
of rest, the repose of the righteous, the joy
of the just, the abode and dwelling-place of
the righteous and the holy, the place of our
hope, the sure abode of our trust, the place
of our treasure, the place that shall assuage
our weariness and remove our afflictions,
and soothe our sighs. To these things it is
right for us to liken, and thus to call, that
place.

§ 14. Again, Death leads away to himself
kings, the founders of cities, who strengthen
themselves in splendour. And he does not
leave aside the Lords of the countries.
Death leads away and takes captive to him-
self the avaricious who are not satisfied nor
say " Enough "; and he is greedy for them
with a greater greed than theirs. Death
leads away to himself the despoilers who
were not by their grace restrained from
•despoiling their fellows. Death leads
away to himself the oppressors, and
through death are they restrained from ini-
quity. Death leads away to himself the
persecutors, and the persecuted have rest
till they go to him. Death leads away to
himself them that swallow up their fellows,
and the down-trodden and oppressed have
rest for a little until they themselves also
are led away and go thither. Death leads
away them that abound in meditations, and
all they have thought upon is dissolved and
brought to nought. Men meditate upon
many matters, and death comes upon them
suddenly, and they are led away ; and
thereafter they remember nothing that they
have thought upon. There is one that
makes plans for many years, and (the
knowledge) is withheld from him that he
shall not survive to-morrow. Some son of
Adam is uplifted and vaunts himself over
liis fellow ; and death comes upon him and
brings to nought his vaunting. The rich
man plans to add to his possessions, and


he knows not that he shall not continue to
possess even that which he has acquired.
Death leads away to himself all the children
of men, and binds them fast in his abode
until the judgment. Also over those that
have not sinned is he king, because of the
sentence of judgment that Adam received
for his sins.

§ 15. And the Life-giver shall come, the
Destroyer of Death, and shall bring to
nought his power, from over tlie just and
from over the wicked. And the dead shall
arise with a mighty shout, and Death shall
be emptied and stripped of all the captivity.
And for judgment shall all the children of
Adam be gathered together, and each shall
go to the place prepared for him. The risen
of the righteous shall go unto life, and the
risen of the sinners shall be delivered unto
death. The righteous who kept the com-
mandment shall p-o, and shall not come
nigh unto judgment in the day that they
shall rise ; as David asked. And bring not
thy servant into judgment ; ^ nor will their
Lord terrify them in that day.

§ 16. Remember that the Apostle also
said, We shall judge angels."^ And our Lord
said to His disciples, Ye shall sit on twelve
thrones, and jicdge twelve tribes of the house of
Israel.'^ And Ezekiel said concerning right-
eous men,* that they shall judge Ahola and
Aholibah. Since, then, the righteous are to
judge the wicked, He has made clear con-
cerning them that they shall not come into
judgment. And as to what the apostles
say, that We shall judge angels, hear, and I
will instruct thee. The angels w^ho shall be
judged by the apostles are the priests who
have violated the law ; as the Prophet said,
The lips of the priest shall guard knowledge, and
the law shall they inquire of his mouth ; be-
cause he is the angel of the Lord, the most
mighty.^ The angels who are the p?'iests, of
whose mouth the law is inquired, when they
transgress the law% shall be judged at the


' Ps. cxlii. 2.

■^ Matt. xix. 28 ; Luke xxii. 30.

■'• Mai. ii. 7.


2 Cor. vi. 3.

4 Ezek. xxiii. 24, 25


4o8


APHRAHAT.


last by the apostles, and the priests who
observe the law.

§ 17. And the wicked shall not arise in the
judgment^ nor sinners in the congregation of the
righteous} And even as the righteous who
are perfected in good works shall not come
into the judgment to be judged, so of the
wicked also whose sins are many, and the
measure of whose offences is overflowing,
it shall not be required that they should
draw nigh unto the judgment, but when
they have risen again they shall turn back
to Sheol, as David said, The wicked shall
turn back to Sheol, and all the nations that for-
get God.'* And Isaiah said, All the nations
are as a di op from the bucket, and as the turn-
i?ig of the balance. And the isles as a gtain of
sand shall be cast away, and all the nations are
esteemed as nothingness by Him. For destruc-
tion and the sword are they esteemed by Him.^
Therefore learn and be persuaded, that all
the nations that know" not God their Maker,
are esteemed by God as nothingness, and
shall not come nigh to judgment, but as
soon as they have risen shall turn back to
Sheol.

§ 18. But all the rest of the world who
are called sinners shall stand in the judg-
ment and be rebuked. Those in whom
there is a little shortcoming will the judge
rebuke, and make known to them that they
have offended. And He will give them the
inheritance of life after the judgment. And
understand that our Lord has made known
to us in His Gospel, that every man accord-
ing to his work shall receive his reward. He
that received money, showed the increase
on it. He whose pound or talent produced
tenfold, received life, perfect, in nothing
lacking. He whose pound or talent pro-
duced fivefold, received the half of ten.
One was given a tenfold authority and one
a fivefold. Now consider and see, that the
increase of five is less than that of ten ; and
the labourers who demand the reward excel
them that received it in silence. They who
toiled all the day, with bold face receive the


1 Ps. i. 5.


2 Ps. ix. 17.


^ Is. xl. 15, 17.


reward and demand it, in confidence that
He will add more to them. While they who-
worked one hour receive it in silence, and
know that through grace they receive mercy
and life. The sinners whose sins are many
shall be condemned by the place of judg-
ment, and shall go into torments. And
from that time and onwards, judgment shall
rule over them.

§ 19. Furthermore, hearken unto the
Apostle who said, Every man according to
his work shall receive his reward^ He that
toiled little, shall receive according to his
remissness ; and he that made much speed,
shall be rewarded according to his speed.
And Job also said. Far he it from God t&
do iniquity ; and far be it from Hi77i to do sin.
For according to a maifs works will He re-
ward him, and a man shall receive according to
his ways.^ And also the Apostle said,
Star excels star in brightness. So also is the
resurrection of the dead .^ Therefore know
that, even w^hen men shall enter into life,
yet reward shall excel reward, and glory
shall excel glory, and recompense shall ex-
cel recompense. Degree is higher than de-
gree ; and light is more goodly than light
in aspect. The sun excels the moon, and
the moon is greater than the stars that are
with her. And observe that the moon and
the stars are also under the power of the
sun, and their light is swallowed up in the
splendour of the sun. And the sun has nO'
power along with the moon and the stars,
that he may not abolish the night which
has been separated from the day. And
when the sun was created, he was called a
luminary. And observe that the sun and
the moon and the stars are all called lu-
minaries ; but luminary excels luminary.
The sun obscures the light of the moon,
and the moon likewise darkens the light of
the stars ; and star excels star in its light.

§ 20. And understand (this) also, from
that which is of this world, those wha
labour with toil, and from the hired men


4 I Cor. iii. 8.

6 I Cor. XV. 41, 42.


5 Job xxxiv. 10, II.


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


409


who work with their fellows. There are
some who hire their fellow-men by day-
wages, and (these) receive the wage of
their toil ; and there are some who are
hired for the month, and compute and re-
ceive the wage for the time, at the time
agreed. And the day-wage is distinguished
from the monthly wage ; and yearly exceeds
monthly wage.

§ 21. And also again, understand it from
the authority that is in this world. There
are some wh^ please the king by their ac-
tivity, and receive honour from those in
authority. One receives a crown from the
kmg, to become governor in one of the
countries. And under the authority of
another, the king places towns ; and also
he excels his inferiors in his attire. Some
receive presents and gifts, and one honour
is distinguished from another. There is one
to whom the king gives the honour of being
steward over all the treasury. Another, ac-
cording to his lower condition, serves the
king, and his authority is only to provide
the daily food.

§ 22. Also in respect of penalty, I say
that all men are not equal. He that has
done great wickedness is greatly tormented.
And he that has offended not so much is
less tormented. Sorrie shall go into outer
darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing
0/ teetJi^ Others shall be cast into the fire,
according as they deserve ; for it is not
written that they shall gnash their teeth,
nor that there is darkness there. Some shall
be cast into another place, a place where
their ivorni shall not die, and their fire shall not
be quenched, and they shall become an astonish-
ment to all flesh ^ In the faces of others the
door shall be closed and the Judge will say
to them :— / know you not.^ And consider
that, as the reward for good deeds is not
equal for all men, so it is also for evil deeds.
Not in one fashion shall men be judged,
but every man according to his works shall
receive his requital, because the Judge is


' Matt. vii. 12.
^ Matt. XXV. 12.


* Is. Ixvi. 24.


clothed in righteousness and regards not
the persons of men.

§ 23. And even as I have showed thee
concerning the world, how one honour ex-
cels another, of those that kings and rulers
of this world give to those beneath them ;
also concerning this I have showed thee,
that even as kings have good gifts to give
to those honoured by them, so also they
have prisons and chains and fetters, which
are various kinds of bonds. One man of-
fends the king with a grievous offence, and
without inquiry he is delivered over to
death. Another offends, yet is not deserv-
ing of death ; he is put in bonds until he is
judged; and is chastised, and the king re-
mits his offence. There is another whom
the king has held in regard ; and outside
the prison house he is kept in freedom,
without chains and without bonds. He
that is put to death is distinguished from
him that is bound; and the punishment of
one exceeds that of another, according to the
desert of his offence. But come thou to our
Redeemer, Who said : — Many are the man-
sions in My Father s housed

§ 24. My beloved, men who are inferior
in understanding, dispute about this that I
write to thee, and say: — "What is the
place in which the righteous shall receive
a good reward ; and what is the place in
which are torments, in which the wicked
shall receive the punishments of their
works t " O man that thinkest thus, I will ask
thee, and tell thou me, why is death called
death, and why is Sheol called Sheol.'' For
it is written that when Korah and his com-
panions made a schism against Moses, tJie
earth opened her 7noiith and swallowed them iipy
and they went down alive into Sheol. '" There-
fore that was the mouth of Sheol that was
opened in the wilderness. David also said.
The wicked shall turn hack to Sheol. ^ We say
that to Sheol, in which Korah and his com-
panions were swallowed up, thither shall
the wicked be, turned back. For God has
power, if He chooses, to give inheritance of


^ John xiv. 2. 5 Num. xvi. 32, 33.


Ps. ix. 17.


4IO


APHRAHAT.


life in heaven, and if it please Him, in the
earth. Jesus our Lord said, Blessed a?'e
the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven.^ And to one of those who were
crucified with Him, who believed on him,
He swore : — Thou shalt he with Me to-day in
the garden of Edeii.'^ And the Apostle said,
When the righteous shall rise again, they shall
fly upwards to meet our Redeemer."^ But,
however, we say thus : That which our
Redeemer said to us is true : — Heaven and
earth shall pass away/ And the Apostle
said, Hope which is seefi is not hope/ And
the Prophet said. The heavens shall pass
away as smoke, and the earth as a garment
shall wear away ; and its inhabitants shall be-
come like it. ^ And Job said concerning- those
that sleep, Till the heave?is wear out, they
shall not be aroused, nor shall they wake out of
their sleep/ From these things be thou per-
suaded that this earth, in which the chil-
dren of Adam are sown, and the firmament
that is over men, (even) that firmament
which is set to divide the upper heavens
from the earth and this life, shall pass
away, and wear out, and be destroyed.
And God will make a new thing for the
children of Adam, and they shall inherit in-
heritances in the Kingdom of Heaven. If
He shall give them inheritance in the earth,
it shall be called the kingdom of heaven.
And if in Heaven, it is easy for Him to do.
For with the kings of the earth also,
although each one of them abides in his
own place, yet every place to which their
authority extends, is called their kingdom.
So the sun is a luminary set in the heaven,
yet for every place to w^hich its rays extend,
its authority suffices, whether on sea or on
land. And observe that the princes of the
world also have banquetings and delights,
and in every place or state into which they
go, their banquetings are with them ; and in
whatever place pleases them, they make a
prison-house. For the sun in twelve hours


^ Matt. V. 3.
2 I Thess. iv. 17.
^ Rom. viii. 24.
' Job. xiv. 12.


2 Luke xxiii. 43.
•* Matt. xxiv. 35.
6 Is. li. 6.


circles round, from the east unto the west ;
and when he has accomplished his course,
his light is hidden in the night-time, and the
night is not disturbed by his power. And
in the hours of the night the sun turns round
in his rapid course, and turning round be-
gins to run in his accustomed path. As for
the sun that is with thee, thou wise man,
from thy childhood till the completion of
thy old age, thou knowest not where he
runs in the night-time, so as to circle round
to the place of its course. Is it necessary
for thee to inquire into those things that are
hidden from thee }

§ 25. These memorials I have written for
our brethren and beloved, the children of
the Church of God, that when these come
into their hands in various places, and when
they read "in them, they may also remember
my insignificance in their prayers, and may
know that I am a sinner also, and fall short ;
but that this is my faith, that I have set
forth from the beginning and written, in
these chapters written (by me). Faith is the
foundation, and upon faith (rest) the works
that become it. And after Faith (I wrote)
that there are two commandments oi Love.
And after Love, I have written of /7zs//>z^, in
its demonstration also along with its works.
And after Fasting, I wrote of Prayer in its
fruit and in its works. And after Prayer, I
have written about War and about what-
ever Daniel wrote concerning the kingdoms.
And after War, I have written of the exhor-
tation for Monks. And after the Monks, I
have written about Repentance. And after
Repentance, I have written about the Re-
surrection of the dead. And after the Resur-
rection of the dead, I have written about
Humility. And after Humility, I have
written of the Pastors, the teachers. And
after the Pastors, I have written about the
Circumcision in which the people of the
Jews pride themselves. And after the Cir-
cumcision, I have written about the Pass-
over, and about the fourteenth day. And
after the Passover, I have written about the
Sahbath, in which the Jews are puffed up.
And after the Sabbath, I have written an


SELECT DEMONSTRATIONS.


411


Exhortation, on account of the dissension
which happened in our days. And after the
Exhortation, I have written about Meats,
those that the Jews deem unclean. And
after the Meats, I have written about the
Gentiles, that they have entered in and be-
come heirs instead of the original people.
And after the Gentiles, I have written and
proved that God has a Son. And after the
Son of God, I have written against the Jews,
who speak injuriously about Virginity.
And after the apology about Virginity, I
have written again Against the Jews, who
.say : — *' It is appointed for us to be gathered
together." And after that defence, I have
written about Almsgiving to the Poor. And
after the Poor, I have written a demonstra-
tion about The Persecuted. And after the
Persecuted, I have written at the end about
Death a7id the Last Times. These twenty-
two discourses have I written according to
the twenty-two letters of the alphabet.
The first ten I wrote in the six hundred and
forty-eighth year of the kingdom of Alex-
ander the son of Philip the Macedonian, as
is written in the end of them. And these
twelve last I wrote in the six hundred and
fifty-fifth year of the kingdom of the Greeks
and of the Romans, which is the kingdom of
Alexander, and in the thirty-fifth year of the
Persian King. ^

§ 26. These things I have written accord-
ing to what I have attained to. But if any-
one shall read these dicourses, and find
words that do not agree with his thought,
he ought not to scorn them ; because what-
soever is written in these chapters was not
written according to the thought of one man,
nor for the persuasion of one reader; but ac-
cording to the thought of all the Church,
and for the persuasion of all faith. If he
shall read and hear with persuasion, it is
well ; and if not, it is meet for me to say
that I wrote for those open to persuasion
and not for mockers. And if again any
reader should find words that are spoken by
us in one fashion, and by another sage in

^ Sc, in the years 337 and 344, a.d.


another fashion, let him not be disturbed at
this ; for every man speaks to his hearers
according to what he can attain to. So I,
who have written these things, even if some
of the words do not agree with what other
speakers have said, yet say this ; that those
sages have spoken well, yet it seemed good
to me to speak thus. And if any man shall
speak and demonstrate to me about any
matter, I will receive instruction from him
without contention. Everyone who reads
the sacred scriptures, both former and latter,
in both covenants, and reads with persua-
sion, will learn and teach. But if he strives
about anything that he does not understand,
his mind does not receive teaching. But if he
finds words that are too difficult for him, and
he does not understand their force, let him
say thus, " Whatsoever is written is written
well, but I have not attained to the under-
standing of it. " And if he shall ask about the
matters that are too hard for him of wise
and discerning men who inquire into doc-
trine, then, when ten wise men shall speak
to him in ten different ways about one mat-
ter, let him accept that which pleases him ;
and if any please not him, let him not scorn
the sages ; for the word of God is like a
pearl, that has a beautiful appearance on
whatever side you turn it. And remember,
O disciple, what David said, From all my
teachers have I learried.^ And the Apostle
said : — Thou readest every Scripture that is
in the Spifit of God. Arid prove everything;
hold fast that which is good ; and flee from
every evil thing. ^ For if the days of a man
should be many as all the days of the world
from Adam to the end of the ages, and he
should sit and meditate upon the Holy
Scriptures, he would not comprehend all
the force of the depth of the words. And
man cannot rise up to the wisdom of God ;
as I have written in the tenth discourse.
But, however, the words of all speakers who
do not take from the great treasure, are ac-
cursed and to be despised. For the image
of the king (on his coin) is received wher-

2 Ps. cxix. 99. 3 1 Thess. v. 21, 22 ; 2 Tim. iii. 16.


412


APHRAHAT.


ever it goes ; but (the coin) in which there
is base metal, is rejected and is not received.
And if any one should say, "These dis-
courses were spoken by such an one ;" let
him carefully learn that to be careful to
inquire aboiit the speaker is not commanded
him. I also according to my insignificance
have written these things, a man sprung
from Adam, and fashioned by the hands of
God, a disciple of the Holy Scriptures. For
our Lord said : — Every o?ie that asketh re-
ceiveth, and he that seeketh findeth, and for him
that knocketh it shall be opened. ^ And the
prophet said : — I will pour out my spirit upon
all flesh in the last days, and they shall prophesy?'


1 Matt. vii. 8.


2 Joel ii. 28.


Therefore whoever shall read anything that
I have written above, let him read with
persuasion, and pray for the author as a
brother of the Body ; that through the peti-
tion of all the Church of God ; his sins may
be forgiven. And let whoever reads un-
derstand what is written : — Let hirn that
hears the word, communicate to him that causes
him to hear, in all good things."^ And again
it is written, The sower and the reaper shall
rejoice together? And Every man according to
his labours shall receive his reward? And
There is nothing hidden that shall not be revealed
to every man?


3 Gal. vi. 6.
5 1 Cor. iii.


■* John iv. 36.
6 Matt. X. 26.


S. GREGORY THE GREAT.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


Gen. ii. 24.
iii. 9 .
iii. 16 ,

iv. 4, 5-

iv. 9 .

ix. I

xxii. 12

xxiii. .

xxxi. 38
Ex. xiii., XV., XVI

xiv.. 14.

xvi. 8 .

xvii. .

XXX., xxxi

xxxi^. sq
Lev. xviii. 7
Num. XX. .

xxvii. .
Deut. iv. 2 .

x.x. 18 .

xxxiii. 25
Ruth i. 20 .
I Chr. xi. 19
Job. xvi. 20

xxii. 3 .

XXX. 29
Ps. i. 2 . .

vi. 8 .

xxvi. 30

xxvii. 7

xxxii. 7 {A
xxxiii. 7)

xliv. 8 {A. V.
7). .

1.7. .

1. 16 (A. V. li

Iviii. 8.

Ixxii. 18 {A.
Ixxiii. 18

Ixxii 28 {A.
Ixxiii. 28)

Ixxvi. II [A.
Ixxvii. 10)

Ixxxv. 17.


V

xlv

6)
V.
V

V.


65,76

49
78
35
49
63
48
2

74
no

5^

55
56

76

5^
56

4^

78

77
34
35.66

63

49

46, 63,

109

68.79

109

3

68

83

79

34-

3

34
66

35
56


PAGE

Ps. Ixxxiii. 7 [A.

V.

Ixxxiv. 5, 6) .

' 34

xcv. II. . .

99

civ. 15 {A. V.

cv

15) • • •

no

cxxviii. 3 {A.

V

cxxix. 3) .

". 68

cxli. 8 . . .

. 45

Prov. iii. 9.

• 25

xiv. 4 .

102

xxiv. 34

. 84

XV. 8 .

35

xviii. 19

• 32

xxi. 27 .

25

xxiv, II

46

XXV. 25

. i:

{7, 102

Eccles. ix. 4

. 40

Is. xlii. 22 .

I

xliii. 26

58

er. xvii. 24
'Dzek. ii. 6.

92

46,63

xvi. 15.

36

xxxii. 19

36

Dan. iv. 17 ,

99

Hos. iv. 2 .

34

Ecclus.xxix. 15.

61

xxxiv. 24.

25

xxxiv. 30 {A.

V

xxxiv. 25). .

66

S. Matt. v. 9 . . .

49

V. II .

64

V. 16 .

63

vii. 22. .

56

x. 8. .

2A

X. 22 .

x. 24 . .

no

X. 25 . .

64

xi. 7 . .

63

xi. 8 .

63

XV. II .

24,79

XV. 12 ,

64

XV. 13 .

64

XV. 18 .

lOI

XV. 19 . .

79

Matt. xvii. 26
xix. 5 .
xix. 0 .
xix. 9 .
xxi.

xxiv. .
xxiv. 13

XXV. .

XXV. 23

xxvii, 63

xxviii. 18
Mark xi. 13

xiii. 32.
Luke i. 38

ii 14 .

iv. 8 .

V. 20 .

viii.

X, 17 .

xi. 17 .

xi. 41 .

xiii. 15

xiii. 27

xiv. II.

XV. 7 .

xviii. 14

xix. 27

xxi.

xxi. 19
John i. I

i. 14.

ni. 14
v. 17

X. I .

X. 27

xi. 34
xiii. 10

xiii. 35
xiv. 6
xiv. 23
xiv. 27

XV. I, 2
xvi. 20.


PAGE

64

65

6?
24, 68

51

66

63

28

64

5°

48

45n, 48

83

35,55

54

55

78

55
no

75
92

56
36
53
51
63
48
83
48
83
55
13,67
52
42n, 49

76
24, 109

lOI

II
63


PAGE


S. John XVI. 22

. 63

xix. 27. .

. . 48

Acts xiii. 30

. . 68

xi. 5 .

• ^5

XI. 12 .

• 65

Rom. ii. 13

. 108

vii. 33-

. 81

viii. 6 .

. 66

X. 2 . .

• 67

xiii. 14

• 92

I Cor. iii. 2-1

3

109

iii. 17 .

. . 36

vii. 7

. 66, 80

xi. 31 .

. . 58

XV. 50.

. . 66

2 Cor. i. 12

■ 63

iii. II .

. 67

vi. 8 .

. . 64

Gal. i. 10 .

. 63

iv. 29 .

63

V. 2. .

• 92

vi. 4 .

- . 63

vi. 8 .

. 66

Eph. iv.

. . 50

V. 29 .

. . 92

Phil. ii. 15 .

. 46, 64

I Thess. iv. 3

. 36

iv. 12 .

27

I Tim. iii. 10

• 25

iv. 8 .

• 37

v. . .

• • 25

v. I . .

I

Tit. i. 15 .

. 79

Heb. xii. 6

11,57

xii. 14 . .

. 68

Jas. i. 19. .

. 36

i. 20. . .

. 36

ii. 15 .

• 29

V. . .

22

2 Pet. ii. 7, 8.

. 64

ii. 22 . .

66

T John V. 20

• 83

Rev. iv. 6 . .

. 41

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Abbess, solemnly ordained by the
Bishop, 4 ; to be selected by the
King with consent of the nuns,
96 ; must mamtam discipline in
her house, 96 ; must appeal to
Bishops on matters of enquiry,
96 ; must assert all rights and
privileges, 96.

Abbot, a higher dignity than prior,
21 ; must exercise great care
and judgment, 52, 53 ; must be
tried and then watched, 44, 88 ;
has to be ordained to his office,
88.

Abel, none wnthout a Cain, 63.

Abramius of Alexandria, correspon-
dent of Gregory, 48.

Adionarii, Agents, 106.

Adamnan, L//(?o/"S Coliimha.'^C) n.,40.

Adrian, Gregory's chartnlariiis,
made rector patrimonii, 97 ; let-
ters to, as notary of Sicily, 44, 69.

Adulouvald, son of Agilulph, 106 :
his history, 106 n. ; born and
baptised, 105.

.^therius,Bishop of Lyons,letters to,
70, 93 ; asked to help Augustine,
71 ; question of an assistant to
him, 93, 94; highly commended
by Gregory, 70.

Affliction, should recall the evils
past, 57 ; a token of remem-
brance, 57.

Africa, under pestilence, 51.

Agatha, Bishop of Sardinia, letter
to, 4.

Agathosa complained of her hus-
band going into a monastery, 69.

Agilulph, 2, 3 (Lombard King) 22 n.,
23, 47 n. ; letter to, 13 ; hostile to
Gregory, 2, 3 ; commended for
making peace, 13 ; had sworn
to peace, 22, 23 ; his friendship
useful, 58, 58 n. ; called Ago, 58 ;
birth and baptism of his son,
106 ; became Arian, 106 n.

Agnoetas, heretics, 45, 45 n., 48.

Aigulfus, Bishop of Mettoe (Metz),
joint letter to, 71.

Albinus, 89.

Albiiln, a precious stone, 107.

Alcyson, Bp. of Corcyra, letter to,
104, 107 ; complaiiis of being
wronged and oppressed, 106 ;
partner in a disputed jurisdic-
tion, 102, 105.

Alexander, deacon, 102.

Alexandria, ship wanted for, 49.
Alius to the monastery of S. Andrew,

51-

Alleluia, when to be said, 8.

Almsgiving may be a snare, 24.

Altar of S. Andrew the Apostle, 62.

Amandus, priest, 43,44, 24 n. ; priest
of the oratory of S. Severinus,
44 ; elected bishop of Surren-


tum, 44 ; venerated at Surren-
tum, 44 n.

Ammonia, mother-in-law of Ste-
phania, 11.

Anamundarus, under affliction, 47.

Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch, letter
to, 13 ; the younger, 13 n. ; com-
mended for holding the faith,
13 ; translated the Pastoral
Ride, 88.

Anathema, to be pronounced by
the Patrician, 64 ; upon heresy,
65 ; of binding force, 67.

Anatolius, Gregory's Apocrisiariiis.
6 n., 21 ; letter to, 11.

Anatolius is quoted, 39 n. ; Bishop
of Laodicea, 39 n. ; whites on the
Paschal question, 39 n., 41.

Anatolius, deacon of Constanti-
nople, 45, 47, 48, 40, 60 ; letter
to, 68. ; puts a question in the-
ology, 49 ; letter to, 68.

Andrew, scholasticus, letter to, 11 ;
complimented after sickness, 11.

Andrew, Bishop of Nicopolis, letter
to, 18 ; referred to for a decision,
104, 105.

Angli, are supplied by Gregory with
preaching, 28, 29, 108 ; have
thrown away their idols, 55 ;
their conversion reserved for
Augustine and his companions,
57 ; their mission commended
by Gregory, 72, J^, 28, 29, 55- S7^
85 ; the constitution for the
church, 8t.

Anthemius, subdeacon, letters to,
44,98.

Antonina, greeted bv Gregory, 37 ;
young lady at Constantinople,
52 n. ; made and gave a racaua,
51 n., 86; greeted at Syracuse,
58, 86.

A paribus, 23 n.

Apocrisiariiis, 6 n., 21 n.

Apostolic See, 5, 19, 20, 21, 22,31 ; its
authority and consent necessary
for a decree, 19 ; appeals made
to, 20, 74 ; has to confirm the
grant of a monastery in Gaul
31 ; its customs to enjoin, 74.

Aqueducts of Rome, under a pre-
fect, 89.

Archdeacon, has five years in office,

and retires.
Archelaus, physician, 10 ; had a

question of prefect, 10 n.
Aregius, Bishop, probably of Syag-

rius, 26.
Aregius, Bishop, of Vapincum, letter
to,26; consoled by Gregory,26,27
Arian heresy and heretics, 16.
Arians, the form of their reconcili-
ation to the Church, 83.
Ariulf, Lombard, duke of Spoletum,
22 ; besieged Rome.


Ark, image of the Church, 67.

Aries, its Bishop had vicariate juris-
diction under Rome, 70 n. ; its
rights to be preserved, 77.

Aroges, Lombard, duke of Beneven-
tum, 23.

Ascriplus glebce, one made defensor
Eeclesice, 89 n.

Asiatic Quarto-decimans, 40 n.

Augustine, Bishop of the Angli, 7,
28, 70, 71, 76, 77 ; Bishop, 28, 70 ;
received the pallium, 29 ; as ex-
positor, 48 ; commended to the
Galilean Bishops , 70, 71, 72, 73 ;
Bishop of the Angli, letters to
74, 81 ; commended to Theo-
doric, 73 ; to Theodebert, 72 ;
Clotaire, 73 ; to Brunichild, 73 ;
Edilbert, 82 ; in relation to the
British Bishops., 76, 76 n., 77 ;
to Virgilius, 84 ; questions and
answers from Gregory, 74 n.,
107, n.

Augustine (of Hippo), refused to
live with his sister, 16 ; admired
by Gregory, 47 ; as expositor, 48.

Augustus, one in trouble, 23.

Aurelius, Bishop of Aries, 31.

Autun, Brunichild's foundations at,
96 n.

Baptism, a sacrament, 3, 66 ; the
very sacrament of faith, 66 ; for
the putting away of sin, 66
prefigured in the Red Sea, 66
in the name of the Trinity, 83
administered to a woman in
pregnancy, 77.

Baptismal Vestment and ceremo-
nies, 3.

Barbacianus, had a monastery and
monks, 41.

Barbara, greeted by Gregory, 37.

Barbara and Antonina, letters to,
59, 86 ; d. of Venantius, 59 ; or-
phans comforted by Gregory.
56 ; orphans of Venantius, 59 n.,
86 ; to be protected from evil
men, 59 ; if made wards of the
Emperor, 29 ; addressed in
view of marriage. 86.

Barbara, young lady at Constanti-
nople, 52 n. ; made and gave a
racaua, 52 n. ; greeted at Syra-
cuse by Gregory, 58.

Barbatianus, a monk, made Prior,
21 ; probably unfit as Abbot, 44.

Bargoma, 39 n.

Baslius, the Hebrew, 12 ; his sons
are Christians, 12.

Basilius, the most illustrious, 23.

Basilius, priest in Sicily, is repri-
manded, 43.

Beator, a suspicious character,
calling himself eonies privata-
riim, 98.

415


4i6


S. GREGORY THE GREAT.


Bede, referred to, 38 n., 6911. ; value
of his authority, 74 n.

Benedict, Bishop of Syracuse, 108.

Bertha, Queen of the Angh, letter to,
56 ; highly commended by
Gregory, 56, 57 ; exhorted to in-
fluence her husband for the
faith, 57.

Bigamist, may not be ordained, 94.

Bishops, subject to the Metropoh-
tan, 4, 5, 28 ; accused of liv-
ing with women, 16 ; preced-
ence among, 28 ; not be or-
dained/id^r sal turn, 7 ; too rapidly
elevated, 25 ; must be vigilant
against heresy and abuses, 27 ;
called sacerdotes, 28 n. ; must at-
tend to order and discipline, 28,
31,32; two reproved for gross,
remissness, 31 ; must not be in-
truders, 32 ; must not be super-
seded, 32 ; their popular elec-
tion, 50; question of one's getting
assistance in sickness, 68, 93 ; not
to be elected by favour, 50 ; can
one be superseded in sickness,
68, 93 ; may not lawfully be su-
I^erseded, 69 ; how they should
live with their clergy, 74 ; must
make Bishops lawfully, 76 ; are
necessary for order in a city, 85 ;
in Gaul to assist Augustine, 76 ;
responsible for their charge,
85, no ; the question of physical
or mental incapacity, 93 ; must
not be disturbed by the laity,
no.

Bizacium, letter to all the Bishops
at the Council of, 91.

Boniface, deacon at Constantinople,
letter to, 105.

Boniface the guardian, letter to, 16,

85-

Boniface, Gregory's messenger, loi.

Boniface IV., Columbanus wrote to,
38 n.

Boniface, chartiilarms, Gregory's re-
sponsalis, 102, 103.

Boniface, S., asks a copy of British
questions, 74 n., 76, n.

Bosoniaci, heretics, 83.

Bribes for Orders in the Eastern
Church, 14.

Britain, mission to, 55, 108 ; pro-
posed constitution of the Church
in, 81, 81, n.

Brunichild, queen of the Franks,
letters to. 6, 28, 33, 73, 74, 84, 93 ;
praised by Gregory, 6, 28, 33,
73, 74, 93, 96,n. ; her benefactions,
7 n., 73, 74, 96 n. ; thanked for
kindness to Augustine, 7; want-
ed to summon a Synod, 23 n.,30,

94 ; must check the Jews in hold-
ing Christian slaves, 29, 30 ; has
Hilarius commended for her
protection, 33 ; her political po-
sition, 73 n., 93 n. ; asked to
favour Augustine, 73 ; grand-
mother of Theoderic and Theo-
debert, 73 n., 6 n, 93 n. ; asked to
check disorder in the Church,
84 ; built the Church of S. Mar-
tin at Autun and a hospital, 93 ;
w^as guardian of Theoderic, 93 ;
her evil influence on Theoderic,

95 n. ; built the Monastery of S.
Mary at Autun, 95 ; her founda-
tions at Autun, 96 n.

Bubum, 40 n.


Burgoaldus, was sent to Gregory by
Brunichild, 94, 95.

Calixenus, son of Stephania, 11.

Callinicus, exarch of Italy, letters
to, 5, 21 ; was succeeded by Ro-
manus, 5 ; his influence with
Gregory, 21 ; desired unity, 6,
21 ; had charge of affairs at
Novae, 6.

Candidus, the presbyter, 7, 69 ; was
sent to Gaul as rector patri-
monii, 42.

Candidus, the abbot in Kent, 58 ;
was sent back to Rome for
relics, 58.

Canonical order has to be respect-
ed, 4, 32, 104.

Canons are required for special
cases, 68, 69 ; their law about
episcopal jurisdiction, 104.

Capritana, Sclaves in the island of,
5 ; its position and history, 5 ; a
diocese, 5 ; its Bishop driven
away, 5, 6 ; the diocese usurped
by a Bishop ordained for it, 5.

Captives, their redemption.

Castorius, notary from Gregory, 5,
20 ; called chartiilariits, 18, 20,
37, 38; letter to, 20 ; was expected
to report to Gregory, 18, 20, 37.

Castnim Cassiopi, 104 n., 105,107.

Castiilitas, its meaning considered,
39. n.

Casuistry, cases for, 80.

Catacombs at the Flaminian gate
at Rome, 62.

Cataphrygce, heretics, 83.

Cautions to be taken in risks to
Church, II.

Celestius, the heretic, 14.

Qeltic traditions were followed by
Columbanus, 38 n.

Chalcedon, Council of, 50 n.

Chalcedonian Synod not universally
accepted, 49.

Chapters, The Three, 50 n., 106 n.

Childebert II., King, founded a
monastery at Aries, 31, 93 n. ;
applied for confirmation of this
grant, 31 ; w^hat followed on his
death, 93 n.

Chrism, holy, 83.

Christian slaves bought by Jews, I2;
their traffic regulated, 12 ; must
be held by Christian masters,
12.

Church, its foundation and growth,
108 ; consecration, 108 ; its or-
derliness, no ; its good name to
be guarded, 11, 12 ; may or may
not have been kept, 108 ; not to be
made as if venal, 2; all its inter-
ests considered, 93 , represented
by the ark, 67 ; dedications, no ;
use judgment in discipline, 76 ;
its uses so diverse, 75 ; of the
blessed Peter, Prince of the
Apostles, 82 ; Holy Catholic, 83;

Cingidmn, 47, n.

Claudius in Spain, a letter to, 33 ;
suggestions as to his position,
33 n. ; highly spoken of by
'Gregory, 33, 88.

Clergy of Januarius has left off all
discipline, 17.

Clementina, patrician, letter to, 43 ;
account of, 43 n.; complimented
and taught ' by Gregory, 43 ;
consoled for the absence of her


priest, 43 ; taught to be placable,
43 ; at Constantinople, 44 n. ;
consent required to Amandus'
consecration, 44.

Clerical dues scaled, 97.

Clerics not to be tried before the
civil court, 60 ; should be taken
before the Bishop, 60 ; only to
charge by scale, 97 ; in relation
to marriage, 75 ; slow to blame
their superiors, no ; held in
court by laymen, 85 ; to be pun-
ished in charity, 104,

Clotaire II., king of the Franks, let-
ter to, 73,73 n.; asked to assist
the Kenlish mission, 73.

Colman, Bishop of Lindisfarne,
39 n., 40 n.

Colont, 10 n.

Columbanus (of Bobio,) letter to
Gregory, 38 ; at Luxuvium,
38 n.; pleads for the Celtic tra-
dition, 38 n., 40 ; wrote a letter
to the Bishop of Gaul in Synod,
38 n.; his argument on Easter,
38 n., 40 n, ; his reasoning about
the Festival, 39, 40 ; refers to
Hieronymus and Eusebius, 39 ;
commends Gregory's Pastoral
Rule, 41.

Columbus, Bishop of Numedia, let-
ters to, 87, 89; charged to enquire
into charges, 87, 89.

Commodiim, on, i n.

Communion, not always to be re-
fused in discipline, 76.

Ccnon, Bishop of Lerins, letter to,

52.

Confirmation ad consignandos in-
fantes, 97 n.

Consecration of Eucharist by Lord's
Prayer, 9; of a Bishop but with a
lady's consent, 44 ; of churches,
108.

Constantine, his actions referred to,
82.

Constantinopolitan church, rival of
the Roman, 8, 9, 19.

Constantius, monk, to be made ab-
bot, 88 ; his character, 88.

Constantius, Bishop of Milan, 6 ; let-
ter to, 18.

Conversio as monastic life, 65 n., 69 n.
103 n.

Corcyra, the Church and its priv-
ileges, 104, 105.

Corrections, divers kinds of, 75,

Councils to be held in dioceses, 26 ;
should be twice a year, 26 ; at
least once a year, 26.

Cousins, the law of intermarrying,
76.

Crementius, African primate, 15 n,
91 ; accused by the African
Bishops, 15, 91 ; his case to be
enquired into, 91.

Cross, wood of, as a relic, 36, 107.

Crypts, near the Flaminian gate at
Rome, 62.

Cumas, a farm in Sicily, 10.

Cycle, the Easter, in Gaul, 40.

Cyprian, rector patrimonii in Sicily,
10 n.

Cyprian, deacon and agent of
Gregory, n.

Cyriacus, the -abbot, i, 2, 27, 30, 29 ;
carries dalmatics to Gap, 27 ;
why sent to Syagrius, 29 ; has
charge of convening the Synod,
29. ^


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


417


Cyriacus, Gregory's fellow-priest, 19,
26 ; commended to Serenus,
Bishop of Marsilia, 23, 53 ;
formerly abbot, 53 ; carried a
letter to Serenus, 53.

Cyriacus, Patriarch of Constanti-
nople, letter to, loi.

Dalmatics, a license required for, 27.

Damasus, the Pope, 8.

Deaconesses, 42.

Debts under proscription, 9.

Defensor, a person in office, 5 ; his
duties as a church ofticial, 60.

Demetrian, letter to, 9.

Demon punished a monk for pur-
loining from the monastic funds,
61.

Desiderius, Bishop of Vienna, letter
to, 69 ; his relation to the Kent-
ish mission, 69 n.

Diminutives favorites with the
Irish, 39 n.

Diocese, each has its rights and
duties, 6, 105 ; ought not to be
usurped, 105.

Dionysius Exiguus and the Easter
cycle, 40.

Discipline to be maintained, 12, 16,
28, 29, 76, 1 10 ; to be used with
judgment and charity, 76.

Diviners to be watched for and cor-
rected, 17, 18.

Donadeus, a deacon, appeals to
Gregory, 87 ; his case has to be
enquired into by Columbus, 87.

Donatus, a landowner, 2.

Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage,
letters to, 51, 87 ; letter is con-
gratulatory, 87.

Domitian, Bishop of Meletina, and
Metropolitan of Armenia, 10.

Donus, Bishop in Sicily, letter to, 97 ;
Bishop of Messana, 107.

Doubtful cases to be decided in

benignity, n.
Droinos (Spu/a^s) a yacht, 47 n.
Du Cange, 39 n.

Easter announcements, 4 ; neglect-
ed by some Bishops, 4, 5 ; calcu-
lations, 38 n., 39 ; cycles, 40 ; cal-
culations, a question between
Rome and Alexandria, 40 n.

Eastern church said to receive
bribes, 14. 66.

Ecclesiastical order and discipline
to be maintained, 12, 60 ; custom,
38, 71 ; the Bishop may assign
judges, 60 ; archives, 71.

Edilbert, King of the Angli, letter to,
81 ; is advised to be zealous
for the church, 81-82 ; receives
presents from Gregory, 82 ; di-
rected to destroy temples, 81 ;
this order modified, 85 n.

Emperor refers a case to the Pope,
15 n. ; his influence in eccelsias-
tical matters, 19, 69 ; Gregory's
deference to the name and
office, 69 n. ; should not inter-
fere in ecclesiastical cases, 69 n.

Ephesine Synod, the first, of doubt-
ful orthodoxy, 14.

Ephron, son of Seor, 2.

Epiphanius, deacon, 102.

Epiphanius, arch-nresbyter, 4, 103.

Epiphanius, a reader at Cagliari, 54 ;
complained to Gregory, 104 ;
bequeathed money to build a

VOL. XIII. — 27


monastery, 54, 104 ; his history,
55 n. ; son-in-law of Pompeiana,
55 n., 104 ; his wife Matrona,
104.

Episcopal succession must be regu-
lar, 13.

Episcopate, its dignity, 3, 6, 12, 13,
16.

EpiscopiiiiJi, 59,

Ethelbert, King of Kent, 56 n.

Etherius, Bishop of Lyons, letter to,

93-
Eiilogias, same as bencdictiones,

102.

Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria,
letters, to, 19, 45, 91, loi, 102 ; sent
letters to Gregory, 19,47; wants
large timber from Gregory, 19 ;
his laudation of Rome, 46 ; his
love and study of the Fathers,
46 ; has Monophysite converts
recommended, 91.

Eupaterius, luagister militum, 3.

Euria, a see in Epirus, 104, 105 ; dis-
pute about its jurisdiction, 104,
105.

Euripus accused of presumption, 41.

Eusebius, Bishop of Thessalonica,
letters to, 18, 49; strictly enjoined
by Gregory, 18, 19, 49 ; arch-
bishop of Thessalonica, 49; slack
in upholding the faith, 49.

Eusebius the historian is referred to
by Columbanus, 30 ; Bishop of
Cassarea, 39.

Excommunication pronounced by
Gregory, 1,6; enforced by the
Guardian, i.

Exhilaratus, Bishop, 104 ; liable to
severe punishment, 104 ; his of-
fence passed over, 104.

Extortions condemned, 2.


Fabius, Bishop of Firmium, 9.

Faith to be maintained, the, 13, 14 ;
the right. 14 ; the Catholic, 49.

Familia of the Roman patrimony,
10.

Fantinus, guardian of Panormus,
letter to, 14, 15, 104.

Farms of the Church, some taxed,
and even burdened, 30 ; their
management, 99, 100.

Fasting to be discontinued in sick-
ness, 59 ; is hurtful where the
body is unhealthful, 61.

Fathers, the, as guide for Church
measures, 26.

Felix, husband of Rustica, 10.

Felix, Bishop of Messana, 7611. ; let-
ter from to Gregory, 107, 109; let-
ter to, 109 ; discusses S. Augus-
tine's letters, 108.

Filii ecdcsiiv, 98 n.

Fleming, Patrick, 39 n.

Fonnanun, the conduits or aque-
ducts, 89.

Fortunatus, his accounts to be en-
quired into, 17 ; then dismissed,

17-
Fortunatus, Bishop of Neapolis, let-
ters to,i2, 21, 44; praised for kind-
ness to Christian slaves, 12]; gets
commission of enquiry, 44 ; re-
primanded for negtect of dutv.

44-

Freedmen received legacies of Rus-
tica, 10.

Funeral exactions, i, 2,


Furniture presented to Geronto-
eoniiiun, 52.

Gallandus, 38 n.

Gaul, the Bishops and Church of,

69, 70, 71, 75. 76, 77-
Gavinia, Abbess 4.
Gennadius, exarch of Africa, 2.
Gentcs, wide meaning of the word,
Gerontocomiuui, 52.
Gildas (Giltas), 41, 41 n.
Gloriosa, wife of Andrew Scholasti-

cus, 12.
God speaks in human manner, 48.
Good ever mixed with evil, 63.
Goths, their conversion considered,

35-

Greece and Rome at one against
heresy, 46.

Gregory the Great, Bishop, re-
proaches Januarius, Bishop of
Cagliari, i, 2 ; sends back the
presents of wheat, i ; appoints
an advocate a nostro latere, 3 ;
investigates into the affairs of
Novae, 6 ; appealed to, 3, 4, 5, 6,
9, 10, II, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 44, 87,
'S'^, 90, 97, 98, 104 ; defends the
Roman Church services, 8 ; his
care for justice, 4, II, 14, 15 ; his
caution, 11, 15, 23,93 ; faithful in
administration, 12, 19, 25, 26, 44-
46, 52, 58, 93, 104 ; has case re-
ferred by the Emperor, 15 n. ;
appealed to by Bishops and the
Emperor, 15 ; had letter from
Reccared, 16; issues commis-
sions of enquiry, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10,
II, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,37,44,
85, 88, ^J, 88 90, ; commissions
two Bishops to try a case and re-
port, 18 ; jealous for the church's
peace, 18, 19 ; replied to the let-
ter from Eulogius, Patr. of Alex-
andria, 19 ; suffered from gout,
20, 31, 46, 57, 58, 61, 106 ; has to
guard against active enemies,
23; anxious to check simony
and other abuses, 23 n ; sends
out circular letters to Metro-
politans, 23, 29 ; his advice on
images, 23 ; calls a synod of
Metropolitans, 25, 26 ; discusses
the conciliar plan, 26 ; gives a
license for using the Dalmatic,
27 ; his care for the Angli, 28,
29, 55, 56, 72, 73, 81 ; u'sed to
be happy in his monastery,
34 ; complains of sickness, 38,
45- 46, 57, 58, 60, 61, 106 ; had
letter on Easter from Colum-
banus, 38 ; on the seat of the
apostle and key-bearer, S.
Peter, 4 ; his Pastoral Rule, 41,
88 ; his liberality, 45 ; at peace
with Maximus of Salona, 46 ;
finds one to pray for him, 52 ;
made peace with the Lombards,
47 ; his fidelity in administering
trusts, 54, 55 ; his advice on
the sorrows at Ravenna, 58 ;
held open court, 65; officially
informed of a new patriarch,
67 ; found misrepresentations of
facts, 65 ; his views on secular
literature, (yq, 70 ; his care for
Augustine's mission, 60, 70, 71,
72, 73 ; failed to find Irenreus's
writing, 71 ; urges the Gallican
clergy to greater zeal, 71 ; his


4i8


S. GREGORY THE GREAT.


replies to Augustine's questions,
74 n. ; gives constitution to tiie
B. Ch. 8i ; his ignorance of the
condition in England, 8i ; had
to consider complications, 93 ;
his relation towards Phocas,
99 n.; sends presents to Adolou-
vald, 105 ; letter from Felix,
Bishop of Messana, 107; one
epistle doubtful, 109 n.

Guest-house [Xcuodocliinin], 4, 103 ;
was neglected in Sardinia, 103.

Gulfarus, magister milituni, letter to,
21 ; often appealed to by Greg-
ory, 2 1 n. ; was praised for his
zeal, 22.

Ham deriding his father, 63.

Heresy to be guarded against, 50 ;
to be enquired into, 71 ; its cor-
rection is an a':cepted oblation,

71-

Heretics, how to be dealt with on
conversion, 82 n, 91.

Hennagoricce novifatis, 40.

Heullni litoris, 41.

Hiberia, probably near Armenia,
82 n.

Hibernia, probably not written to
by Gregory, 82 n.

Hieronymus referred to by Colum-
banus, 39, 41, 42.

Hilarius commended to Brunichild's
protection, 3.

Hilarius, archdeacon, commissioned
to investigate the Easter ques-
tion, 40 n. ; cJiartuIariits, 57.

Hilarius, cliartularius, 90.

Honoratus, archdeacon of Salona,
6, 20 ; urgent for investigating
disorders, 20, 38 ; careful in en-
forcing discipline, 38 ; was com-
mended to Maximus of Salona,

38-

Hortulanus, friend of Nereida ; his
hospital, 103.

Hospital ought not to be built by
simony, 25 ; those of Hortulanus
and Thomas, 103.

Husband and wife in separation, 65,
69.

Husbandmen of the Syracusan patri-
mony, letter to, 10 ; put under
the care of the papal defensor,
10.

Idol-worshippers are to be watched
against, 17, 18 ; their temples to
be destroyed, 81 ; sometimes to
be changed into churches, 85.

Images in churches sometimes
ought not to be broken, 23, 53,
54 ; their value for teaching the
ignorant, 23 ; ought not to be
adored, 23.

Imposition of hands in reconcilia-
tion of heretics, 83.

Incapacitated Bishop, by sickness
or insanity, 93.

Incarnation, mystery of, 83.

Innocent, prefect of Africa, letter to,
47 ; his eloquence lauded, 47 ;
has procured advancement, 47.

Innocentius, Bishop of Sardinia,
letter to, 4.

Interdict, under pain of anathema,
29.

Ireland not contemplated by Gre-
gory, 82 n. ; not infested with
Nestorianism, 82 n.


Irenasus, his writings not found by
Gregory, 71.

Irish, views upon the Easter ques-
tion, 38, 39, 40 ; ancient were
philosophers, 40.

Isacius, Bishop of Jerusalem, letter
to, 67 ; charged to reform
abuses, 68.

Isaurus erects a Gerontoeoininin, 52.

Isidore, deacon, 102.

Istrian Schismatics, 5, 6, 21 n, 22.

Italica, wife of Venantius, letter to,
37 ; her many ailments, 37 ; was
comforted by the news, of other
people being afflicted, 37.

Item in anagnostico, explained, 37 n,

Italy liable to pestilence, 51.

Januarius, Bishop of Caralis, letters
to, I, 2, 3, 4, 17, 54, 103 ; re-
proached by Gregory for his
conduct, I, 2, 17 ; his associates
excommunicated, i ; his exac-
tions, I, 2 ; his appeal to Rome,
3 ; advised to see to the fortify-
ing of his city, 4 ; rerroached
for neglect of discipline, 17 ;
accused of retaining money,
55 n. ; advised about the election
of Bishops, 103 ; celebrates in
extreme sickness, 104.

Jerome, a source of tradition, 8, 38 n.

Jerusalem, church of, as an author-
ity, 8.

Jesus, his knowledge and ignorance,
48, 49 ; partook in mortality,
time and ignorance, 49.

Jewish Passover is not for Christians
to observe, 40.

Jews complain to Gregory, 3 ; cou'd
not build new synagogues, 3 ;
allowed to use their old syna-
gogues, 3, 14 ; buy Christian
slaves, 12, 29, 30 ; to "be inhibited
from buying Christian slaves,
12, 29 ; must be kept to honest
dealing, 12 ; must have restitu-
tion of prooerty, 14 ; tried to
save themselves by bribery, 35 ;
without a temple or Passover,
40 ; are warned against, 96, 57.

Job, its exposition sent to Gregory,

47.
John, Bishop of Euria. 107.
John, Bishop, imposed penance on

clerics, 60 ; his work undone by

Romanus the Guardian, 60.
John, subdeacon of Ravenna, letter

to, 88.
John, Bishop of Syracuse, letters to,

8, 10, 15, 59;" made Gregory's

notary for enquiry, 10, 11," 1511.,

86, 100 ; his election to Syracuse,

1511.
John, a Bishop from Pamonia, 5.
John, Regionarius, 7.
John, Bishop of Corinth, letter to, 18.
John, Bishop of Prima Justiniana,

letter to, 18 ; needs an assistant,

68.
John, Bishop of Crete, letter to, 18.
John, Bishop of Larissaand Scodra,

letter to. 18.
John, Bishop of Constantinople,

usurps the title of Q^ciimenical,

18.
John, the Baptist, his hairs as a

relic, 36.
John, abbot, letter to, 52 ; Clemacus

or Scholasticus, 52 n ; his life


and writings, 52 n. ; much com-
mended by Gregory, 52.

Julianus Scribo, letter to, 12 ; an ac-
count of, 46.

Jurisdiction of the Bishop over
clerics, 60 ; disputed as between
sees, 104, 105.

Justinian's treaties with Rechared,
27 ; the records of them burned,
37 ; of pious memory, 106.

Key, containing iron from Peter's

chains, 36.
Kyrie Eleison, how sung at Mass, 8, 9.

Laurentius, presbyter from Britain,
57, 70 ; carries good tidings to-
Rome, 57 ; is commended to the
Galilean Bishops, 72, 73.

Leander, priest of Hispalis, 17.

Leander, Bishop of Hispalis (Se-
ville), letter to, 34 ; wrote to
Gregory, 34 ; received the pal-
lium, 34.

Leo, Bishop, complained of to Gre-
gory, 10.

Leo I., deals with the Easter ques-
tion, 40 n.

Leo, Bishop in Sicily, joint letter to,

Leo, Bishop of Catana, commis-
sioned to investigate a scandal,
44, 104.

Leontius, ex-consul, 10 ; appeals to
Gregory, 19.

Leontia, Empress, letter to, 100 ;
congratulated on the peace of
her empire, 100.

Leo, Bishop in Sicily, joint letter to,

. 97-
Letters to

Adrian, Notary of Sicily, 44. 69.

^therius. Bishop of Lugdunum,

70. 93-
Agilulph, King of the Lombards,

71-
Alcvson, Bishop of Corcyra, 104,

107.
All the Bishops of the Council of

Bizacium, 91.
Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch,

13-

Anatolius, Deacon at Constanti-
nople, 68.

Anatolius, ConstantinopolitanDea-
con, 68.

Andrew, ii.

Anthemius, Subdeacon, 44, 98.

Aregius, Bishop of Vapincum,
26.

Augustine, Bishop of the Angli,
74: Hi-

Barbara and Antonina, 59, 86.
Bertha, Queen of the Angli, 56.
Boniface, Deacon, 105.
Boniface, Guardian (Defensor) in

Corsica, 16, 85.
Brunichild, Queen of the Franks,

6, 28, 33, 73, 74, 84, 93.

Callinicus, Exarch of Italy, 5, 21.
Castorius, Notary, 20.
Certain Bishops "of Sicily. 57.
Claudius in Spain, 3^.
Clementina, Patrician, 43.
Clotaire, King of the Franks, 73.
S. Cf)lumbanus to Pope Gregory,.
3^.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


419


Columbus, Bishop of Numidia,

87. 89-
Conon, Abbot of Lirinus (Lerins),

52-

Constantius, Bishop of Milan, 18.
Cyriacus, Patriarch of Constanti-
nople, lOI.

Demetrian and Valerian, 9.
Desiderius, Bishop of Gaul, 69.
Divers Bishops of Gaul, 99.
Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage,

51. 87.

Edilbert, King of the Angli, 81.

Etherius, Bishop of Lugdunum,
( Lyons ),gT,.

Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexan-
dria, 19, 45, 91, loi, 102.

Eusebius, Archbishop of Thessa-
lonica, 18, 49.

Fantinus, Guardian (Defensor) of

Panormus (Palermo), 14, 15,

104.
Felix, Bishop of Messana, to

Gregory, 107.
Felix, Bishop of Messana, 109.
Fortunatus, Bishop of Neapolis,

12, 21, 44.

Gulfaris, Magister Militnm, 21.

Isacius, Bishop of Jerusalem, 67.
Innocent, Pr^efect of Africa, 47.

Januarius, Bishop of Caralis,
(Cagliari), i, 2, 3, 4, 17, 54, 103.
John, Abbot, 52.

John, Subdeacon of Ravenna, 88.
John, Bishop of Syracuse, 8, 10,

15, 59-
Julianus, Scribo, 12.

Leander, Bishop of Hispalis

(Seville), 34.
Leontia, Empress, 100.
Libertinus, Ex-Proetor, 45.
Lupo, Abbot, 96.

Marcellus, Pro-consul of Dal-

matia, 3.
Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna,

5, 20, 28, 60.
Martin, Scliolasticns, 15.
Maximus, Bishop of Salona, 37, 40.
Mellitus, Abbot, 84.

Pantalio, Notary, 99.

Paschasius. Bishop of Neapolis

(Naples), 56.
Phocas, Emperor, 99, 100.

Quiricus, Bishop, 82.

Rechared — his epistle to Greg-
ory, 16.
Rechared, King of the Visigoths,

35-

Romanus, Guardian (Defensor),
9, 10, II, 15, 17, 22, 43, 60,99.

Romanus and other Guardians
(De fen sores) of the Ecclesias-
tical Patrimony, 17.

Rusticiana, Patrician Lady, 61,97.

Rusticianus, Patrician, 63.

Senator, Abbot. 95.
Serenus, Bishop of Massilia (Mar-
seilles), 23, 53.


Syagrius etherius, Virgilius and
Desiderius, Bishops, 69.

Syagrius, Bishop of Augustodun-
um (Autun.) 27, 31, 32.

Thalassia, Abbess, 95.

The Bishops of Sardinia, 5.

The Husbandmen [Colon i) of the
Syracusan Patrimony, 10.

The Neapolitans, 50.

The Roman Citizens, 92.

Theoctista, Patrician, 10.

Theodebert, King of the Franks,
29, 32.

Theodelinda, Queen of the Lom-
bards, 13.

Theodore, Curator of Ravenna, 22.

Theoderic, King of the Franks,

72, 94.
Theoderic and Theodebert, Kings

of the Franks, 29, 32.
Venantius, Ex-Monk, Patrician of

Syracuse, 57.
Venantius and Italica, 37.
Victor, Bishop, 90.
Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate

(Aries), 30, ^i, 70, 84.
Virgilius and Syagrius,. Bishops,

23-
Vltalis, Guardian {defensar) or

Sardinia, i, 10^.
Vitus, Guardian {Defensor), 6o.

Libertinus, Bishop of Sardinia, letter
to, 4.

Libertinus, Ex-proetor, letter to, 45 ;
comforted under affliction, 44 ;
receives 20 suits of clothing for
his servants, 45.

Liber i us, patrician in Campania, 16.

Licinius, Bishop of Angers, joint let-
ter to, 71 ; called Bishop of the
Franks, 71.

Lombards, peace made with them
by Gregory, 47.

London, was to have a Metropoli-
tan, 81.

Lord's Prayer, used as part of con-
secration prayer, 9 ; probably
omitted from the Roman Canon,
9n.

Lucidus, Bishop in Sicily, joint letter
to, 97.

Lugdnnnni had precedence over
Angnslodnniun 28.

Luke, Eusebius's, presbvtcr, 49.

Lupo, presbyter and abbot, letter
to, 96.

Lupus, Bishop of Chalons-sur-Sa-
one, joint letter to, 71.

Major-domo of Callinicus, lost a
letter, 2.

Marcellinus, the Magnificent, 21 ;

Marcellus, proconsul of Dalma-
tia, letter to, 3, 21 n. ; called to
repentance for his great wicked-
ness, 3. 21 n. ; supported Maxi-
mus, Bishop of Salona, but re-
canted, 21 n. ; may be called
Marcellinus and lauded by
Gregory, 21 n.

Marinianus", Bishop of Ravenna, 5,
37, 88 ; letters to, 5, 20, 28, 60 ; his
Fraternity is attacked with sick-
ness, 58 ; has corrupt copv of
Job, 88 ; will ordain an abbot,
88.

Marinianus, Bishop in Sardinia, 3 ;
letter to, 3 ; commission to try
a case, 18.


Marriage, as regards the clerics, 75;
of two brothers to two sisters,

75 ; law regarding kindred, 76,
108, 109, III ; the Roman law, 76;
specially between cousins, 76,

76 n. ; questions regarding, 77,
80, 108 ; prohibition of 108.

Martin Schulasticus, letter to, 15 ;
acting as lawyer in a case, 15 n.

Mary Virgin mother. 48.

Mass, celebrated, i, 8, 58 ; how cele-
brated, 8, 9 ; profaned, i ; to be
provided in sickness, 58.

Martianus, has usurped the name of
defensor, 17 ; his conduct to be
enquired into, ly.

Martianus, a monk of the monas-
tery of S. Vitus, 44 ; carries a
complaint to Gregory, 44.

Matrona, wife of Epiphanius, J04.

Maurus, cellarer, to be abbot, 88.

Mauricius, the Emperor, 105.

Mauricius, monk, has left his mon-
astery, 44.

Maximus, 3.

Maximus, of Salona, 5 ; prevaricator
of the Church of Salona, 18 ; up-
held by Marcellus, proconsul,
21 n. ; his case referred to two
Bishops, 18

Maximus, 3, 5, 69 n. ; received the
pallium, 38 ; letters to, 37, 46 ;
amply forgiven by Gregory, 37,
46 ; his case to be investigated,
I, 5, 6, 20 ; usurping Bp. at Sa-
lona, 6; accused of simonical
heresv, 20 ; will be restored if
innocent, 20 ; his penance, 20 n.

Melantus. Bishop of Rouen, joint
letter to, 71.

Mellitus, going to Kent, 69 n., 70, 72,
73, 81 n. ; his dates, 71 n. ; com-
mended to the Galilean Bishops,
72, 73 ; letter to, 84 ; called
abbot in France, 84 ; letter ex-
plained, 84 n.

Mennas, Bishop of Telona, 52 (Tou-
lon), 94 ; joint letter to, 71 ;
cleared of blame, 94.

Messianus, cleric, committed to the
care of Stephen, 38.

Metropolitan, has authority over
Bishops, 4, 5, 28 ; of Autun,
next after Lyons, 28 ; two were
proposed for Britain, 81.

Modius, used at Syracuse, 99.

Monastic law of property, 4, 31, 75,
88, 103, 104; law of advance-
ment, 44, 45, 103 ; devotion ought
to be promoted, 30. 31 ; stories,
61, 62 ; order must be promoted,
41, 45, 61, 62, 65, 71 ; life as re-
ligio and conversio, 65 n. ; forms
of correction, 75 ; property not
to be wasted, 95, c;q, 104 ; "man-
agement of farms, 100.

Monastery, one to be founded in
Sicily, on bequest, 10 ; ought not
to be built bv simony, 25 ; one
founded by King Childebert, 31 ;
foundation of confirmed by the
Pope, 31 ; scandals in, 44, 52, 53,

54 ; must be ruled with much
care, 52 ; must not be placed
near a female monastery, 54,

55 ; to be built to the memory of
Epiphanius, 54 ; of blessed
Apostle S. Andrew, 6t : its
monks involved in peculations,
61, 75 ; not to be fled from, 61,


420


S. GREGORY THE GREAT.


62 ; new one to have all its
privileges secured, 95.
Monks flee from their monastery,

44 ; judgment upon two monks
for small thieving, 61 ; lay down
all claim to property, 88.

Medical men have to be trained for

some time, 25.
Monophysites and the controversy,

45 n., gr ; some conversions
among, 91.

Moses, as leader of the Israelites,
56 ; his fault remembered to the
end, 5.

Neapolitan youth caused corre-
spondence with Rechared, 37.

Neapolitans, letter to the, 50.

Neas, a church in Jerusalem, 68.

Nereida, a lady, appeals to Gregory,
I, 2.

Nestorian, heretic, 48, 83 ; teaching
not infecting Ireland, 82 n. ;
heretics, how to be dealt with in
conversion, 82.

Nestonus, heretic, 50 ; his teaching,
83, 84 ; his followers anathema-
tised, 84.

Noah and Ham, 63.

Notaries, on their employment, 44 n.

Nothelm, Bede's agent at Rome, 76
n., 84 n.

Novae, a castle and Episcopal see in
Capritana, 5.

Oath on the body of S. Apollinaris,

20.
QLciimenical, title usurped by John,

late Bishop of Constantinople,

18.
Offerings, how to be divided, 74.
Oppression of Bishops and Clergy,

32

Order, ecclesiastical and civil, 32.

Orders, got by bribery in the East-
ern Church, 14, 68, loi ; should
be given to men of right faith,
14, 68.

Ordmation fer saltum, to the Epis-
copate forbidden, 7, 28, 29 ; to
be done in due form and con-
ditions, 76, "jj.

Pallium given to Bishops,6 n,7, Jj; by
royal permission, 7 ; not given
to a schismatic, 7 ; rules for giv-
ing it, 7, 27, 37 ; given in recon-
ciliation, 21, 26 n., 27, 38 ; given
on request, 28 ; when to be worn,
28, 29, 34, 38, 81 ; sent to Augus-
tine, 29, 8[ ; sent to Leander of
Seville, 34, 39 ; sent to Maximus
of vSalona, 38 ; its dignity, 38 ;
conveys authority, JJ.

Pantaleo, Notary, letter to, 99.

Parocliia, its meaning, 32 n., 105 n.

Paschasius, Bishop of Naples, letter
to, 56 ; warned against the Jews,
96 ; accused of negligence, 98.

Passivus, father of Demetrian and
Valerian, 9.

Passover lamb, time of its slaugh-
ter, 39 n.

Passover, its relation to Easter, 38

n., 39-
Patronage of people, to be avoided,

II.
Patroni, the six, letter to, 16.
Paul diaconus, 106.
Paulinas, Bishop of Tegessis, his


case to be enquired into, 89, 90 ;

accused of simony, 90 ; accused

of excessive simony, 85, 90.
Pelagius, the heretic, 14.
Pelagius, Bishop of Rome, censured

the usurping oecumenical, 18.
Penance done by Bishop Maximus,

20 ; revoked by the Guardian,

60 ; for a period, 66 ; its spiritual

import, 66.
Penitence, to escape the judgment,

58.

Pentecost, season of, 8 n. ; observ-
ance, 8.

Persecution and calumny to be sub-
mitted to, 81

Peter, the monk from Britain, 57.

Peter, asciiptus glebce in Sicily made
defensor, 89 n. ; will be watched
and kept to the law, 89.

Peter, reader of the church of Euria,
107.

Peter, friend of Gregory, 3.

Peter, husband of Stephania, 11.

Peter, converted Jew, 3 ; took pos-
session of the Jewish synagogue.

3-
Peter, prince of the Apostles, 5, 22

33, 34, 35, 47, 5r, 65, 82, 86, 91, 94 ;
blessed Apostle, 15. 16 ; the
Apostle who shines first in dig-
nity, 16 ; the prince of the Apos-
tles, 19 ; his chains, 36 ; apostle
and key-bearer, 41 ; received
power in the heavenly king-
dom, 65 ; his baptizing Corne-
lius, 65.

Peter, the deacon, 27, 49 ; his
character discussed, 50 ; has a
little daughter, 50 ; elected Bish-
op by the Neapolitans, 59.

Philo on the Jewish Passover, 39 n.;

Phocas, Emperor, letter to, 99, 100 ;
Gregory's relation towards him,
99 n. ; wanted a deacon at Court,
100.

Photinians, heretics, and to be avoid-
ed, 46.

Pictures and images, their use in
church, 23, 53 ; not to be de-
stroyed, but properly used, 23,

53-

Pompeiana, a religious lady, 54, 55
n., 103 ; her religious house, 103,
104 ; her complaint to Gregory,
104.

Pomponiana [Pompeiana], 104.

Poor to be defended, 46.

Prayers for the Emperor, 14.

Preaching to declare the truth, 67.

Pregnancy, its relation to the sacra-
ments, 77.

Presbyterce, what, 4 n.

Priests too rapidly raised to the of-
fice, 25, 28 ; denounced as an
abuse, 25 ; ought first to be tried
and proved, 25, 28, 30 ; should
meet for discussion, 26; made
captive by avarice, 70, 71, 96 ;
one in known sin, 70 ; some
bad, have to be checked, 84, 87 ;
bad, ruin the people, 84 ; only to
change by zeal, 97.

Priests' office should be without re-
proach, I, 2, 70, 87 ; lofty ideal in
the name, 7, 28, 29, 87 ; should be
carefully prepared for, 25, 30 ;
liable to abuses, 25, 26, 29, 30, 70,
84 ; an office of ambition to lay-
men, 29, 30 ; should not be set


aside w-ithout cause, 32 ; bought
and sold, 29, 30, 70, 72. 73.

Primicerius, 60 n.

Probinus, the presbyter, 35.

Probus, Abbot, 2, 13, 22 ; reported to
Gregory, 13, 22.

Procedere, its technical meaning, 8
n„ 18 n.

Property, question as to that of an
abbess, 4 ; of a married woman
devoted, 31 ; lawful use of Ec-
clesiastical, 9, 18, 88, 95, 103 ;
church not to be alienated, 11,
17, 18, 104 ; of a monastery plun-
dered, 17 ; law of, in a monas-
tery, 88, 103 ; not to be wasted,
95, 104-

Pulcheria Augusta, called the New-
Helena, lOI.

Punishment, given for repentance
and amendment, 18 ; corporal
in clerical bodies, 80 ; in charity,
104.


Reccared, King, 16, 33 n.

Rechared, King of the Goths, letter
to Gregory, 16 ; doubtful, 16 n. ;
disavows Arianism, 16, 35 n. ;
desires Gregory's friendship, 16;
sent presents to Gregory, 16 ;
letter to, 35 ; King of the Visi-
goths in Spain, 35 ; accounts of
his conversion and history, 35
n. ; dates are doubtful, 35 n.
commended by Gregory, 35
must rule with moderation, 36
question about letters to, 37 n.
sent cowls to the poor, 37 n.
received one key, or tw^o, 36,

37, 37 n.
Redemption of captives, 9.
Redemptus, the guardian, i, 2.
Reeves, his S. Columba, 39 n.
Rcgioimrins, 7 n.
Relics sent out by 'Gregory, 36, 54,

58, 77 ; of S. Sixtus the'Martvr,

77-

Ritual, questions of, 8. 9.

Riniarii. the Gallican, 39.

Rome, mother church, 22 ; w^as re-
sorted to for appeal, 41 ; the
Apostle Peter's see, 48 ; has the
seat of the Apostle and key-
bearer, 41 ; and Greece alone
against heresy, 46 ; church of,
its foundation, 108 n.

Roman See objected to in Africa, 15
n. ; tradition, not Greek, 8, 9 ;
its peculiar uses, 75 ; citizens,
letter to the, 92.

Romanus defensor, letters to, 9, 10,
II, 15, 17, 22, 43, 60, 89; gets
charge of the Roman patri-
mony, 9, 10 ; w^as guardian in
Sicily, 43 ; had to enquire about
the 'tonsnratorcs of Sicily, 17 ;
had to enquire into the accounts
of Fortunatus, 17 , also into the
conduct of Martian, 17 ; was
asked to befriend some Istrians,
22 ; \vas instructed to give a
bountv, 45 ; was forbidden to
hear suits^ against clerics, 60 ;
interfered \vith Ecclesiastical
discipline, 60 ; was made guard-
ian of the patrimonv in Sicily,
89 n.

Romanus, exarch of Italy, at Raven-


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


421


na, 5 ; his relation to Gregory,

„ S

Rustica, her bequests, 10 ; 'delay in
their administration, 10.

Rusticiana, Patrician lady, 60 ; let-
ters to, 61, 97 ; sent veils to Gre-
gory, 61 ; her grandson, Strate-
gius, 62 n.

Sabbath question at Rome, 92.

Sabinianus, Bishop of Jadera, 2 :
recommended to the peace of
Maximus, 38.

Sabinus, subdeacon, letter to, 15.

Saccrdotes, referring to Bishops, 28
n., 97 n., 163 n.

SS. Gavinus and Luxorius, 4 ; S. Vi-
tus, 44 ; S. Julian, Monastery of,
17 ; S. Sixtiis the Martyr, yy ; S.
Apollinaris, Oath on the body
of, 20 ; S, Mary, Hospital of, 95 ;
S. Severinus, 44 ; S. Martin, hos-
pital and church, 93 ; S. Hermes,
Monastery of, 103 ; S. Donatus,
his body, 104.

Sacraments are means of grace, 76 ;
when given or refused, 76, yy n.

Salarius, notary of Gregory, reports,

14-

Satan tempts by a show of piety, 24,
26 ; to be guarded against, 24, 36.

Scala Paradisi, 52 n.

Schismatics, how to be dealt with,
5, 22 ; how acting, 5, 6, 8.

Scholasticiis, 15 n..

Schynteneiun, meaning suggested,
40, 40 n.

Sclaves expected to join the Roman
obedience, s ; the nation at war
with Rome, 46.

Scruples of conscience, 80.

Scribo, 12 n., 46 n.

Secundiccrins, 60 n.

Secundinus, Bishop in Sicily, joint
letter to, 47.

Secundus, Abbot, loi.

Senator, Abbot, letter to, 95 ; Abbot
of Xenodochimu, 95,

Serenus, Bishop of Massilia, letters
to, 23, 53 ; notes upon, 53 n. ;
blamed for destroying pictures
of samts, 53 ; lax in discipline,
53, 54, 70 ; blamed for harboring
bad men, 70 ; joint letter to, 71 ;
asked to assist the Kentish mis-
sionaries, 70.

Sergius, the guardian, letter to, 16.

Severianus Gabalensis, 49.

Severus, a heretic, 50.

Siagrius, Bishop of Autun, 95,

Sicilv, Letter to certain Bishops of,

57-

Sickness in the monastery at Ra-
venna, 58.

Simoniacal heresy, 27, 28, 29, 72, 73,
90, lOI.

Simony to be guarded against, 7, 24,
29, 102 ; prevalent in Gaul, 23
n., 24, 28, 29, 72, yT, ; attributed to
the Eastern Church, 14, 68, loi,
102 ; restrained by Synodical ac-
tion, 23 n., 24, 26 n., 72. y-^, 89, 90.

Simplicius, Bishop of Paris, joint
letter to, 71.

Sirica, abbess, made a will contrary
to monastic rule, 4 ; her be-
quests were disputed, 4.

Slaves to be recovered from hiding,
10 ; Christians were bought try
Jews, 12, 29, 30 ; were to be sold


to none but Christians, 12 ; must
have their interests guarded,
12, 29.

Soothsayers have to be watched for
and corrected, 17, 18.

Soldier not to be tonsured without
the Pope's consent, 45 ; pro-
hibited from taking monastic
vows, 69 n.

Son consubstantial with the Father
48.

Sophronius patriarch of Jerusalem,

4511-

Sorrow for the dead to be restrain-
ed, 26, 27, 51 ; has a beneficent
object, 51.

Spanish abbots left the voyage to
Rome and went home, 35.

Spina Dagouis, 40 n,

Stephania appeals to Gregory about
property, 11.

Stephen, Maximus, deacon, 38 ; gets
charge of Messianus, 38.

Stephen, abbot of Lerins. 52 n.

Strategius, grandson of Rusticiana,
62 n., 98.

Sub-deacon, his disrobing for Mass,
8.

Syagria, a religious, was forced into
marriage, 31 ; devoted her prop-
erty to pious uses, 31.

Syagrius, Bishop of Autun, 6n., 7,
23, 26 n. ; was promised the pal-
lium, 7, 26 n., 28 ; applied to
by Gregory, 23 ; included in cir-
cular letter, 23 ; had charge of
assembling the Synod, 26 n, ;
letters to, 27, 31, 32; had request-
ed the pallium, 28 ; reproved for
remissness in duty, 31.

Synagogues, Jewish, must have their
property respected, 14.

Symmachus brought veils to Greg-
ory, 61.

Synod was called by Gregory, 26,
33 n., 71.

Temptation by Satan, 24.
Testatrix's desire should be execut-
ed, 10.
Thalassia, abbess, letter to, 95,
Theft from the church considered,

75-
Themistiani heretics, 45 n.

Themistius, deacon of Alexandria,
and heretic, 48 n.

Theoctista, Patrician, letter to, 10 ;
sister of the Emperor Maurice,
62 n. ; occasion of Gregory's
letter, 62 n.

Theodebert H., King of Austrasia,
6 n. ; joint letter to, 29, 32 ; call-
ed for amendment in his king-
dom, 29, 32, 92 ; abuses in his
kingdom, 32 ; his age 32 n. ; let-
ter to, y2 ; asked for Augustine,
72.

Theodelinda, Queen of Lombard,
letter to, 13 ; commended and
exhorted as a peacemaker, 13.

Theoderic H., King of Burgundy,
6 n., 38 n., 73 n., 93 n., 95 ; joint
letters to, 29, 32 ; called for
amendment in his kingdom,
29, 32, 72; his age, 32 n., 93 n. ;
asked to convene a Synod,
72 ; letters to, y2, 94 ; his "influ-
ence from P^runichild, 9^n.

Theodore, curator of Ravenna, let-


ter to, 22 ; highly praised by
Gregory, 22, 23.

Theodelinda, queen, letter to, 106 ;
congratulated on the birth of a
son, 106 ; gave his son to bap-
tism, 106.

Theodosius, abbot of an unfounded
monastery, 10.

Theodorus, magister niilitum, 15.

Theoria utpotc diviiia ciistulitalis
potito, 39 n.

Thomas, hospital of, 103.

TJirce Chapters, TJie, 50 n., 106 n.

Timber for building lias to be pre-
pared, 25 ; exports, 49, 102.

Toledo, Council of, 35 n.

Tonstira tores, \y ; some usurp the
name, 17.

Trajan, Bishop in Sicily, joint letter
to, 97.

Turin, Augusta Taunuaruni, 32 n.

Unity in the Church through Christ,
24 ; with Rome, 22.

Urban, his monastery at Cagliari,
54 ; to be appointed abbot, 54.

Urbicus, the abbot, 14.

Urbicus, Bishop of Dyrrachium,
letter to, 18.

Ursicinus, Bishop of Turin, 32 ; en-
dured captivity, 32 ; suftered
from an usurping Bishop, 32

Uses in different churches so di-
verse, 75 ; freedom in adopting
and varying, 75.

Valerian, letter to, 9,

Vapincum, a see in Narbonensis
Sacunda, 26 n.

Varmaricarius, sent to Gregory by
Brunichild, 94, 95.

Veils given for the Shrine of St.
Peter, 61, 61 n.

Vennianus, 41.

Venantius, the Patrician, 14 ; letter
to him and his wife, Italica, 37 ,
ex-monk. Patrician of Syracuse;
letter to, 57 ; had renounced his
monastic state, 57 n., 59, 86 n. ;
had daughters Barbara and An-
tonina, 59, 86 n. ; the care of iiis
children to be considered by the
Bishop of Syracuse, 59, (o ;
charge of his property, 59 ; dales
of marriage, etc., 86 n.

Veteranus, presbyter, 46 ; came to
Rome with letter from Gregory,
46.

Vicedominus, a person or officer, 5.

Victorius of Aquitaine on the Easter
cycle, 40, 40 n. ; has the ques-
tion referred to him, 40, 4011.

Victor, Bishop of Sardinia, letter
to, 4.

Victor, Bishop of Palermo, is writ-
ten to by Gregory, 14.

Victor, Bishop of Rome, 40, 40 n.

Vincentius, Bishop of Sardinia, let-
ter to, 4.

Victor, primate of Numidia, 87 ; to
be disciplined, 87 ; letter to, 00.

Victor, co-primate in Africa, 89 ; has
to thoroughlv examine a case.
.89.

Vigilius, Bishop of Rome, 31.

Virgilius, Bishon of Aries, letters to,
30, 31, 70, 84 ; reproved for re-
missness in duty, 31, 54 ; asked
to befriend Augustine. 84.

Vitalis, guardian in Sicily, letters to.


422


S. GREGORY THE GREAT.


I, 103 ; his patronage resorted
to. 17. 55 ; forbidden to uphold
culprit clerics, 17 ; was given
stricter injunctions, 103 ; was
accused of retaining, 55 n.

Vitelas, a church estate in Sicily, 89.

Vitus, guardian, letter to, 60.


Warnilfrid, adviser of Ariulf, 23.
Whitby, Synod of, 39 n., 40 n.
Wilfrid, Bishop of York, 40 n.
Will not allowed to be made by one

in a monastery, 4.
Women forbidden to live with

Bishops, 16. 26 ; what ones may,


16 ; prohibited from living with
those in any holy order, 26 ;
forbidden to live in monas-
teries, 44 ; cause scandal, 44.
World coming to a close, 37, 82.

York received a Metropolitan, 81.


EPHRAIM S TRUS AND APHRAHAT.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

Gen.i. 2 . . .

.128

,371

ii. 7 • . .

.

372

ii. 17 . . .

.380

402

iii. 6 . . .

.

365

iii. 15 . . .

232

V. 29 . . .

.

225

ix. 23 . . .

. 224

232

X. 2 ...

356

X. 10 . , .

35^^

XV. 6 . . .

299

xvi. 12 . .

.243

249

xvii. I . .

3«8

xviii. 14 . .

.

393

xxi. 9 . . .

. .

243

xxii. 6 . .

.

239

xxvii. 40 . .

361

XXX. I . . .

239

xxxi. 38, 40.

.

383

XXXV. 22 . .

.

365

xxxviii. . .

240

xxxviii. 29 .

.

240
305

xxxix. 7, sq .

xli. 49 . . .

231

xlix. 3, 4 . .

377

xlix. 10 . .

'361

390

xlix. 29, sr .

377

1.24 . \ .

377

E.x. 1. 16 . . .

.

240

iii. 6 . . ,

402

iii. 6, 15 . .

388

iii. 14 . . .

388

iv. 4. sq. . .

237

iv. 19 . . .

396

iv. 22, 23 . .

387

IV. 24, 26

365

vi. 1 . . .

. .

387

vi. \2 . . .

224

vii. 1 . . .

387

xii. 3 • • •

235

xiii. 19 . .

.

377

XV. 25 . . .

249

xvii. 12 . .

350

XX. 2 . . .

.

349

xxxii. I . 31

2, 324, 378 1

xxxii. 4 . .

307

xxxii . 26, 27,

28 '.

307

xxxiii. 22. .

234

xxxii. 20 . .

.

307

xxxii. 3r, 32

383

x.xxiii. 20

317

xxxiii. II. .

.

366

xxxvi. 14 . .

.

387

xxxvii. . .

.

239

Lev. xxi. 12 . .

.

371

xxiii. ir . .

.

228

xiv. 52 . .

. .

xxiii. 10 . .

230

xxvi. 12 . .

".346.3B8I

Numb. V. 17, 27

xi. 17 . .

xii. I sq. ,

xiv. 10 .

xvi. 32, 33

xxiv. 17 .

XXV. 6, 15
Deut. iv. 2 .

iv. 17 . .

vi.5 . .

xiv. I . .

xxvi. 12 .

xxix. 23 .

xxxii. 15 .

xxxii. 21 .

xxxii. 32 ,

xxxii. 39 .


xxxiii. 6 .

xxxiv. 5, 6
Josh. ii. 9 . .

iii. 17 . .

X. 13 . .
Judges iii. 12

iv. 2 . .

xi. 5 . .

xiii. I, 24

xiv. 6 . .

xvi. 15, sq.

xviii. 2, 14
Ruth iv. 12 .

1 Sam 1.7 .

ii. 6. . .
ii. 26 . .
iv. I sq. .
V. 4. . .
xvi. 14, sq.
xxiii., xxiv,
xxvi., xxvii.

2 Sam. iii. 2^, 28

vi. 23 .
viii. 14
xi. 2, sq.
xiii. I sq.
xxiv. 17
I Kings i. 38
iv. 27 .
X. i.
xi. I, 4
xi. 12, 36
XV. 4, sq
XV. 13 .
xvi. 31
xvii. 3, 5
xix. I, 8

XX. II

xxi. 5, sq
xxii. 28


383,
162,


308

370

365

319
409

223
366
361
388
378
387

394
335
361
360, 393

347, 378,
, 387, 402

377, 402
378
299

351
351

395
395
395
395

232

365
299
240

239

378, 402
242

395
232

372
318
226
366
243
387

365
384
275
373
295
365
398
398
366

365
366
366
395
365
401


2 Kings ii. 20

ii. 8, 15 .

ii. II . .

iii. 15, 17 .

iv. 8, 10 .

iv. 26 . .

vi. 32 . .

viii. 15 .

xviii. 9, 13

xvni. 35 .

xix. 23, 24

xix. 21, 23, 28

xix. 37.

XX. 18 .

XX. 19.

xxii. II,

xxiii, 29

XXV. I sq
2 Chron. xxxv. 25
Esther vi. 11

vi. 13 .

vii. 10.

ix. 10 .
Job i. 13, sq.

ii. 9

ni. 18, 19

xiv. 12

xiv. 27

xvi. 19

xvi. 20

xlvii. 5. 6

xxviii. 19.

xxxiv. 10

xl. 14 .

xli. 4 .
Ps. i. 2, 3 .

i.5. .

ii. 7- •

iii. 6 .

ix. 17 .

xvi. 5 .

xvi. 10.

xix. 4 .

xxii. 6.

xxii. 17, 19

xxii. 17, 18

xxii. 23 .

xxiii. 45 .

xxiv. 7, 9.

xxvi. 19 . .

xxxvii. 35, 36

xiv. 5 .

xiv. 14.

xiv. ij.

1.9. .

ll. 13 .
Ixi. 3 .
Ixvi. 3 .


226

350
366

373
366

323
373

395
353
353
353
353
354
398

399
298
298

399
400
366
400
400

365
405
410

398
405
405
351
295
408

474
294
364
408

390
381
408, 409

231
391, 400

347
223

390
391

391. 392
392
350

381
352
226
241
388
237
373
228

237


Ps, Ixviii. 31 .
Ixix. 14 .
Ixix. 22, 27
Ixx.

Ixxi. 14 .
Ixxii. 15 .
Ixxviii. 72
Ixxxi. 6 .
Ixxxi. 10 .
Ixxxii. 6 .
Ixxxii. 7 .
Ixxxv. 12.
Ixxxvii. 6
Ix.xxviii. 5
Ixxxviii. 10
xc. I .

XC. I, 2

xcvii, II

xcix. I

ex. 3 .

cxiii. 5

cxviii. 22

cxix. 99

cxix. 105

cxxxix. I

exlii. 2

cxlv. 19

Prov. iii. 18

iv. 23 .

V. 15. 17

i-^'-.3. •
xvni. 10

XX. I .

XX. 6 .
Eccles. i. 3

2 . .

viii. II

xi. 10 .
Cant. i. 15 .

i. 5 . .

ii. I . .

ii. 3- •
ii. 17 .
iv. 14 .
Isaiah i 2 .
i. 10 .
i. 3 . .
i. 6. .
i. 18 .
v. . .
v. I sq.
V. 2 .
vi. 2 .
vi. 6 .
vi. 7 .
vii. 14 .
viii. 18
ix. 6


II


230


12


PAGE

295
228

39i
323
294

244

384, 385
350
244
388
388

347
223
241
378
388
388
227
248

390
308

347
411

348

233
407
128

223

333

332
231
228
232

351
331
228
294

334
226

295
246
246

258
246

387

234, 393
296

410

295
360
360
360, 393
248
236
326

390
380
223


4:?3


424


EPHRAIM SYRUS AND APHRAHAT:


Isaiah ix. 6, 7.

X. 15 . .

X. 19 . .

xi, I, 2 .

xiv. 13

xiv. 15, 16

xiv, 25 . .

XV. 15, 17.

xxiii. 15, 16, 17

xxvi. II .

xxvi. 19 .

xxviii. 16.

XXX. 27 .

xxxiii. 17.

xxxiv. 4 . .

xxxvii. 22, 24,

xxxvii. 24, 25

xxxvii. 38

xxxix. 7

xl. 12 .

xl. 15, 17

xli. 8 .

xli. 14 .

xliii. 2, 3

xliv. 6

xlviii. 12

xlix, 6.

xlix. 24

Hi. II .

Hi. 13, 14

Hi. 15 .

Hii. 2 .

Hii. 5 . ,

Hii. 8 .

Hii. 9 .

Hii. 12

Hii. 10

Hv. 9 .

Iv. I .

Iv. 6, 7

Iv. 10, II

Ivi. 5 .

Hx. 5 .

Ix. 8 .

Ixii. 9 .

Ixvi. 2 .

Ixvi. 8

Ixvi. 16

Ixvi. 24
Jer. ii. 10, 13

ii. 30 .

V. 14 .

vi. 7, 8

vi. 30 .

vii. 4, 5

viii. 7 ,

ix. 23 .

xiii. 23.

xvii. 5, 7, 8

XX. 9 .

xxiii. 29

XXV. It

xxv. 15, 27

xxvii. 8

xxviii. 14

xxxi. 22

xxxii. 18

xlviii. 47

1. 17 .
Lam. xHx. 6, 39.

iv. I .

iv. 2 .

iv. 16 .

iv. 20 ,

V. 16 ,
Ezek. xiii. 10.

XV. 4, 5

xvi. 48.

xvi. 49.


390

353

348

353
353
353
35^
395
378
402

347

278

364
395
353
353
353
354
248
408
392
359
392
389
389
348
249

359
390
390
223, 390

390, 391
242
249
370
391
395
297

349

380

3(y7

393
406

382
373
377
350
350, 409
395
395
355
395
359, 393
346. 388
296
352
295
364
355
355
358

395

388

358

233

388

395
358
395
355
335
559
355, 399
355
347
360

393
393


Ezek. xvi. 52.

393

Mai. ii. 7 . .

.

xvi. 55. . .

'■ 393,

394

ii. 10 . .

xviii. 3 . .

354

iv. 6 . . .

xviii. 23, 32 .

380

Ecclus. xxix. 18.

xviii. 29, 32 .

380

I Maccab. i. 19..

xxii 30 . .

347

2 Maccab. v. 26.

xxiii. II . .

380

V. 27 . . .

xxiii. 24, 25 .

407

vi, 18, sq, .

xxviii. 2 . .

355

vi. 18, 31 . .

xxviii. 14

355

vii. I sq.

xxviii. 14, 15

355

ix. 5, 12 . .

xxviii. 16 .

355

ix. 13, 18, 19

xxix. 18, 19 .

355

S. Matt. i. 3 sq .

xxxiv. 2, 19.

384

i. 23 . . .

xxxiv. 14

384

ii. 3 .

xxxiv. 36

384

ii. 20 .

xxxvii. I, 10.

379

ii. 12 .

xlvii. 10, sq.

230

iv. II .

Dan. ii. 31, 33 .

356

V. 3. .

"•35 • •

357

V. 5. . .

ii. 36 . . .

357

V. 6. . .

ii. 37 • • •

388

V. 7. .

ii. 38 . . .

35^

V. 9. . .

ii. 39 . . .

356

V. 12 . .

ii. 40 . . .

357

V. 13 .

ii. 43 • . .

357

V. 14 . .

ii. 44 . . .

357

V. 15 . .

iii. 17 . . .

V. 16 .

iii. 28, 29. .

400

V. 19, 20 .

iii. 34 . • ■

347

V. 28 .

iii. 34, 35- •

347

V.39 •

iv. 13 . . .

225

vi, 29 . .

iv. 17, 19. .

356

vi. 20 . .

iv. 30 . . .

358

vi. 33 • .

vii. 6 . . .

357

vii. 7 . .

vii. 2, 4 . .

354

vii. 12. ,

vii. 3 . . .

357

vii. 8 .

vii. 7 . . .

356

vii. 24.

vii. 8 . . .

.354

359

viii. 8, 10

vii. 8, 24 . .

349

viii. 20.

vii. 9, 13, 14, ■

22 .

354

viii. 24.

vii. 19. . .

354

ix. 2 .

vii. 21. . .

359

ix. 6 .

vii. 25. . .

359

ix, 12 ,

vii. 26. . .

359

ix, 13 , ,

vii. 27. . ,

'359

,360

ix, 20 .

viii. 20, 21 .

354

ix, 26 .

ix. 26, 27 . .

390

ix. 28 , .

ix. 27 . . .

.393

,394

ix. 29 .

X. 5,6. . .

316

X. I .

x.h . . .

317

X. 8 .

X. 8 . . .

316

X14 .

X. 19 . . .

317

X, 16 ,

Hosea iv. 16 . .

125

xi. II .

i. 2 . . . .

298

xi. 12 .

i. II. . . .

222

xi. 27 .

iv. 3 . . .

294

xii. 22 .

vi. 5 . . .

395

xii. 36.

viii. 10. . .

.360

,361

xii. 42 .

X, II . . .

125

xii. 50 ,

X. 12 . . .

. 348, 349

xiii. 7 ,

xi. I, 2. . .

387

xiii, 30

Joel ii. II , , .

363

xiii. 46

ii. 28 . . .

412

xiii. 44

ii. 28, 29 . .

370

xiii, 47

Amos V. I, 2 . .

395

xiv, 6 sq.

Micah V. 2 . .

223

xiv. 17

Zeph i. 3 . . .

294

xiv. 24

Zach. ii. 3 . . .

227

xiv, 15

ii. 8 ...

296

xiv. 31

iii. 9 . . .

34g

XV. 36.

iv. 2 . . .

348

xvi. 19.

iv. 10 . . .

348

xvii. 19

xi. 9, 17 . .

384

xviii. 10

xii. 12 . . .

399

xviii. 24

xiii. 7 . . .

391

xix. 28

xiv. 6 , . .

391

XX. i. .

xiv. 6, 7 . .

34Q

XX. 30 .

xiv. 7 . . .

391

xxi. 2, 7

28


313


360:


22


36


407
406
250
404

277

359
359
401

359
401

359
359
240

393
314
39^
125
316
410

125

362
362

364
348
367
248

348
348
401
2^2
334
405
405
363
363
409
412
362
351
369
369

336, 339
313
323
298
310
I, 412
351
351
399

345, 386
348

333
366

235
371, 386
339
348
296

245
364
231
362
364

2^0
366
231

339
339
351
231

329
351, 392
230, 372
364
363, 407
363
339
369


38


32


10


52


DJ


S, Matt. xxi. 19
xxi. 21
xxi. 22
xxi. 38
xxi. 40, 44
xxi. 44
xxii. 13
xxii. 28
xxiii. 9
xxiii. 29,
xxiv. 6
xxiv. 20
xxiv. 32
xxiv. 35
xxv. 4, I
xxv. 10
xxv. 29
xxv. 6 .
xxv. 16
xxv. 21
xxv. 27
xxv. 32 S(
xxv. 33
xxv. 40
xxvi. 7
xxvi. 13
xxvi, 53
xxvi, 04
xxvii. 25
xxvii. 50,
xxvii. 52
xxvii. 50
xxvii. 51
xxvii. 54
xxvii. 04
xxviii. 18,
xxviii. 19
xxviii, 20

S. Mark ii. 27
iv. 39 .
V. 9, ,
V, 22 ,
V, 23, 36
V, 47 .
vi. 3 .
vii. 32, 37
ix, 22, 26
ix,49 ,
xiv. 21 ,
xvi, 9, 20
xvi, 16
xvi, 17, 18

Luke i- 35,
■. 41 .
i. I, 2,

ii, 22 .

i. 28 .

i, 29 ,

1, 30 .

i. 46 ,

i. 52 .

34 •
V. 25, 28,
vii. II .
vii. 14.
vii. 36,
vii. 37, 38
viii, 16
viii. 28
viii. 30
viii. 33.
viii. 36.
ix. 59, 60
X. 17, 18
X. 19 .
xi, II ,

xi. 33 .
xii. ^7.
xii, 47 .


24


25


367
351
392
396
326

347
363
38a

363
3ho
402
364

375
410
362

367

363
362

364
381
362
228
326

327
248

369
4C0
306

233
306

399
400

3<>9
399
347
370
313
328
248
339
351
379
239
309
351
27, 249

348
162

351
351
305
329
361
262
327
327
327
226
242
328
376
339
379
33(>
310

348

248
329

380
399
363, 374
401

362
364


INDEX OF TEXTS.


425


S, Luke xii. 49

xiii. 32 .

xiv. II .

xiv. 18, 19

xiv. 29 .

XV. 7 . ,

xvi. 6 . .

xvi. 9 , .

xvi. 15.

xvi. 16.

xvii. 5 .

xviii. 9.

xix. 13, 14

xix. 14.

xix. 44.

XX. 9, sq.

XX. 10, sq.

XX. 35, 36

XX. 38 .

xxi. 9 .

xxi. 10, II

xxi. 14, 15

xxi. 16, 17

xxi. 23, 24

xxii. 30 .

xxii. J.3 .

xxii. 02 .

xxiii. 14, 15

xxiii. 27, 28

xxiii. 43
S, John i. I

i. 5. .

i. II .

i. 14 .

i. 23 .

iii. 12 .

iii. 13 .

iii. 34 .

iii- 34, 35
IV. 6, 7
iv. 36 .
iv. 42 .
v. 22 .
v. 25 .
vi. I sq.
vii. 37 .
viii. 12


PAGE

125

231

352
364
364
230

228

405
352

375
351
298

347
347
399
382
360
406
402
402

375
401
400

399
407
322
296
301

399

230, 410

348, 380

. 348

• 348
369, 380

. 231
. 382

• 382
529, 370

• 371
. 369
. 412
. 230

. 371

. 380

• 231
. 323
. .348


PAGE

S. John viii. 56 .

. . 225

ix. I . . .

. . 339

ix. 6 ...

. 309, 336

ix. 24, 31. .

. . 326

x. 9 . . . .

. 228, 384

X. II . . .

■ . 384

X. II sq. . .

. 383

X. 16, 17 . .

. 384

X. 20 . . . .

. 347

X. 30 . . .

. . 370

X. 34 . . . .

. 224

XI. 25 . . .

. 236

xi, 43 . . .

. . 379

xn. 24 . . .

231, 248
. 362

xii. 25. . .

xii. 26. . . .

. 385

xii. 28 ... .

. 399

xii. 35. . .

348, 364

xn. 36. . . .

. 348

xiv. 2 . . .

. 409

xiv. 3 '. . . .

. 369

xiv. 6 . . .

. 228

xiv. 20. . .

346, 370

xiv. 23. . .

• 373

XV. I . . .

. . 231

XV. 12 . . .

. . 348

XV. 15 . . .

. 348, 392

XV. 19, 20 .

. 400

xvii. 14 . .

362, 400

xviii. 9 . .

. 249

xix. 15 . . .

• 347

xix. 30 . . .

. 321

XX. 17 . . .

. 230

xxi. 7 . , . .

. 298

xxi. 15, 17 .

. 384

Acts ii. II . . .

• 249

iii. 31 . . .

. . 400

viii. 27 , .

. « 295

xiii. 37 . .

. 400

XX. 28 . . .

• . 331

xxii. II . .

. . 316

xxvi. 13 . .

. . 316

Rom. V, 12, 14 .

. . 402

vii. 5 • . .

. . 376

viii. 9 . . .

. . 376

viii. 26. . .

. . 225

viii. 28 . .

. . 410

Rom xii. 12
xii. 36 .
xiii. II

1 Cor. i. 24
9 .

li.^ •. ;

ii. 10, 12
ii. 10 .
ii. II .
ii. 16 .
ii. 16, 17
x. 4 .

X. 4, 5
X. 7, sq
X. 20 .
xii. II, 28
xiii. 13
XV. 13, 15
XV. 27, 28
XV. 29 , .
XV. 32, 33
XV, 35 . .
XV. 36, 38
XV, 40 . .
XV. 41, 42
XV. 44 , .
XV. 44, 45
XV. 49 . .
XV. 51 . .
XV. 52 , .
XV. 53, 54
XV. 54, 55
XV. 55.
XV. 57 .

2 Cor. ii. 15

V. 3. .
V. 4 .
V. 8 .
V. 21 .
vi. 9, 10
viii, 9.
viii. 9.
X. 5 .
X. 17 .

xi. 14, 15
xi. 25


sq,


. 363

. 370

. 362

. 386

. 406

• 376
408, 412

• 349

• 347
347, 350

• 347
. 364

. 367
. 385
. 231

. 370

. 376

308, 371

• 376
. 376

• 375
. 375
. 376
. 408

372, 376

• 374
. 374

374, 381
. 374

374, 376
. 367

• 403
. 376

• 376
. 374

• 372
372, 382

• 391
. 363

. 249

. 309

• 315

• 352
. 374

• 319


Gal. iii. 28 . . .

367, 406

vi. 6 ...

. 412

vi. 9 . . .

• 335

Eph. i. 18 . . .

. • 319

ii. 4, 5 • . .

• 348

ii. 6. . . .

. . 370

iv. 22 . . . •

• 364

iv. 30 . . . .

• 364

V. 2 . . . „

348, 362

vi. 14, 17 . .

• 363

vi. 16 . . .

. 363, 364

Phill. ii. . . .

. . 369

ii. 9 ...

. . 396

Col. 1. 15 . . .

. . 392

ii. 9 ...

. 310

n. 14 . . .

. 235, 367

iii. I, 2. . .

. . 363

I Thess. iv. 13 .

. . 381

iv. 16 . . .

• . 372

iv, 17 . .

. 224, 410

V. 21, 22 . .

. . 411

2 Thess. i, 7, 8 .

. . 314

I Tim. ii. 5 . .

. „ 299

iii. 16 . . .

. 248

2 Tim. ii. 11, 12 .

■ . 363

ii. 21 . . .

. . 362

iii. 16 . . .

. 411

Hebrews iv. 8 .

. . 224

iv. II . . .

. 364

vi. 7. . .

. . 244

IX. 15, 16 . .

. 377

X. 31 . . .

. . 314

X. 38 . . .

■ . 364

xi. I . . .

. 402

xi. 19 . . .

225, 249

xi. 32 . . .

. 401

xi. 38 . . .

. . 401

xi. 40 . . .

. 382

James ni. 10 . .

' • 294

I Peter i. 11 . .

. . 225

Rev. ii. II . = .

. 38?

iii. 14 ... .

. 244

V.9 . . .

• 249

XI. 8 ... .

. 234

XX. 14 . . „

. • 381

xxi, 6 . . 0

. 275

xxi. 18, „ .

. 381

xxii. 17 . .

. . 275

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Aaron made the calf, 182, 207, 280 ;
between the living and the dead,
201 ; his staff that budded, as a
type, 223 ; looked for Jesus, 224 ;
and his sons were anointed,
269 ; his hyssop, 272.

Abba, disciple of Ephraim, 126.

Abel, 210.

Abgar, King of Edessa, 135 n.

Abner son ot Ner, 201.

Abraham, the patriarch, 188, 299,299,
394 ; rewarded for his willing-
ness, 215, 394 ; desired to see
Christ, 225'; received circum-
cision, 262 ; type of faith, 249,

• 394-
Abraham, disciple of Ephraim, 126.

Abraham, Bishop of Nisibis, 151 ;

hymn concerning, 186, 187, 188.

Absalom, 211.
Achor, the body of, 201.
Adam as the head of the human
race, 194, 196, 200, 204, 207, 208,
210, 214, 217, 219, 223, 224, 236,
237, 238, 256, 257, 261. 275, 280,
308, 372, 389 ; returned to Para-
dise, 201, 282 ; looked for Jesus,
224, 237 ; his Rib taken out, 232,
389 ; he was restored in Jesus,
237, 238, 265, 280, 282, 389 ; he
sinned and suffered, 280 ; he
fell by food, 311.

Affliction and some of its objects,
171, 172, T73, 179.

Agag was slain, 201.

Ahab, the King, 201, 353.

Alexander, King of Macedon, 358,
394.

Alexandretta, 126.

Altar and the priest, 173, 179 ; of
Araunah the Jebusite, 394.

Amba Bishoi, an Egyptian monas-
tery, 127, 142.

Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, 147 n.

Amid, 121, 141, 145 n.

Amnon, 245.

Amphilochius of Iconium, 121.

Ananias and his company in the fur-
nace, 188.

Anatolius, Patriarch of Constanti-
nople, as a hymn writer, 148 n.

Angel of glory and humility, 322.

Angels at Bethlehem, 237 ;' their
new song of the Nativitv, 250 ;
their bright light, 315, 316, 317,
318, 321, 322 ; the Lord^ of the

317-
Anna kissed Christ, 236.
Annunciation by Gabriel, 305.
Anointing by the Chrism, 269, 270 ;

is our dedication, 281.
Anomaeans, 150.
Antino (Antinoe, Antinoopolis) in

Egypt, 126.
Antiochus Epiphanes, 359.
Aphrahat, his dates, 152, 153, 156 ;


chronological relation to Eph-
raim, 152 ; Persian by nation-
ality, 152, 156, 157, 158 ; wrote in
Syriac, 152, 157 ; a Christian
theologian, 152, 157 ; his name
was long forgotten, 152 ; called
"the Persian Sage," 152, 155,
160 n. ; called " Mar Jacob the
Persian Sage," 152, 155, 159 ;
name entirely lost in the «th
century, 152 ; received the name
of Jacob, 152 ; works ascribed
to Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis, 153,

155 ; the name " Aphrahat " re-
appears in the loth century, 153,
155, 156 ; his Demonstrations, as
arranged and classified, 153 ;
the dates of their composition,

153. 156 n, i6r, 394 n., 411 n. ; the
Maphrian, 160 n. ; extent and
limits ot their circulation, 153 ;
his works early translated, 154 ;
Armenian translations of the
" Demonstrations" 154, 155; man-
uscript evidence, 154, 155 ;
works known to Syriac authors,

154, 155 ; acquamtance with
them traced, 154 sq. ; made
sister's son to Gregory the Illu-
minator, 155 n. ; called "Jacob,
Bishop of Mar Mathai," 156,
158 ; was a Bishop, 156, 157 ; his
name "Aphrahat" is Persian,

156 ; was not originally a Chris-
tian, 157 ; evidence of his being
a cleric, 157 ; his writings and
contemporary controversies,
158 ; Metropolitan of Nineveh,
138 ; slightly leaned to Nesto-
rianism in his waitings, 159 ;
his writings w^ere popular in
the Armenian Church, 160 ;
known chiefly in the Eastern
Church, 160 n. ; Armenian ver
sion of his works first printed,
160 ; recovery of his Post Syriac
Original, 61 ; before or after
Ephraim, 161 ; his use of Scrip-
ture Books, 162 ; seems to know
or use only some of the N. T.
Canon, 162 ; used the Diatessa-
ron, 162 ; estimate of the literary
and theological value of his
waitings, 162 ; his Demonstra-
tions translated (selections),
345 sq. ; his plea for writing,
386, 394,410,411.

Apollinarians, 150.

ApoUinaris, heretic, 131 ; silenced

by a trick, 131.
Apostacy alluded to, 188.
Aramaeans and Hebrew's, 218.
Arbo, a ram, and A rbozo, 3.n Arab,

278 n.
Arian heresy, 129.
Arians, 132, 159.


Ark of Noah, 167 ; its spiritual teach-

mg, 167, 168, 224 ; of Bezaleel,

239 n.
Armenian Church, 160 ; alphabet,

158, 161.
Arnad, a disciple of Ephraim, 126.
Asahel, son of Zeruiah, 201.
Ascension, the feast of the, 176, 230,

260 ; of Christ, 265.
Asuna, a disciple of Ephraim, 126.
Assemani, Bibt. Orient, 124 n., 141 n.,

142 n., 152 n., 155.
Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria,

155-
Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, 147 n.
Aurit, disciple of Ephraim, 126.

Baal- worship, 177.

Babu, Bishop of Nisibis, 151, 187.

Babylon, the three brethren in, 176,
277.

"Babylonian," (that) (Nebuchadnez-
zar), 173.

Babel, tower of, 204.

Balaam, the seer, 259, 296.

Baptism, its figure in the Flood,

166, 225 ; its spiritual power,

167, 225, 271, 272, 273, 277, 279,
280, 281, 282 ; with confession of
the Three Persons, 190, 272,
273 ; of Virgin Mary, 245 ; its
figure in the Red Sea, 266, 272 ;
ordained for atonement, 272.
273 ; by the Three Names, 270,
272, 282; cleansed the secret
misdeeds of the soul, 272, 280 ;
by water and Spirit, 273, 277.
279, 280 ; in Christ's name, 330 ;
its water sanctified for the re-
mission of sins,^79, 282, 283, 285 ;
as in Jordan, 279, 283, 284 sq. ;
of infants, 279 ; requisites, for,
279 ; His the cause of our clean-
sing, 280, 382, 372 ; the laver
of, 274 ; types of, 274 ; by the
Spirit, 372 ; its ceremonial, 273,
274, 279, 280, 271, 272 ; its relation
to the Cross, 274, 259, 372 ; figures
of, 274, 275, 279, 280, 281, 282, 265,
259, 271.

Baptized, Hymn of the, 283.

Bar-Bahlul, i6on.

Bardesan, heresiarch, 129, 159 ;
named from his birthplace,
129 n. ; controversy with Eph-
raim, 129, 309 n. ; the seven
^ons of his heresy, 130 n.

Barhebrceus (Gregory), 131 n., 145
155 n., 160 n., 161 ; his history,
158 n., 160 n.

Barses, Bishop of Edessa, 131.

Barrenness, a sorrow, 239 ; a judg-
ment, 243, 251.

Baronius, 132, 140.

Basil, Bishop of Caesarea, 120, 126,

143 ; visited by Ephraim, 127,

427


426


EPHRAIM SYRUS AND APHRAHAT.


137, 142, 143, 144 ; alludes in his
writings to Ephraim, 128 ; is
taught by the Holy Ghost in
form of a dove, 127, 128, 137 ;
his death, 132, 143 ; lady's trouble
at his death, 132, 133 ; his dates,
143 ; knew Aphrahat's works,
156 n.
Basil, Emperor, his mcnologium,

145-
Benaiah, 201.

Beth-Garbaia, 124, 141, 144, 157.
Bethlehem, 223, 237, 238, 257, 258,

259 ; infants slain at, 257, 258,

259-

Bevan, Texts and Studies, 149 n.

Bishoi, monk in Egypt, 126 ; was
visited by Ephraim, 126.

Blood of the Passover, 202.

Boaz and Ruth, 240.

Bones, the power that was in, 205,
206, 216 ; honoured in Sheol,
216, 218.

Book of the Caliphs, 143 n.

Booli of Rays, 158 n.

Bread, the Heavenly, 231, 232, 259 ;
as a type of Christ, 243 ; a pe-
culiar rite in the Syrian Lit-
urgy, 245 n.

Brooding, as spoken of the Holy
Ghost, 128.

British Museum and its literary
treasures, 261.

Buzitis, 155 n.

Caiaphas, 211, 229.

Cain, 210, 214, 224 ; as the murderer,
224.

Cainan, son of God, 222.

Caleb, the spy, looked for Jesus, 224.

Calf, was made and worshipped,
307, 308, 312 ; its making was
prompted by Satan, 299.

Calamities by God's judgments,

349-
Canaan, 224.
Catholicus by the East is rebuked,

157-

Cephas, the Apostle, 190.

Chaldean Art, 203, 206.

Chaldeans were converted, 213 ;
their activity, 254.

Champions, Feast of the, 176.

Cherubim, not liable to death, 196 ;
their praises, 267.

Children, how trained, 204.

Christ, the Bridegroom of Truth,
190 ; his name as a seal, 191,
209 ; his Chrism, 269.

Christian persecutions under Julian,
124.

Church, to be kept in purity, 175 ;
like a mirror, 190 : not to pos-
sess wealth, 191 ; building and
adorning in peace, 192, 193, 247,

260 ; Holy, 224, 299 ; her glory
and privilege, 259, 260 ; her fes-
tivals, 259, 260 ; her oblations,
259 ; as seen in the Prophecies,
259, 260 ; Ephrata, mother of
kings, 260 ; upon the Rock, 267;
as seen in the Pearl, 293.

Circumcision, as a sacred rite, 308.
Commandments of Christ's new

law, 330.
Constans, the Emperor, 123, 141.
Constantine, the Emperor, 145, 153.
Constantius, his apparition at Nisi-

bis, 12^, 138, 141 ; his life, 123,

124, 141.


Conun, the month of Christ's birth,
252, 253.

Council of Nicaea (325), 123, 159,' 160.

Creation, made free, 255 ; was wor-
shipped, 255 ; the time and pro-
cess of, 261 ; giving glory, 267.

Cross and its spiritual power, 167,
182, 198, 199, 212, 224, 268, 269,
274, 305^ 30«. 330, 397 ; its teach-
ing, 182, 212, 224, 230, 274, -330;
opened the graves of Sheol, 201,
268 ; seemed to favour Death,
205 ; reversed for S, Peter, 212 ;
its similitudes, 274; our treas-
urer, 281 ; as a bridge over
death, 307 ; held the Son of God,

387.
Crowns, three, of Jesus, 253.
Ctesiphon, the Church or, 157, 158,

159-
Cureton discovers the Aphrahat

MS., 161.
Cyrus, Bishop of Edessa, closed the

school of the Persians, 159, 160.


Dagon, 232.

Daniel in the lions den, 188, 211, 353,
399 ; his fasting, 191 ; as type of
resurrection, 241 ; as prophet
speaking, 259, 260, 316 ; in a vis-
ion, 316 ; his visions and their
interpretation, 353 sq., 399, 400.

Darius, the Mede, 356.

Dathan and Abram, 353.

David, King, 188. 191, 201, 207, 226,
.235, 238, 240: 243, 318, 353, 372 ;
rescued the lamb, 189, 238 ; his
justice, 201 ; slew the lion and
bear, 202 ; the house of David,
211, 226, 244, 257 ; his cheeses to
his brethren, 226 ; father of the
Christ, 240, 257 ; the psalmist,
243, 244 ; was anointed, 270 ;
longed for the water, 275 ;
crushed Goliath, 353 ; was v er-
secuted by Saul, 353, 372 ; how
much he did for Israel, 397.

Days of remembrance, 230, 231 ; of
the Creation, 261.

Dead not to be buried heathenishly,
191 ; not to be buried wnth vest-
ments, etc., 191 ; mourning for,
a vain work, 213 n. ; their resur-
rection, 375 sq.

Death, as personified, 193 sq. ; trem-
bled before Jesus, 193, 205 ; dis-
putes with Satan, 195, 199, 205,
206, 207, 208, 209, 216 ; assert-
ing its powers, 196 ; its offence
against Jesus, 197, 205, 306 ;
pleads with Jesus to depart, 197;
extols its own goodness, 199,

214, 215 ; humbled Jesus, 202, 204,
306 ; marvelled at the crucifixion,
205 ; its activity, 209 ; condemns
sloth, 209 ; defied by the resur-
rection, 210, 215, 216, 217 ; mocks
the Evil One, 210 ; curses Satan,
211, 212 ; reproaches the living
for mourning, 213, 214, 215, 210,
217 ; forestalled by others, 214,

215, 218 ; is complained of that
it shuts off hope, 214 ; obeys
God's command, 214 ; gives rest
to the weary, 216, 217 ; did not
crucify Jesus, 218 ; disputes with
man, 218,219 ; its sleep bv sin,
225, 381, 403, 404, 405 ; trodden
down by Jesus, 306, 403, 404.


Debtors, parable of the two, 31 1»

325, 340, 341.
December, as a symbol of Christy

230, 232, 234, 252.
Demonstration on Death and the

Latter Times, 402 sq.
Demonstrations of Aphrahat, 153 sq.
Denha, 247, 266.
Diocletian, 123.
Divinations and enchantments, 177,

179, 203,209, 211,213,352.
Dumb, their language when they

were cured, 309.

Easter, feast of, 230 ; flowers used
at, 230 n.

Ebedjesu, the historian, 156, 160 n.

Edessa and its school, 124, 125, 126;,
was plundered by the Huns,
131 ; was under the persecution
of Valens, 131, 136 ; the Mount
of 121, 137 ; constancy of its
people to the faith, 123, 137 ; had
the school of the Persians, 159 ;
its Bishops, 159 ; was the centre
of Syriac theology, I60 ; relics of
bones at, 205.

Edom, the prophet out of, 275.

Edomites, were destroyed, 201.

Egypt marvelled at the sight of the
Infant, 213.

Eldad and Medad, 189.

Eli and his house, 191 ; his greedi-
ness, 192.

Elias Barinneus, 160 n.

Elijah, the prophet, 189, 191, 196,.
200, 207, 210, 218, 219, 241, 244,
269, 276, 349 ; looked for Jesus,

224 ; kept rain from the adul-
terous, 244 ; multiplied the oil
in the cruse, 269 ; was fed by
the ravens, 298, 366 ; how much
he did for Israel, 398.

Elisha, the prophet, 186, 189, 191.
200, 206, 218, 247, 265, 272, 278,
323, 366, 371 ; his consecration,
186 ; life by his bones, 206 ;
raised the widow's son, 204, 218,
244, 323 ; his seven-fold bath,
265 ; made the heavy float, 277.

Elizabeth, her desire for a son, 239 ;
the barren mother, 251.

Enator, district in Alexandria, 126 n

Ennadius, 160 n.

Enoch, an example of faith, 196,
350 ; triumphed over Satan and
Death, 218, 219 ; looked for Jesus,

225 ; mounted up to heaven to
see Jesus, 225.

Ephraim, got the birthright, 200.

Ephraim Syrus, his relations to
Aphrahat, 119, 161 ; represents
the Syriac religious mind, 119;
gave an impetus towards a new
literature, 12 ; his fame rests on
his hymns, 120, 129, 130, 153 ; his
hymns in the Syriac ritual, 120,
147, 148 ; born in Nisibis, 120,
121, 145 ; disciple of St. Jacob,

120, 122, 123 ; lived at Nisibis
under three sieges, 120, 124, 129,
137 ; settled at Edessa, 120, 142 ;
repute as a teacher, 120, 128 ;
champion against heresv, 120,

121, 128, 129 ; ascetic and saint,
120, 125, 126, 142, 149 ; admirer
of St. Basil. 120. 126, 127, 142, T43 ;
visited St. Basil, 120, 127, 1^7, 142,
143, 144; was deacon, 120, i-i^,
146; may have been a priest,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


429


120, 128 ; his dates, 120, 121, 129,
137, 141, 142, 143. 144, 145, 152,

161 ; copious writer, 120, I46sq.,
153 ; died at Edessa, 120, 136,
145; the Syrian, his fixed epithet,

120, 128 ; called iiialpoiio, or
teacher, 120 ; materials for his
biography, 121 ; Syrian by birth
and descent, 121, 145 n. ; his
father called an idolatrous priest,

121, 122, 138, 145 ; his dream of
the vine, 121, 126, 137 ; entrance
into theChristian fold,and its hin-
drances, 122 ; slanderous accusa-
tions, 122, 138 ; his exculpation,

122 ; attended Jacob of Nisibis,

123 ; conducted Jacob's funeral,
123 ; was baptized at Beth-Gar-
baia, 124 ; fled to Amid, 124 ;
went to Edessa, 124 ; made
Edessa his residence, 124, 141 ;
his encounters with the washer-
women, 124, 137 ; earned his
livelihood in Edessa, 124 ; was
induced to join the solitaires,
125 ; great exegete and com-
mentator, 125 ; fled from publi-
city, 125 ; was stoned and left
for dead, 125, 138 ; as a teacher,
125 ; his testament, 126, 133 ; his
visions, 125, 126, 137 ; his visit
to Egypt, 126, 141 ; could speak
Greek, 126, 127, 128, 138 ; at
Scete, in the Nitrian valley, 126 ;
his habits and appearance, 126 ;
sojourned with the monk
Bishoi, 126, 127 ; had miraculous
power, 127, 129, 131, 138 ; his in-
troduction to St. Basil, 127; made
deacon by St. Basil, 128 ; by
some called a priest, 128 ; return
to Edessa, 128 ; o;^posed to
heresy, 120, 121, 125, 128, 129, 130,
131 ; was at Nicaea, 122, 144, 152,

162 ; his controversy with Bar-
■desan, 129 ; its consequences on
hymnody, 129, 136 ; account of
his hymns in controversy, 129,
130, 136, 151, 300 n.; his Nisibene
Hymns, 129, 150, 161, 167 sq. ; his
borrowing the idea of hymnody,
129, 130 ; his gift of languages,
126, 127, 138 ; question about his
Greek, 127, 128, 138 ; his con-
troversy with Apollmaris, 131 ;
refused the Episcopal consecra-
tion, 131, 136 ; feigned madness,
131 ; his exertions in the famine,
133' 137. 143 ; his Testament
quoted from 132-36 ; his death,
136, 137 ; attended by Lam-
protate, 136 ; his simple
funeral, 136 ; an early commem-
oration of his death, 136 ; the
genuine facts of his life, 137 ; his
acts amplified, 137 sq. ; never
claimed miraculous powers,
138 ; his heathen parentage
discussed, 138 ; his parents were
Christians, 138 ; Vatican Text of
his Life, 144 ; his baptism and
its date, 144 ; his writings and
his characteristics, 146 sq. ; his
Commentaries, 146 ; his Homi-
lies mostly controversial, 147 ;
Homtties still read publicly in
the Eastern Church, 147 ;' his
Hymns, 147 sq., 161 ; are not of
much literary value, 149; his
disposition gloomy, morbid,


and desponding, 149 ; great stu-
dent of Scripture, 150 ; the Nisi-
bene Hymns, 150, 151 ; probable
dates of his works, 151 ; his late
production of poetry, 152 ; Bar-
hebr^eus's account of Ephraim,
152 ; Three Homilies, 305 sq.

Epiphany, Hymns of the, 227, 247,
265; the manifestation of the
King, 247, 265, 283 ; its spiritual
teaching, 265 sq. ; the festival of
the Lord of feasts, 276 ; its glory
is in the fact of Incarnation,
276, 279, 280 ; the first offerings
at, 287.

" Era of the Greeks," 354 n.

Esther, 211, 400.

Eugenius, the Solitary of Egypt, 125.

Eulogius, Bishop of Edessa, 131 n.

Eunuch of Ethiopia, 295.

Eusebius, the historian, 135 n. 359 n.

Eve, was beguiled by the Serpent,
210 ; looked for Jesus, 224, 237,
238, 242, 246 ; in Sheol, 243 ; has
her reproach annulled in Mary,
254 ; as seen in the Pearl, 295.

Ezekiel, his vision of the valley of
dry bones, 198, 217. '

Fair, He who is, 226, 232.

Faith, enquiry into, 345 sq. ; ex-
amples of, 350.

Fasting, 336.

Feast of the Ascension, 176.

Feast of the Champions, 176.

Fire-Worshippers, 253.

Fishes as symbols, 230, 270 ; for
death, 276.

Flood, a judgment, 194 ; its teach-
ing, 225.

Forget's De Vita Aphraatis, 152,

forgiveness, seventy times seven,
201 ; of the two debtors, 325.

Freedom to sin is human, 354 ; for
creation, 255.

Gabriel, angel of the annunciation,

235, 246, 252, 255, 305; called

Jesus " My Lord," 252.
Gehazi, his house, 191, 198, 206 ;

their thievishness, 192, 385.
Gehenna, 210, 219.
Gennadius, of Marseilles, 154.
Gentiles, their leaven, 226.
Georgius, Bishop of the Arabs, 154 ;

knew about Aphrahat's works,

154. 159-

Gibbon, referred to, 123 n., 141 n.,
160 n.

Gideon selecting his soldiers, 275.

God our only refuge in trouble,
173 sq., 180 ; his name as a seal
on His people, 191 ; his judg-
ments by the flood, etc., 194 ;
God in the world worshipped
at Bethlehem, 251 ; His glory as
Incarnate, 276; the Son of, 'Be-
gotten, 308 ; Incarnate, 308 ; om-
nipresent and unlimited, 301 n.;
the Lord of the angel, 317 •" could
have shown Himself to our
sight, 317, 318 ; should not be
instructed by men, 318 ; the
creator, 352 ; his judgments,
349, 352, 353.

Godhead, the fountain of, 230; direct
blessings from, 230 ; the three
feasts of, 230 ; dwells in man-
hood, 234 ; is crowned, 240, 272 ;


in the womb wove itself a ves-
ture, 250 ; the power of the
Three Names, 270, 272 ; con-
cealed itself in the manhood,
306 ; God sent from, 308 ; the
Name of, 308 ; of Jesus was re-
vealed. 314.

Gold, its object in God's worship,

^ 254.

Goliath, type of world power, 188,
196, 207.

Grace, freeborn sister to Justice,
170 ; does not use compulsion,
185 ; in hidden mystery, 225,

^ 255.

Graffin, Dr. R., edits Aphrahat, 16.

Grape, a type of Christ, 224, 230,

^ 245, 249.

Graven images were worshipped,
213, 253, 254 ; no gods, 308.

Gregory of Nyssa, referred to, 121,
I33» 137 ; his collections upon
Ephraim, 124, 130, 137 ; his En-
cominm, 137, 138 ; probably could
not read Syriac, 137.

Ham, his undutiful action, 168, 210.

Haman, 211, 353.

Hananiah and his companions, 353,

400.
Hannah, mother of Samuel, 239, 242.
Harmodius, son of Bardesan, a

hymn writer, 130, 149 n. ; gave

Ephraim the idea, 130, 149 n.
Harmonius, 149 n.
Hearers, as catechumens, 274.
Heathenism, as a fever, 192, 324.
Hell, insatiable, 196 ; what it lost by

Jesus, 157.
Heresy in the Svrian Church, 120,

121, 125, 128, 129, 159.
Heretics named, 129, 131, 132, 136,

Tx ^59-

Herod, "the base fox," 237.

Herod (the Great), 246.

Hezekiah, King, 208, 353, 354 ; how
much he did for Israel, 398.

Hilary of Poitiers, 147 n.

Holy Ghost, typified, 223, 273 ; is
besought in meditation, 225 ; be-
come our robe, 255, 372 ; brooded
on the waters, 273, 129, 278 ; His
action in baptism, 273, 274, 277,
278, 372 ; as the Fire, 277 ; His
presence in the Resurrection,
372 ; His leaving a man, 373.

House in building a picture of Faith,
346,349.

Huns plundered Edessa, 131.

Hymnody for controversial pur-
poses, 129, 300 n. ; its place in
the Eastern Church, 147 ; the re-
lation of Syriac to Greek and
Roman, 148.

Hyrnns, the Nisibene, 125 ; Ephra-
im's, have touched all churches,
J47 ; early Greek, 148 n. ; Ephra-
im's, not of much literary va-
lue, 149.

Ibas, Bishop of Edessa, was Nesto-
rian, 159.

Idolatry in the wilderness, 298, 299,
307, 312 ; false worship is god-
less, 308.

Idols, were destroyed by Jovian, 121 ;
their worship, failed before the
Cross, 213 ; their worship was
discontinued, 218, 253, 254 ; their


430


EPHRAIM SYRUS AND APHRAHAT.


worship was met by the Infant's
birth, 252 ; their altar, 207 ; the
teraphim of Micah, 299.

Incense, as an oblation to God, 254.

Infant baptism, 279.

Irenaeus, 160.

Isaac, as a type of Christ, 239, 249,
268 ; saved from the knife by
Christ, 268.

Isaac, disciple of Ephraim, 126.

Isaac the Great, of Antioch, 154, 159.

Iscariot, the deceiver, 191, 195, 200 ;
was known to Christ, 195.

Isidore, of Seville, 147 n.


Jacob and Esau at their birth, 182.

Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis, 120, 121, 125
n., 139, 140, 141 n. ; patron of
Ephraim, 121, 123 ; used every
influence against the siege of
Nisibis, 123, 139 ; his death at
Nisibis, 123. 137, '141 n., 144 ;
was at the Nicsean Council, 123,
144, 145.

Jacob, a name given to Aphrahat,
152, 156.

Jacob, of Sarug, 155.

Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis, 151, 160 n,,
16 r, 187, 190 ; credited with the
works of Aphrahat, 153.

Jacob, of Tagrit, 155,

Jacob, Bishop of Mar Mathai.a name
of Aphrahat, 156, 158, 160.

Jacob, his vision of the ladder, 196 ;
his blessing, 223 ; and his flock,

274, 275
acobite communities, 147,
airus's daughter, 201, 205.
Taphet, 224.

avan, the children of, 356.
ehu, King, 207.
ephthah and his daughter, 202, 215 ;

what he did for Israel, 397.
Jeremiah, his firmness, 191, 211 ; his
moral teaching, 216, 218 ,275, 277 ;
was cast into the mire by the
people, 218, 277 ; sanctified in the
womb, 277.
Jericho, wasted by Joshua, 201.
Jerome referred to, 121, 125, 131 n.,

147 n., 154, 359 n.
Jerusalem in judgment, 393.
Jesus, the Bread of life, 259 ; the
blessing, of His Birth, 261 ; gave
true freedom, 254, 261, 262, 281,
351 ; His circumcision, 262, the
■ All-purifier, firstborn, 262, 280 ;
His Epiphany, 265 sq., 287 ; His
ascension, 265, 281, 382 ; the
Light-giver, 265, 266 ; His two
heralds, 265 ; His reign, 266 ; re-
ceived the chrism as Christ, ,270 ;
the power of His life, 271, 272,
280,309,310, 351; His parables
272, 360 ; value of His Incarna,
tion, 276, 280, 305, 306, 308, 310-
a devouring fire, 278 ; His bap;
tism in Jordan, 280, 281, 283, 284-
hymn of His baptism, 284 ; her;
esy against, 300 ; power of His
death on the Cross, 305, 306, 309,
331 ; was not crucilied by Death,
218 ; was Virgin-born in Beth-
lehem, 223, 231, 235, 237, 251, 287,
305, 306 i fulfilled prophecies,
223, 239, 254, 258 ; as God and a
babe, 223, 239, 242, 251, 252 ; His
generation without marriage,
223, 232, 244, 251, 252 ; celebra-


tion of His birthdav, 223 n'., 227,
229, 230, 235, 251. 252, 255 ; the
True One, 223, 266 ; force of the
Name, 22s, 259, 262 ; praises for
His birth, 227, 229, 230, 231, 232
sq., 243 sq. ; the richness of His
services to us, 227, 228, 238, 248,
305 ; the Physician and Medi,
cine, 225, 229, 230, 246, 247, 252
308, 323, 379 ; His days of re-
membrance, 230, 231 ; took our
human nature and body, 231,
232, 227 sq., 255, 256, 261, 305 ;
carried by Joseph, 233 ; older
than the oldest, 223 ; collection
of antinomies in, 232, 233, 250,
251, 267, 271, 272 ; a carpenter,

235, 239 ; called child of Joseph,

236, 255 ; called David's Son
and Mary's Lord, 236 ; the Lamb
of God, 232, 235, 237, 331 : the
Wise One, 238 ; the Merciful
One, 238 ; the Vine Cluster, 239 ;
like His Father, 240 ; types
among men, 240, 272 ; the Re-
surrection, 236, 241, 261, 262, 268,
280, 305, 310, 351, 372, 374 ; His
types of resurrection, 241 ; loving
as an infant, 243 ; is addressed
by His Mother, 245 ; His years
computed and numbered, 247,
266, 267 ; redeemed mankind
wdth His own Blood, 248, 306,
351 ; the Firstborn One, 250, 256,
261, 305 ; God in the world, 251 ;
in birth and death gave life, 251,

254. 255, 256, 261, 280, 305, 306 ;
sought for at His birth, 251 ;
Mercy, conceived and born. 253,

255, 256 ; Truth conceived and
born, 253, 266 ; His humiliation,
255. 256, 260, 276, 305, 369 ; the
firstborn of Mary, 255, 256, 305 ;
offspring of the Most High,
255 ; His birth gave spiritual
birth to man, 256, 280, 305 ; in-
fants w-ere slain for Him, 257 ;
our Emmanuel, 259 ; the Shep;
herd from Ephrata, 259, 260-
as seen in the Pearl, 293 n. ;
the effect of His Cross on hea-
thenism, 308 ; as God sent from
the Godhead, 308 ; the second
Adam, 309 ; His miracles upon
the dumb, deaf, etc., 309, 310, 323;
His miracles different from
those of others, 310, 323 ; His
power remained in the Apos-
tles, 310 ; His great Gifts, 310 ;
why He associated with sinners,
etc., 311 sq., 340 ; why feasted
with the Pharisees, 31 1 sq. ; why
received kindness from the
woman, a sinner, 310, 311, 312,
313, 314, 324; forgave sins, 313,
324, 325 ; proved God by forgiv-
ing, 313, 315; knew the Phari-
sees'inner thought, 314; showed
Himself more than a prophet,
311 sq. ; prayed for His cruci-
iiers, 315, 331 ; denounced woes
to His crucifiers, 316 ; His action
and appearance in St. Paul's con-
version, 3t6 sq. ; raised Lazarus,
323 ; had His feet anointed, 326 ;
was presented in the temple,
328 ; the Infant was clothed with
prophesy and priesthood, 329 ;
held the true priesthood, 330 ;
His kingdom, 361 ; His example,


369 ; lives in individuals, 370 ; the
Son of God, Demonstration up-
on, 387 sq.; the Bridegroom in
truth, 190 ; makes Satan, death,
and hell tremble, 193, 194 ; a
cause of offence to Satan, 104,
Son of Mary, 194, 195, 196, 197
199, 200, 202, 203, 205, 223, 232, 239,
241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 250, 253
255 ; His miracle at Cana, 194 ;
divine and human, 194, 195, 200,.
238, 239 n., 242, 250, 255, 266, 276.
300, 313, not liable to temptation
by lust, 194 ; the splendor of His
youth, 194, 243, 256, 266 ; His
"'conininnicatio idiomatiini," 195;.
death's conqueror, 196, 204, 205,
206, 241, 305, 306, 310, 331, 379
403, 474 ; His voice in liell and
the grave, 197 ; full of grace and
tender mercy, 199, 238, 243, 256,,
276, 280, 282, 310; firstborn of She-
ol, 200, 305 ; healed the paralytic^
201 ; preaches all grace, 202, 251
n. ; the carpenter's son, 202, 307 ;
seemed to be conquered by
death, 205, 310 ; gave sight, 200,.
310; His scourging, 211, 212;
revealed the truth to those in
error, 213 ; a babe in Egypt, 213,
246, 257.

Jesus, son of Nun, 201, 224 ; looked
for Jesus, 224.

Jethro, among the Hebrews, 187.

Jews, the apostacy in the wilderness^
307, 308, 312, 324 ; did not profit
by mere knowledge, 309 ; bribed
the Roman guard in vain, 319,
320 ; were heathen at heart,
307, 308, 319, 324 ; were long un-
^der afflictions, 395 ; cannot re-
'proach the Christians for suffer-

^ ing, 395-

Jezebel, 262, 211, 218.

Job, his afflictions, 177, 188, 203 207,
216, 250, 268, 335 ; covenant with
his eyes, 191.

John Baptist, as a torch, 191, 208,
211, 265 ; as a herald, 200, 234,
237, 265, 266, 286 ; his head given
in a charger, 250 ; as he bap-
tised, 273, 279 ; baptised Jesus,.
279, 280, 284 ; his littleness and
greatness, 281, 282 ; the treasurer
of baptism, 329.

Jonah, son of Amittai, 193, 209, 278.

Jonathan, without envy, 191.

Joseph, husband of Mary, 194, 233,
234 ; carried Jesus, 233, 334 ;
caressed his God, 235.

Joseph in Egvpt, the sons of, 188,
191, 207, 210, 246, 257, 335 ; type
of Christ, 300 n., 377, 385.

Joshua, name-sake of Jesus, 262 ;
laid his curse on Jericho, 277 ;
minister of Moses, 189 ; his work
for Israel, 397.

Joshua, an anchorite, 154.

Josiah, King, 208, 211, 398 ; how
much he did for Israel, 398.

Jovian, Emperor, 120, 124, 159, 144.

Judah, 240.

Judgment is for us all, 408.

Julian, disciple of Ephraim, 126.

Julian, (Emp.) 120, 123, 124, 132, I37»
140. T42 ;

sufferings of the Christians un-
der, 124, 142; his defeat and
death, 124, t;;2.

Julian the solitary, 125


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


431


Khabur (Chaboras), affluent of the

Euphrates, 123 n.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, 189,

200.

Lagarde, referred to, 164.

Lamb is sealed, 271.

Lamb, the, 232, 237, 249, 267 ; one

closed up for the Passover, 235 ;

the Paschal, 237, 249, 267 ; for

Isaac, 249.
Lamech looked for Jesus, 225.
Lamy as editing Ephraim's Coin-

iuciit(ni'ies, 147.
Land, Auccdota, 143 n.
Languages divided into tongues,

224.
Lazarus was raised, 201, 205, 219,

241 ; as type of resurrection,

241.
Leaven in silence, is Jesus, 213, 250 ;

as a Christian power, 250.
Legion, the evil one, 180, 267 ;sank

in the sea, 248.
Leper, was anointed, 202.
Light as a symbol of truth, etc.,

316.
Lily of Glory, 246.
Lot, 210, 275 ; his wife, 210 ; looked

for Christ in holiness, 224.
Love exchanged for strife, 299.

Magi and their gifts, 233, 244, 246,
251, 252, 256, 257, 258, 266, 287 ;
were hre worshippers, 253.

Malkite communities, 147.

Mammon be put to shame, 191.

Mamas, St., 127.

Man, disputes with Death, 218 ;
shall have life from the dead,
219 ; was worshipped, 253 ; not
compelled to sin, 254, 281 ;
always free, 281 ; is dealt with
morally by God, 281 ; cannot
look on God, 315, 316, 317; should
not be God's instructor, 318,

319. 320.

Manasseh lost his birthright, 200.

Manes, heretic, 159.

Manhood stamped with God's seal,
226.

Manichaean heresy, 129.

Maphrian, a Jacobite title, 157 n.

Mara, disciple of Ephraim, 126.

March as a symbol of Christianity,
230.

Marcionite heresy, 129, 159,

Maris, a Persian, Nestorian, 159.

Mar Jacob and his companion, 180.

Mar"Mathai, its Bishops and see,
158, 159 ; account of the monas-
tery, 158 ; Aphrahat its Bishop,
158, 159 ; its Bishop was metro-
politan of Nineveh, 158, 159.

Maro, Nestorian teacher of Edessa,

159-

Maromte communities, 147.

Marriage in purity, 332.

Martha of Bethany, 326.

Martyrdom, mother and her two
sons going to, 132, 144.

Mary, sister of Martha, 326.

Mary had the leaven of Abraham,
226 ; was mother in virginity,
198, 223, 232, 233, 234, 241, 242, 244,
251 ; the greatness of her privi-
lege shown, 223 sq., 232, 233, 234,
235, 239, 240, 24 f, 251, 252, 35\ 260,
305,306; mother of the human
nature, 235, 241 ; her son her


Lord, 236, 239 ; both mother and
sister, 241, 245 ; addresses the
Infant Jesus, 245, 246 ; her bap-
tism in water and blood, 245 ;
her meditation upon the Infant,
246 ; removed the reproach
of Eve, 254 ; gave the Sweet
Salt, 278.

Mary anointed Jesus, 270,

Melchizedech, expected Christ, 224 ;
a type of Christ, 240.

Men in sloth, 204 ; in anger, 204 ;
in secret sins, 204 ; are as Satan
and murderers, 214 ; were wor-
shipped, 253.

Mercy was conceived and born, 253,

255-

Metram or Metropolitan, 158.

Methuselah looked for the Son, 225.

Micah spoke of Christ, 259, 260.

Midian, the daughter of, 210.

Miracles are attributed to Ephraim,
112, 123, 126, 127, 131 ; the details
of Ephraim's miracles are con-
sidered, 138.

Miriam, Mariam, Maria, Mary, only
different forms, 396 n.

Moab, King of, and his son, 202,
215.

Modestus, Roman prefect, 132.

Monastery of the Theotokos, 141 n.,
142 ; its literary treasures, 141 n. ;
its tamarind tree, 142.

Monks, Demonstration of, 362 sq.

Moon-worshippers, 253.

Moral duties, 362, 363, 364, 368, 405.

Mordecai, 211, 400.

Mosquitoes, plague of, at Nisibis,
123, 136, 140.

Moses, 200, 207, 210, 213, 217, 234, 244,
249, 267, 272, 275, 276, 307, 324,
378 ; trod down the Egyptian,
201 ; translated Joseph's bones,
205, 216, 377 ; conquered by
death, 207 ; looked for Jesus,
224, 249 ; sweetened the waters,
265 ; at the Red Sea, 272 ;
ground the calf to powder, 307,
308, 312 ; retired, and the calf
was made, 312 ; the object of his
covenant, 299 ; was allowed in-
to God's presence and vision,
317; could not look upon The
Glory, 317, 319; his eyes shone
with glory, 317, 319 ; his shining
was a token to the people,
319 ; was threatened to be
stoned like a dog, 319; his
humility, 272, 322 ; had a
heathen people, 319, 320, 324;
was shepherd in Midian, 383,
385 ; his works for the Israelites,

3^A 397-
Mygdonius (laghjagh), the river at
Nisibis, 123 n., 139.

Naaman healed, 206, 269, 272.

Nabal, his reviling, 192, 208.

Naboth, 211, 218.

Nativity, the Hymns of, 223 ; its
word realization, 223 n., 255,
287, 256 ; celebration of the Day,
223 n., 230, 250, 255, 256, 257 ;
character of the night, 226 ; to
realise the marvel of, 255, 287,
288.

Neale's Hymns of the Eastern Church,
148.

Nebuchadnezzar, "that Babylo-
nian," 173.


Nestorian communities, 147 ; a tinge
of its teachings in Aphrahat's
writings, 159.

Nicaea and its Council, 159, 160.

Nineveh, its metropolitan, 158, 159 ;
repentance of its inhabitants,
169.

Nisan, the time of birds, 176 ; month
of the Paschal Lamb, 235 ;
month of Christ's Conception,
252.

Nisilis, thrice besieged, 120, 123, 137,
139, 140, 141 n., 144, 168, 171 sq.,
180 ; was taken by Sapor, the
Persian King, 120, 123, 124, 139,
140 ; its sieges confused in the
history, 139, 140, 141 n., 144 ; its
Bishops, 120, 121, 139, 140, 151,
186-7 ; addressed in its affliction
171, sq. ; called to sincere re-
pentance, 171 sq. ; its spiritual
degradation, 174, 180 ; its sad
condition, 177, 178, 180, 181 ;
likened to Sodom, 178 ; its three
lights, 180 ; stands upon her
river, i8r.

Nitrian Valley ascetics, 126 ; visited
by Ephraim, 126 ; its monas-
teries, 141 n. ; its MSS. 'collec-
tion, 161.

Noah, 167, 168, 210, 219, 224, 238 ;
his ark and its teaching, 167,
168 ; in Sheol, 219 ; his nakedness
covered, 224 ; longed for Jesus,
225.

Nonnus, Orthodox Bishop at Edes-
sa, 159.

Oil and its teaching, 269.
Onions and garlic, for food, 218.

Palladius, Historian, 121, 127 n., 128,

133-

Palm Sunday, 239 n.

Papas, the Catholicus, 156, 160, 161.

Paralytic, send to be cured, 131.

Parisot, Patr. Syr., 157 n.

Paschal Chroiifck, 129, 140, 141.

Patrons, Demonstration upon, 383
sq. ; place and duty, 383 sq.

Paul, his conversion at Damascus,
206, 316 sq. ; was blinded with
the glory, 316, 318, 319. 320 ;
taught by Jesus' calling him,
321 ; was taught by hearing and
being blinded, 321,322.

Paulinus, disciple of Ephraim, 126.

Pearl brought up from the sea, 275 ;
its purify, 275, 393 ; seven hymns
on, 293 ; its qualities and typo-
graphy, 293 sq. ; has beauty by
nature, 294 n.

Peleg, 224.

People are responsible for many
evils, 218.

Persian Sage, a name of Aphrahat,
150 j?q. ; " by name Pharhad,"
156.

Peshitto, its value, 119, 128, 153, 162;

Peter (Simeon, Simon), 191, 206.
raised a woman to life, 208 ;
cruciflcd head downward, 212 ;
cut off the servant's ear, 249,
268 ; in connection with the
Rock, 295 ; was a type of the
Christian"^ 298.

Pesoes, 127, 142, 143.

Pharaoh hardened himself, 178,
213, 248, 353.


432


EPHRAIM SYRUS AND APHRAHAT.


Pharisee was proved the greater
sinner, 326, 340.

Pharisees, were opposed to Christ,
196, 203, 311.312, 313, 314 sq.,
323 ; gave praise in Christ, 259,
314 ; why Jesus associated with
them, 311, 313 ; misjudged Jesus,

311, 312, 313. 314, 323, 324, 325 ;

entangled in their curiosity, 313,
314; had their inner thoughts
revealed, 314, 323 ; would not
believe, 322.

Philoxenus of Mabug, 157 n.

Phinehas, the zealous, 201.

Pilate, 277.

Poverty belongs to the monk, 334,
368 ; God's treasure, 334, 336,
368.

Prayer, resorted to, 172 sq. ; in the
soul, 334.

Preachers, selected by Jesus, 213.

Priests, the three, 180, 182, 190 ; as
shining lights, 193 ; make pro-
pitiation, 193 ; allied in office to
the kings, 193 ; offer to the
Father the Son of the Father,
260 ; their duty and privilege,
193, 260, 269, 271, 273, 276, 285 ;
were anointed under the Law,
266, 273 ; are daysmen of the
Lord,27i ; are daysmen between
two, 271 ; are cleansing souls,
281 ; are greater than John Bap-
tist, 282 ; their deterioration,
301.
Prophets and just men put to
death, 218 ; may have had days
of remembrance in the East,
231 n. ; prophesied of Christ,
258, 299.

Purity in the whole life, 332, 333.

Queen of Sheba, 295.

Rachel, wife of Jacob, 239.

Rahab and the scarlet thread, 224 ; a
type of Christ, 240, 299.

Real, as distinguished from typical,
231 n. 247.

Rebekah (Rebecca), 198, 239 ; her
desire for seed, 239.

Recipients, when baptized, 274.

Reeds, used in Egypt for writing,
300.

Rehoboam, 187.

Repentance, its importance, 170, 171,
330 sq. ; unavailing in Sheol,
216 ; rejoiced over by the
angels, 273.

Resurrection of the dead, homily
upon, 375 sq.

Resurrection of the body 197 sq.,
205, 215 sq., 375 ; against the
interests of Death, 197, 198, 200,
205, 209, 210, 215, 217, 218, 375 ;
was prophesied, 202 ; defies
even death, 210 ; full -of bless-
ing, 210, 215, 217,375 5 described
by Death, 215, 217 ; its seed
sown in Adam, 216, 375 ; some
of its types, 217, 218, 219 ; the
day of Christ's commemo-
rated, 230 ; Jesus the, 236, 241.

Theodoret, Historian, 121, 131 n.

140, 141.
Theophanes, Chronicles, 139, 141.
Theotokos, the Nitrian monastery

of, 141 n.


Thief on the Cross, 296 ; gained
Paradise, 256.

Thomas, a Cappadocian Saint, 127.

Thomas, St., the apostle, 131, 135 n.,
205 : slain in India, 205.

Tower of Babel, 224, 225.

Tree of Life, 224.

Trinity, the, 173, 190, 262, 270, 272,
282 ; the Key of the, 180.

True One, the, 223 ; His coming ex-
pected, 223, 224.

Types of the resurrection, 317.

Ritual, usages, 277.

Romans, counted as sons of Esau,
358 n.

Ruth, as a type, 223, 240 ; her glean-
ing, 241.

Sabbath, the rest of God, 261,299 ; a
feast for the land, 299.

Sacrifices discontinued, 213 ; as car-
ried out under the Law, 269,
270.

Sachau, referred to, 158 n.

Sadducees, 201.

Samaria, its teachings, 171, 173.

Samson, in jealousy, 175 ; named,

210, 242 ; that lion's whelp, 201,
208 ; his riddle, 202, 298 ; yoked
to the mill, 208 ; as a type, 298 ;

Samuel slew Agag, 201 ; the pro-
phet, 207, 218, 242.

Sapor, King of Persia, 120, 123 ;
siege and capture of Nisibis, 120,
123, 137, 141 ; takes Nisibis by
diverting the river, 137, 139,
141 n.

Sarah, wife of Abraham, 188, 239.

Satan and his armies, 193, 200 ; be-
fore Jesus, was terrified, 193,
240 ; the Evil One, 104, 210, 212,
213, 218, 219 ; complains about
Jesus, 194, 195, 203, 205, 213 ; dis-
putes with Death, 195, 199, 205,
206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 212 ; his
persistence, though bruised,
199 ; began to boast, 202 ; deals
with spells and divinations, 334 ;
works by patience, 204, 300 ;
consoles Death, 205 ; mocked by
Death, 210 ; is cursed by Death,

211, 212 ; was amazed at the sin-
ful woman's correction, 212, 213;
in presence of the crucifixion,
213 ; his role assumed by men,
214 ; laughs at the mourners,
216, 217 ; the fellow of Death,
218 ; strangled the little ones,
246 ; was worshipped as a god,
254; cursed Adam, 261 ; is the
darkness overcome by the light,
266 ; is subdued in baptism, 283;
plotted against Jesus, 300 ; was
strangled by the Truth, 299 ;
prompted the making of the
calf, 299 ; the prompter of evil,
strife and such, 204, 261, 299, 300,

Saul, the King, 201, 203,209, 211,318;

was anointed, 270.
Saul, the Apostle, at Damascus. 206,

316, 319, 320, 321 ; form of the

call, 320, 321.
Sealed, the, in baptism, 273.
Salt, the sweet, of the Gentiles, 226 ;

of the Christ, 245 ; of all the

faithful, 249 ; of the body and of

the soul, 268 ; the sweet, from

Mary, 278.


Seasons, symbolical of Christ, 230.
Seleucia, the Church of, 157, 158,

159.
Semha, 247, 266.
Sennacherib, the judgments on, 194,

353-

Serpent, lifted up, 224 ; trodden un-
der foot by Mary, 251, 261, 282.

Seth shadowed out the True One,
224 ; in Abel's stead,224; watched
for Jesus, 225.

Seven, the, referring to the .^ons,
of heresy, 130.

Sheaf, as a symbol of Christ, 230.

Sheba, queen of, 295.

Shem, 224.

Shemuni, the son of, 211.

Sheol robbed by Jesus, 198, 204, 205,
208, 209, 217, 219, 268, 305, 306 ;
hurt by Jesus' miracles, 202, 204,
306 ; is hated, 207 ; is full of
Sodomites, Assyrians, and such,
207 ; is filled by murderers, 214,
215 ; is full of hope in the resur-
rection, 217, 219, 268 ; the mill in
Sheol, 217 ; rest in Sheol, 217
218, 219.

Shepherds at Bethlehem, 237, 238 ;
and the sheep, 238, 270.

Siloam pool, 276.

Simeon, the Metaphrast, 121.

Simeon, the aged, 234, 236, 327, 328.

Simeon, disciple of Ephraim, 126.

Simeon, of Beth-Arsam, 159 n.

Simon, the Pharisee, 311 sq., 322.

Sin, as seen in different nations,
299 ; forgiven by Jesus, 313.

Sin, as personified, 193, 210 ; more
to be considered than mourn-
ing for the dead, 216 ; forgiven
in baptism, 271 sq.

Sinful woman corrected, 212, 310,
311 ; how one of the debtors,
311, 312, 326 ; how well Jesus
knew her, 311, 312 ; her dispute
with Satan, 338, 339 ; her at-
tempts at reformation, 337, 339 ;
had her alabaster box of oint-
ment, 337 ; homily upon, 336 sq.

Socrates, Historian, 121, 131 n. ; his
value as a historian, 132.

Sodom, a type of Nisibis, 178.

Sodomites in judgment, 194, 224,

393-
Solomon, a builder of idol altars,

207, 211.
Son of God in the likeness of God,

171 ; as seen in the Pearl, 293,

294 ; His Incarnation, 305 sq. ;

departed from being with Deity,

305 ; took up his abode in the

Virgin, 305 ; convicted idolatry

of falsehood, 308.
Sozomen, Historian, 122, 128, 131 n.
Star, the, as Christ, 256, 257, 258, 259,

289.
Stibium, 337.

Sticks, the two of the Cross, 212.
Slavery preferred to freedom, 246 n.
Sloth is condemned by Death and

Satan, 209.
Smith, Dr. Payne Smith, 138.
Stone, as a figure of Christ, 296, 297,

346, 347-
Sun-worshippers, 177, 253.
Sun as a person, 193 ; as giving more

light at Christmas, 235 n. ; a

type of Christ, 280.
Syriac. literature and its character,

119, 146; history, an outline of,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


453


121 ; writing tends towards am-
plification, 146 ; hymns, not suit-
able for Greek reproduction,
148, 150 ; their versification, 148,
150 ; theology had its centre in
Edessa, 159, 160 ; MSS. in the
Nitrian monasteries, 161.

Tatian's, Diatessaron, 147
Teraphim of Micah, 299.
Thamar (Tamar), as a type, 223, 240,

244, 245.

Valens, Emperor, 131, 132,142, 144,
145 ; persecuted the Edessepes,

143, 144- ,
Valentmian, heresy, 159.

Valesius, an authority referred to,

141 n.
Valgesh, Bishop of Nisibis, 139, 140,

141, 151, 187, 190, 191, 193 ; his

state, 141 n.
Vine and Vineyard, their teaching,

267.
Virgin, the, 198, 232, 239, 241, 242,

244, 245, 250, 251, 252, 287, 288 ;

brought forth Immanuel in


Bethlehem, 222, 242 ; mother

and sister, 241 ; addresses the

Babe, 244, 245 ; conceived by

the Spirit, 246.
Virgins, the consecrated, 191, 368,
Virginity brought forth, 232, 241 ; of

Eve, and her shame, 246.
Vision given to the solitary about

Ephraim, 125, 138 ; others, 126,

I3«.

Wars, homily upon, 352 ; the result

of evil, 352.
Water, as a symbol in baptism, 230,

271, 274, 276, 279 ; its spiritual

power, 271, 272, 273, 274, 279 ;

and spirit in baptism, 274, 279,
Wakefulness for objects, good and

baa, 225.
Wine, its use and teaching, 231, 230,

232, 234, 245, 270.
Winter, a symbol of Christ, 230.
Wise man's watching, 226.
Watching for various reasons, 225,

235 ; righteous or unrighteous,

226 ; of a wise man, 226.
Watchers, the, 172, 197, 218, 219, 225,


230, 250, 251, 252, 255, 260. 266,
278, 283, 289 ; watches for Jesus,
225, 260'; the Angels, 225, 250,
251, 255, 283, 289 ; sang a new
song at Christmas, 250, 260.
Widow's son raised, 204, 205, 218,

244.
Woman, a penitent when Basil

died, 132.

Woman, who was a sinner, 269,
310, 311, 312, 313 sq., 323,324;
who had an issue of blood, 310.

Women, Hebrew, ate their chil-
dren, 218.

Worshippers of sun, moon, fire,
men and images 253, 266.

Wright, Apocryphal Acts, 149 n., 124,
155 n., 157 ; assistant keeper of
the British Museum, 161.

Zaccheus, chief of extortioners, 213,

326.
Zacharias, father of the Baptist, 235,

237.
Zenobius, disciple of Ephraim, 126,

159.
Zimri and Cozbi, 201.
Zipporah, 244.


BRIGH AM YOUNG .VNiy.^i;^,^,^!


3 1197 20692 5460


- 'ifi


Date Due

All library items are subject to recall at any time.

APR 2 9 7nn8

APR 1 fe Lm

?\n 1 ^ ?rirH

NOV 1 5 2008

Brigham Young University

I 'ft:',- ••• ..■• • ... ji


> Vi-.


sS^!<'f^.--


■■^•i


'y-^^ i> ::.%:,


■;!C-^


;<J"^


Sif;.


!,?>f y 1. iU


?^:^


h^j*^*:^


vj'o'ri'. ;


■r-^'.
