Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 1, Vol. 1: The Confessions and Letters of St. Augustine, with a Sketch of his Life and Work
Philip Schaff (ed.), various translators (1886)
Source: Internet Archive
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

A SELECT LIBRARY


OF THE


NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS


OF


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.


EDITED BY

PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LLD.,

PROFESSOR IN THE UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, NEW YORK,
IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE AND AMERICA.


VOLUME I.

THE CONFESSIONS AND LETTEI^S OF ST. AUGUSTIN,
WITH A SKETCH OF HIS LIFE AND WORK.


BUFFALO:

THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.

1886.


V f.

THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.


(( SE? 2 5 1363 I


^<^h


8 1} U 5 5 5


ELECTROTYPED AND PRINTED

BY RAND AVERY COJIPANV,

BOSTON.


PREFACE.


Encouraged by the assured co-operation of competent Patristic scholars of Great Britain
and the United States, I have undertaken the general editorship of a Select Library of the
NicENE AND PosT-NiCENE FATHERS OF THE CHRISTIAN Church. It is to embrace in about
twenty-five large volumes the most important works of the Greek Fathers from Eusebius to Pho-
tius, and of the Latin Fathers from Ambrose to Gregory the Great.

The series opens with St. Augustin, the greatest and most influential of all the Christian
Fathers. Protestants and Catholics are equally interested in his writings, and most of all in his
Confessions, which are contained in this volume. They will be followed by the works of St.
Chrysostom, and the Church History of Eusebius.

A few words are necessary to define the object of this Library, and its relation to similar
collections.

My purpose is to furnish ministers and intelligent laymen who have no access to the original
texts, or are not sufficiently familiar with ecclesiastical Greek and Latin, with a complete apparatus
for the study of ancient Christianity. Whatever may be the estimate we put upon the opinions
of the Fathers, their historical value is beyond all dispute. They are to this day and will con-
tinue to be the chief authorities for the doctrines and usages of the Greek and Roman Churches,
and the sources for the knowledge of ancient Christianity down to the age of Charlemagne.
But very few can afford to buy, or are able to use such collections as Migne's Greek Patrology,
which embraces 167 quarto volumes, and Migne's Latin Patrology which embraces 222 volumes.

The three leaders of the now historic Anglo-Catholic movement of Oxford, Drs. Pusey, New-
man, and Keble, began, in 1837, the publication of "^ Library of Fathers of the Holy Catholic
Church, anterior to the JDivisioti of the East and West. Translated by Members of the English
Church''' Oxford (John Henry Parker) and London (J. G. F. & J. Rivington). It is dedicated to
"William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England." The editors were aided by
a number of able classical and ecclesiastical scholars. Dr. Pusey, the chief editor and proprietor,
and Dr. Keble died in the communion of the church of their fathers to which they were loyally
attached ; Dr. Newman alone remains, though no more an Anglican, but a Cardinal of the
Church of Rome. His connection with the enterprise ceased with his secession (1845).

The Oxford Library was undertaken not so much for an historical, as for an apologetic and
dogmatic purpose. It was to furnish authentic proof for the supposed or real agreement of the
Anglo-Catholic school with the faith and practice of the ancient church before the Greek schism.
The selection was made accordingly. The series embraces 48 vols. It is very valuable as far as it


vi PREFACE.


goes, but incomplete and unequal. Volume followed volume as it happened to get ready. An
undue proportion is given to exegetical works ; six volumes are taken up with Augustin's Com-
mentary on the Psalms, six with Gregory's Commentary on Job, sixteen with Commentaries of
Chrysostom ; while many of the most important doctrinal, ethical, and historical works of the
Fathers, as Eusebius, Basil, the two Gregorys, Theodoret, Maximus Confessor, John of Damas-
cus, Hilary, Jerome, Leo the Great, were never reached.

In 1866, Mr. T. Clark, Lord Provost of Edinburgh, and an Elder in the Free Church of
Scotland, who has done more than any publisher for the introduction of German and other for-
eign theological literature to the English reading community, began to issue the valuable "■ Ante-
Nicene Christian Library,'' edited by Rev. Alexander Roberts, D. D., and James Donaldson,
LL. D., which was completed in 1872 in 24 volumes, and is now being republished, by arrange-
ment with Mr. Clark, in America in 8 volumes under the editorship of Bishop A. Cleveland
Coxe, D. D. (1884— 1886). Mr. Clark, in 1871, undertook also the publication of a translation
of select works of St. Augustin under the editorial care of Rev. Marcus Dods, D. D., of Glas-
gow, which was completed in 15 volumes. The projected translation of Chrysostom was
abandoned from want of encouragement.

Thus Episcopal divines of England, and Presbyterian divines of Scotland have prepared the
way for our American enterprise, and made it possible.

We must also briefly mention a similar collection which was prepared by Roman Catholic
scholars of Germany in the interest of their Church, namely the Bibliothek der Kirchenvater.
Auswahl der vorziiglichsten patristischen Werke in deutscher Uebersetzung, herausgegeben unter der
Oberleitung von Dr. Valentin Thalhofer (^Domdekan tmd Prof, der Theol. in Eichstdtt, formerly
Professor in Munich). Kempten., Koselsche Buchhandlung. 1 869-1 886. Published in over
400 small numbers, three or four of which make a volume. An alphabetical Index vol. is now
in course of preparation by Ulrich Uhle (Nos. 405 sqq.). The series was begun in 1869 by
Dr. Fr. X. Reithmayr, Prof, of Theol. in Munich, who died in 1872. It embraces select
writings of most of the Fathers. Seven volumes are devoted to Letters of the Popes from Linus
to Pelagius II. (A. D. 67-590).

"The Christian Literature Company," who republish Clark's "Ante-Nicene Library," asked
me to undertake the editorship of a Nicene and Post-Nicene Library to complete the scheme.
Satisfactory arrangements have been made with Mr. Clark and with Mr. Walter Smith, repre-
senting Dr. Pusey's heirs, for the use of their translations, as far as our plan will permit. With-
out such a preliminary arrangement I would not have considered the proposal for a moment.

I have invited surviving authors of older translations to revise and edit their work for the
American series, and I am happy to state that I received favorable replies. Some of them are
among the list of contributors, others (including Cardinal Newman) have, at least, expressed a
kindly interest in the enterprise, and wish it success.

The Nicene and Post-Nicene Library will be more complete and more systematic as well as
much cheaper than any which has yet appeared in the English language. By omitting the volu-
minous Patristic commentaries on the Old Testament we shall gain room for more important and
interesting works not embraced in the Oxford or Edinburgh series ; and by condensing three or
more of these volumes into one, and counting upon a large number of subscribers, the publishers


PREFACE. vli


think themselves justified in offering the Library on terms which are exceedingly liberal, consid-
ering the great expense and risk. It will be published in the same handsome style and at the
same price per volume ($3) as their Ante-Nicene Library.

For further particulars, I beg leave to refer the reader to the prospectus which is annexed to
this volume.

May the blessing of the Great Head of the Church accompany and crown this work,

PHILIP SCHAFF.

New York, October, 1SS6.


AUTHORIZATION OF MESSRS. T. & T. CLARK.


^57-t>'


AUTHORIZATION OF MR. WALTER SMITH.


34.K|NGi STREET.

COVEMT GARDEN,
LONDON.


CONTENTS.


PAGE

I. PROLEGOMENA : St. Augustin's Life and Work.

By Philip Schaff, D. D 1-27

Chapter L — Literature i

Chapter IL — Sketch of the Life of St. Augustin 5

Chapter IIL — Estimate of St. Augustin 9

Chapter IV. — Writings of St. Augustin 12

Chapter V. — The Influence of St. Augustin upon Posterity and his Relation

to Catholicism and Protestantism 12

Chief Events in the Life of St. Augustin 25

II. THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN :

Translated by J. G. Pilkington, M. A. . . , 27

Translator's Preface 29

St. Augustin's Opinion on his Confessions 23

The Confessions 45

III. THE LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN:

Translated by J. G. Cunningham, M. A 209

Translator's Preface . • • 211

The Letters 219

ix


X


PROLEGOMENA.


ST. AUGUSTIN'S LIFE AND WORK.

FROM SCHAFF'S CHURCH HISTORY, REVISED EDITION.

New York 1884. Vol. III. 988-1028.
Revised and enlarged with additions to literature till 1886.

CHAPTER \.— Literature.

I. SOURCES.

Augustin's Works. S. Aurelii Augustini Hippoiiensis episcopi Opera . . . Post Lovaniensium theolo-
goruvi recensioneni [which appeared at Antweip in 1577 in II vols.], castigatus [referring to tomus primus, etc.]
denuo ad MSS. codd. Gallicanos, etc. Opera et studio monackorum ordinis S. Benedicti e congregatione S. Mauri
[Fr. Delfau, Th. Blampin, P. Constant, and CI. Guesnie]. Paris, 1679-1700, il torn, in 8 fol. vols. The same
edition reprinted, with additions, at Antwerp, 1700-1703, 12 parts in 9 fol.; and at Venice, l729-'34, in II tom. in
8 fol. (this edition is not to be confounded with another Venice edition of 1756— '69 in 18 vols. 4to, which is full
of printing errors) ; also at Bassano, 1807, in 18 vols.; by Gmime fr aires, Paris, 1836— '39, in 11 tom. in 22 parts
(a very elegant edition); and lastly byy. P. Aligne, Petit-Montrouge, 1841-49, in 12. tom. ("Patrol. Lat." tom.
xxxii.-xlvii.). Migne's edition gives, in a supplementary volume (tom. xii.), the valuable Notitia literaria de vita,
scriptis et editionibus Aug. from Schonemann's " Bibliotheca historico-literaria Patrum Lat." vol. ii. Lips. 1794,
the VindicicB Augustiniamz of Cardinal NoRis (NoRlsius), and the writings of Augustin first published by Fontanini
and Angelo Mai. So far the most complete and convenient edition.

But a thoroughly reliable critical edition of Augustin is still a desideratum and will be issued before long by a
number of scholars under the direction of the Imperial Academy of Vienna in the " Corpus Scriptoi^um ecclesiasti-
corum Latinorum."

On the controversies relating to the merits of the Bened. edition, which was sharply criticized by Richard Simon,
and the Jesuits, but is still the best and defended by the Benedictines, see the supplementary volume of Migne,
xii. p. 40 sqq., and Thuillier : Histoire de la nouvelle id. de S. Aug. par les PP. Benedictins, Par. 1736.

The first printed edition of Augustin appeared at Basle, i489-'95 ; another, in 1509, in 11 vols.; then the edition
of Erasmus published by Frobenius, Bas. 1528-29, in 10 vols., fol. ; the Editio Lovaniensis, of sixteen divines of
Louvain, Antw. 1577, in 11 vols, and often reprinted at Paris, Geneva, and Cologne.

Several works of Augustin have been often separately edited, especially the Confessions and the City of God.
Compare a full list of the editions down to 1794 in Schonemann's Bibliotheca, vol. ii. p. 73 sqq. ; for later editions
see Brunet, Manuel du libraire, Paris i860, tom. I. vol. 557-567. Since then WiLLlAM Bright (Prof, of
Ecclesiast. Hist, at Oxford) has published the Latin text of Select Ayiti- Pelagian Treatises of St. Aug. and the Acts
of the Second Council of Orange. Oxford (Clarendon Press) 18S0. With a valuable Introduction of 68 pages.

English translations of select works of Augustin are found in the " Oxford Library of the Fathers," ed. by Drs.
Pusey, Keble, and Newman, viz.: The Confessions, vol. i., 1838, 4th ed., 1853; Sermons on the N. T., vol. xvi.,
1844, and vol. xx. 1845 > Short Treatises, vol. xxii., 1847 ; Exposition of the Psalms, vols, xxiv., xxv., xxx., xxxii.,
xxxvii., xxxix., 1847, 1849, 1850, 1853, 1S54; Homilies on John, vols. xxvi. and xxix., 1848 and 1849. Another
translation by Marcus Dods and others, Edinb. (T. & T. Clark), 1871-76, 15 vols., containing the City of God, the
Anti-Donatist, the Anti- Pelagian, the Anti- Manichaean writings. Letters, On the Trinity, On Christian Doctrine,
the Enchiridion, On Catechising, On Faith and the Creed, Commentaries on the Sermon on the Mount, and the
Harmony of the Gospels, Lectures on John, and Confessions. There are several separate translations and editions of
the Confessions : the first by Sir Tobias Matthews (a Roman Catholic), 1624, said, by Dr. Pusey, to be very inaccurate

I


PROLEGOMENA.


and subservient to Romanism ; a second by Rev. W. Watts, D. D., 1631, 1650; a third by Abr. Woodhead (only
the first 9 books). Dr. Pusey, in the first vol. of the Oxford Library of the Fathers, 1838 (new ed. 1883), republished
the translation of Watts, with improvements and explanatory notes, mostly borrowed from Dubois's Latin ed. Dr.
Shedd's edition, Andover, i860, is a reprint of Watts (as republished in Boston in 1S43), preceded by a thoughtful
introduction, pp. v.-xxxvi. H. de Romestin translated minor doctrinal tracts in Saint Augustin. Oxford 1885.

German translations of select writings of Aug. in the Kempten Bibliothek der Kirchenvater, 1 871-79, 8 vols.
There are also separate translations and editions of the Coifessions (by Silbert, 5th ed., Vienna, 1861 ; by Kautz,
Arnsberg, 1840; by Groninger, 4th ed., Miinster, 1859; by Wilden, Schaffhausen, 1865; by Rapp, 7th ed., Gotha,
1878), of the Enchiridion, the Meditations, and the City of God [Die Stadt Gottes, by Silbert, Vienna, 1827, 2 vols.).

French translations : Les Confessions, hy Dubois, Paris, 16S8, 1715) I75^> 1776, and by Janet, Paris, 1857 ; anew
translation with a preface by Abbe de la Mennais, Paris, 1822, 2 vols. ; another by L. Moreau, Paris, 1854. La
Cite de Dieii, by Emile Saisset, Paris, 1855, witR introd. and notes, 4 vols.; older translations by Raoul de Prsesles,
Abbeville, i486; Savetier, Par. 1531 ; P. Lombert, Par. 1675, and 1701; Abbe Goujet, Par. 1736 and 1764, re-
printed at Bourges 1818 ; L. Moreau, with the Latin text, Par. 1846, 3 vols. Les SoliloqHes,hy Pelissier, Paris,
1853. Les LettreSfhy Poujoulat, Paris, 1858,4 vols. Le Manuel, by d'Avenel, Rennes, 1861.

II. BIOGRAPHIES,

PossiDius (Calamensis episcopus, a pupil and friend of Aug.) : Vita Augustini (brief, but authentic, written 432,
two years after his death, in torn. x. Append. 257-280, ed. Bened., and in nearly all other editions).

Benedictini Editores : Vita Aiigiistini ex ejus potissiiman scriptis concinnata, in 8 books (veiy elaborate and
extensive), in torn. xi. 1-492, ed. Bened. (in Migne's reprint, tom. i. col. 66-578).

The biographies of Aug. by Tillemont {Mem. tom. xiii.) ; Ellies Dupin (in " Nouvelle biblioth^que des auteurs
ecclesiastiques," tom. ii. and iii.) ; P. Bayle (in his " Dictionnaire historique et critique," art. Augustin); Remi
Ceillier (in " Histoire generale des auteurs sacres et eccles.," vol. xi. and xii.) ; Cave (in " Lives of the Fathers,"
vol. ii.); Kloth [Der heil Aug., Aachen, 1840, 2 vols.); BoHRINGER {Kirchengeschichte iti Biographien, vol. i.
P. iii. p. 99 sqq., revised ed. Leipzig, l877-'78, 2 parts) ; PoujOULAT {Histoi?-e de S. Aug. Par. 1843 and 1852, 2
vols.; the same in German by Fr. Ilurter, Schafih. 1847, 2 vols.); Eisenbarth (Stuttg. 1853); C. Bindemann
[Der heil. Aug. Berlin, 1844, '55, '69, 3 vols., the best work in German) ; Edw. L. Cutts [St. Augustin, London,
1880) ; E. DE Pressense (in Smith and Wace, " Dictionary of Christ. Biogr." I. 216-225) \ ^^- ScHAFF (.S"^. Augus-
tin, Berlin, 1854; English ed. New York and London, 1S54, revised and enlarged in St. Augustin, Melanchthon
and Neattder; three biographies. New York, and London, 1886, pp. I-106). On Monnica see Braune: Monnica
utid Augustin. Grimma, 1846.

III. SPECIAL TREATISES ON THE SYSTEM OF AUGUSTIN.

(i) The Theology of Augustin. The Church Histories of Neander, Baur, Hase (his large work, 1885, vol. I.
514 sqq.), and the Doctrine Histories of Neander, Gieseler, Baur, Hagenbach, Shedd, Nitzsch, Schwane,
Bach, Harnack (in preparation, first vol., 1886).

The voluminous literature on the Pelagian controversy embraces works of G. J. Voss, Qarnier, Jansen (died
1638; Augustinus, 1 640, 3 vols.; he read Aug. twenty times and revived his system in the R. Cath. Church, but
was condemned by the Pope), Cardinal NoRiS [LListoria Pelagiana, Florence, 1673), Walch [Kctzergeschiihte,
vols. IV. and V., 1768 and 1770), Wiggers [Augustinismus und Pelagianismus, 1821 and 1833), Bersot [Doctr. de
St. Aug. sur la libertk et la Providence, Paris, 1843), Jacobi [Lehre des Pelagius, 1842), Jul. MtJLLER [Lehre von
der Si'inde, 5th ed. 1866, Engl, transl. by Urwick, 1868), jNIgzley [Augustiuian Doctrine of Predestination, London,
1855, very able), W. Bright (Introduction to his ed. of the Anti-Pelag. writings of Aug. Oxford 1880), and others.
See ScHAFF, vol. III. 783-785.

Van Goens : De Aur. August, apologeta, sec. I. de Civitate Dei. Amstel. 1838.

NiRSCHL (Rom. Cath.). Ursprung und IVesen des Bosen nach der Lehre des heil. Augustin. 1854.

F. RiBBECK : Donatus und Augustinus, oder der erste entscheidende Kampf zwischen Separatismus und Kirche,
Elberfeld, 1858, 2 vols.

Fr. Nitzsch : Augtistin^ s Lehre vom Wunder. Berlin, 1865.

Gang.auf : Des heil. August. Lehre von Gott de?n dreieinigen. Augsburg, 1 866. Emil Feuerlein : Ueher die
Stellung Attgusfin's in der ICirchen^=ttnd Kulturgeschichte, in Sybel's " Histor. Zeitschrift " for 1869, vol. XI.
270-313. Naville : Saint Augustin, Etude sur le developpement de sa pensee. Geneve, 1872. Ernst : Die
Werke und Tugenden der Unglaubigen nach Augustin. Freiburg, 1872. Aug. Dorner (son of Is. A. D.) : Augus-
tinus, sein theol. System und seine religionsphilosophische Anschauung. Berlin, 1873 (comp. his art. in Herzog's
" Encycl." 2d ed. I. 781-795, abridged in Schaff-Herzog I. 174 sqq.). Ch. H. Collett: St. Aug., a Sketch of
his Life and Writings as affecting the controversy with Rome. London, 1883. H. Reuter (Prof, of Church


PROLEGOMENA.


Histor)^ in Gottingen) : Augtistinische Studicn, in Brieger's " Zeitschrift fiir Kirchengeschichte," for i88o-'86 (sev-
eral aiticles on Aug.'s doctrine of the church, of predestination, the kingdom of God, etc., — very valuable).

(2) The Philosophy of Augustin is discussed in the larger Histories of Philosophy by Brucker, Tennemann,
RlXNER, H. RiTTER (vol. vi. pp. 153-443), Erdmann [Grundriss der Gesch. der Philos. I. 231 sqq.), Ueberweg
{^Ilist. of Philos., transl. by Morris, New York, vol. I. 333-346); PraNTL [Geschichfe der Logik im Abendlande,
Leipzig, 1853,1.665-672); Huber i^Philosophie der Kirchenvdter, Miinchen, 1859), and in the following special works :

Theod. Gangauf : Aletaphysische Psychologie des heil. Aitgustimis. iste Abtheilung, Augsburg, 1852. T.
Thery : Le ghiie philosophiqice et litteraire de saint Atigustin. Par. 1 86 1. AbbepLOTTES: Etudes siir saint Aug.,
son genie, son ame, sa philosophie. Montpellier, 1S61. NoURRlSSON : La philosophie de saint Augustin [ouvrage
couronne par t Institut de France), deuxieme ed. Par. 1866, 2 vols. Reinkens : Geschichtsphilosophie des Aug.
Schaffhausen, 1866. Ferr.\z : De la psychologie de S. Augustin, 2d ed. Paris, 1869. SCHUTZ : Augustinum non
esse ontologum. Monast. 1S67. A. F. Hewitt : The Problems of the Age, with Studies in St. Augustin. New
York, 1868. G. Loesche: De Augustino Plotinizante. Jenae, 1880 (68 pages).

(3) On Aug. as a Latin author see Bahr : Geschichte der rom Literatur, Suppl. H. Ebert : Geschichte der
lafein. Literatur (Leipzig, 1874, I. 203 sqq.). ViLLEMAiN : Tableau de Peloquetice chritienne au IV^ siecle (Paris,
1849).

CHAPTER II.— A Sketch of the Life of St. Augustin.

It is a venturesome and delicate undertaking to write one's own life, even though that life be
a masterpiece of nature and the grace of God, and therefore most worthy to be described. Of
all autobiographies none has so happily avoided the reef of vanity and self-praise, and none has
won so much esteem and love through its honesty and humility as that of St. Augustin.

The "Confessions," which he wrote in the forty-fourth year of his life, still burning in the
ardor of his first love, are full of the fire and unction of the Holy Spirit. They are a sublime
composition, in which Augustin, like David in the fifty-first Psalm, confesses to God, in view of
his own and of succeeding generations, without reserve the sins of his youth ; and they are at
the same time a hymn of praise to the grace of God, which led him out of darkness into light,
and called him to service in the kingdom of Christ.^ Here we see the great church teacher of
all times " prostrate in the dust, conversing with God, basking in his love ; his readers hovering
before him only as a shadow." He puts away from himself all honor, all greatness, all merit,
and lays them gratefully at the feet of the All-merciful. The reader feels on every hand that
Christianity is no dream nor illusion, but truth and life, and he is carried along in adoration of
the wonderful grace of God.

AuRELius AuGUSTiNUS, bom on the 13th of November, 354,^^ at Tagaste, an unimportant
village of the fertile province of Numidia in North Africa, not far from Hippo Regius, inherited
from his heathen father, Patricius,* a passionate sensibility, from his Christian mother, Monnica
(one of the noblest women in the history of Christianity, of a highly intellectual and spiritual
cast, of fervent piety, most tender affection, and all-conquering love), the deep yearning towards
God so grandly expressed in his sentence : " Thou hast made us for Thyself, and our heart is
restless till it rests in Thee. ' ' * This yearning, and his reverence for the sweet and holy name of
Jesus, though crowded into the background, attended him in his studies at the schools of
Madaura and Carthage, on his journeys to Rome and Milan, and on his tedious wanderings
through the labyrinth of carnal pleasures, Manichsean mock-wisdom. Academic skepticism, and
Platonic idealism ; till at last the prayers of his mother, the sermons of Ambrose, the biography

1 Augustin himself says of his Confessions : " Con/essionum mearum libri tredecim et de malis et de bonis meis Deunt laudant
justum et hovian, atqtie in eutn excitant humanum intellectutn et affectum." Retract. 1. ii. c. 6. He refers to his Confessions also
in his Epiftola ad Darium, Ep. CCXXXI. cap. 5 ; and in his De dono perseverantice, cap. 20 (53).

2 He died, according to the Chronicle of his friend and pupil Prosper Aquitanus, the 28th of August, 430 (in the third month of the
siege of Hippo by the Vandals) ; according to his biographer Possidius he lived seventy-six years. The day of his birth Augustin
states himself, De vita beata, § 6 (torn. i. 300) : " Idibus Novembris mihi natalis dies erat."

'^ He received baptism shortly before his death.

< Conf. i. I : " Fecisti nos ad Te, et inqriietuin est cor nostrutn, donee requiescat in Te." In all his aberrations, which we would
hardly know, if it were not from his own free confession, he never sunk to anything mean, but remained, like Paul in his Jewish
fanaticism, a noble intellect and an honorable character, with burning love for the true and the good.


PROLEGOMENA.


of St. Anthony, and, above all, the Epistles of Paul, as so many instruments in the hand of the
Holy Spirit, wrought in the man of three and thirty years that wonderful change which made
him an incalculable blessing to the whole Christian world, and brought even the sins and errors
of his youth into the service of the truth. ^

A son of so many prayers and tears could not be lost, and the faithful mother who travailed
with him in spirit with greater pain than her body had in bringing him into the world,^ was
permitted, for the encouragement of futute mothers, to receive shortly before her death an answer
to her prayers and expectations, and was able to leave this world with joy without revisiting her
earthly home. For Monnica died on a homeward journey, in Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber,
in her fifty-sixth year, in the arms of her son, after enjoying with him a glorious conversation
that soared above the confines of space and time, and was a foretaste of the eternal Sabbath-rest
of the saints. If those moments, he says, could be prolonged for ever, they would more than
suffice for his happiness in heaven. She regretted not to die in a foreign land, because she was
not far from God, who would raise her up at the last day. "Bury my body anywhere," was
her last request, "and trouble not yourselves for it; only this one thing I ask, that you
remember me at the altar of my God, wherever you may be." ^ Augustin, in his Confessioris,
has erected to Monnica a noble monument that can never perish.

If ever there was a thorough and fruitful conversion, next to that of Paul on the way to
Damascus, it was that of Augustin, when, in a garden of the Villa Cassiciacum, not far from
Milan, in September of the year 386, amidst the most violent struggles of mind and heart — the
birth-throes of the new life — he heard that divine voice of a child: "Take, read! " and he
"put on the Lord Jesus Christ" (Rom. xiii. 14). It is a touching lamentation of his: "I
have loved Thee late, Thou Beauty, so old and so new ; I have loved Thee late ! And lo !
Thou wast within, but I was without, and was seeking Thee there. And into Thy fair creation I
plunged myself in my ugliness ; for Thou wast with me, and I was not with Thee ! Those
things kept me away from Thee, which had not been, except they had been in Thee ! Thou
didst call, and didst cry aloud, and break through my deafness. Thou didst glimmer, Thou
didst shine, and didst drive away my blindness. Thou didst breathe, and I drew breath, and
breathed in Thee. I tasted Thee, and I hunger and thirst. Thou didst touch me, and I burn
for Thy peace. If I, with all that is within me, may once live in Thee, then shall pain and
trouble forsake me ; entirely filled with Thee, all shall be life to me."

He received baptism from Ambrose in Milan on Easter Sunday, 387, in company with his
friend and fellow-convert Alypius, and his natural son Adeodatus {given by God). It impressed
the divine seal upon the inward transformation. He broke radically with the world; abandoned
the brilliant and lucrative vocation of a teacher of rhetoric, which he had followed in Rome and
Milan ; sold his goods for the benefit of the poor ; and thenceforth devoted his rare gifts
exclusively to the service of Christ, and to that service he continued faithful to his latest breath.
After the death of his mother, whom he revered and loved with the most tender affection, he
went a second time to Rome for several months, and wrote books in defence of true Christianity
against false philosophy and against the Manichgean heresy. Returning to Africa, he spent
three years, with his friends Alypius and Evodius, on an estate in his native Tagaste, in contem-
plative and literary retirement.

Then, in 391, he was chosen presbyter against his will, by the voice of the people, which, as

1 For particulars respecting the course of Augustin's life, see my work above cited, and other monographs. Comp. also the fine
remarks of Dr. Baur in his posthumous Lectttres on Doctrine- History {1866), vol. i. Part ii. p. 26 sqq. He compares the development
of Augustin with the course of Christianity from the beginning to his time, aud draws a parallel between Augustin and Origen.

2 Conf. ix c. 8 : " Quce me parttirinit et carne, nt in hanc iemporalem. et corde, ut in ceternam hicem nascerer." L. v. 9 : " Non
eniin satis eloquor, quid erga me hahebat animi, et quanta majore soUicitudine me parturiebat spiritu, quam came pepererat."
In De dona persev. c. 20, he ascribes his conversion under God " to the faithful and daily tears" of his mother.

•• Conf. 1. ix. c. II : " Tantttm illud vos rogo. tit ad Domini a/fare memineritis mei, Jibi /ueritis ." This must be explained from
the already prevailing custom of offering prayers for the dead, which, however, had rather the form of thanksgiving for the mercy of
God shown to them, than the later form of intercession for them.


PROLEGOMENA.


in the similar cases of Cyprian and Ambrose, proved to be the voice of God, in the Numidian
maritime city of Hippo Regius (now Bona) ; and in 395 he was elected bishop in the same city.
For eight and thirty years, until his death, he labored in this place, and made it the intellectual
centre of Western Christendom.^

His outward mode of life was extremely simple, and mildly ascetic. He lived with his clergy
in one house in an apostolic community of goods, and made this house a seminary of theology,
out of which ten bishops and many lower clergy went forth. Females, even his sister, were
excluded from his house, and could see him only in the presence of others. But he founded
religious societies of women ; and over one of these his sister, a saintly widow, presided.- He
once said in a sermon, that he had nowhere found better men, and he had nowhere found worse,
than in monasteries. Combining, as he did, the clerical life with the monastic, he became
unwittingly the founder of the Augustinian order, which gave the reformer Luther to the world.
He wore the black dress of the Eastern coenobites, with a cowl and a leathern girdle. He lived
almost entirely on vegetables, and seasoned the common meal with reading or free conversation,
in which it was a rule that the character of an absent person should never be touched. He had
this couplet engraved on the table :

" Quisquis amaf dictis absefituin rode7-e vitam,
Hanc mensani vetitatn noverit esse sibi.'"

He often preached five days in succession, sometimes twice a day, and set it as the object of
his preaching, that all might live with him, and he with all, in Christ. Wherever he went in
Africa, he %vas begged to preach the word of salvation.* He faithfully administered the external
affairs connected with his office, though he found his chief delight in comtemplation. He was
specially devoted to the poor, and, like Ambrose, upon exigency, caused the church vessels to be
melted down to redeem prisoners. But he refused legacies by which injustice was done to
natural heirs, and commended the bishop Aurelius of Carthage for giving back unasked some
property which a man had bequeathed to the church, when his wife unexpectedly bore him
children.

Augustin's labors extended far beyond his little diocese. He was the intellectual head of the
North African and the entire Western church of his time. He took active interest in all theo-
logical and ecclesiastical questions. He was the champion of the orthodox doctrine against
Manichsean, Donatist, and Pelagian. Li him was concentrated the whole polemic power of the
catholic church of the time against heresy and schism ; and in him it won the victory over them.

In his last years he took a critical review of his literary productions, and gave them a thorough
sifting in his Retractations. His latest controversial works, against the Semi-Pelagians, written
in a gentle spirit, date from the same period. He bore the duties of his ofiice alone till his
seventy-second year, when his people unanimously elected his friend Heraclius to be his assistant.

The evening of his life was troubled by increasing infirmities of body and by the unspeakable
wretchedness which the barbarian Vandals spread over his country in their victorious invasion,

1 He is still known among the inhabitants of the place as " the great Christian " (Rumi Kebir). Gibbon (ch. xxxiii. ad ann. 430)
thus describes the place which became so famous through Augustin : " The maritime colony of Hippo, about two hundred miles west-
ward of Carthage, had formerly acquired the distinguishing epithet of Regius, from the residence of the Numidian kings ; and some
remains of trade and populousness still adhere to the modern city, which is known in Europe by the corrupted name of Bona." Sal-
lust mentions Hippo once in his history of the Jugurthine War. A part of the wealth with which Sallust built and beautified his
splendid mansion and gardens in Rome, was extorted from this and other towns of North Africa while governor of Numidia. Since
the French conquest of Algiers Hippo Regius was rebuilt under the name of Bona and is now one of the finest towns in North Africa,
numbering over 10,000 inhabitants, French, Moors, and Jews.

2 He mentions a sister, " soror mea, sancta proposita " \tnonasteri{\, without naming her, Epist. 211, n. 4 (ed. Bened.), alias Ep.
109. He also had a brother by the name of Navigius.

*Possidius says, in his Vita Aug. : " Ceeteriim episcopatu suscepto tnulto instantius ac ferventiiis , majore auctoritate , non in una
tantutn regione, sed ubicunque rogatus venisset, verbum salutis alacriter, ac suaviter pullulante atque crescente Domini ecclesia,
prcedicavit."


PROLEGOMENA.


destroying cities, villages, and churches, without mercy, and even besieging the fortified city of
Hippo. ^ Yet he faithfully persevered in his work. The last ten days of his life he spent in close
retirement, in prayers and tears and repeated reading of the penitential Psalms, which he had
caused to be written on the wall over his bed, that he might have them always before his eyes.
Thus with an act of penitence he closed his life. In the midst of the terrors of the siege and
the despair of his people he could not suspect what abundant seed he had sown for the future.

In the third month of the siege of Hippo, on the 28th of August, 430, in the seventy-sixth
year of his age, in full possession of his faculties, and in the presence of many friends and
pupils, he past gently and peacefully into that eternity to which he had so long aspired. " O
how wonderful," wrote he in his Meditations^ "how beautiful and lovely are the dwellings of
Thy house. Almighty God ! I burn with longing to behold Thy beauty in Thy bridal-chamber.
O Jerusalem, holy city of God, dear bride of Christ, my heart loves thee, my soul has
already long sighed for thy beauty ! . . . The King of kings Himself is in the midst of
thee, and His children are within thy walls. There are the hymning choirs of angels, the
fellowship of heavenly citizens. There is the wedding-feast of all who from this sad earthly
pilgrimage have reached thy joys. There is the far-seeing choir of the prophets ; there the
company of the twelve apostles ; there the triumphant army of innumerable martyrs and holy
confessors. Full and perfect love there reigns, for God is all in all They love and praise, they
praise and love Him evermore. . . . Blessed, perfectly and forever blessed, shall I too be, if,
when my poor body shall be dissolved, ... I may stand before my King and God, and
see Him in His glory, as He Himself hath deigned to promise : ' Father, I will that they also
whom Thou hast given Me be with Me where I am ; that they may behold My glory which I had
with Thee before the world was.'" This aspiration after the heavenly Jerusalem found grand
expression in the hymn De gloria et gaudiis Paradisi :

" Ad perennis viicefontem mens sativit aridaP

It is incorporated in the Meditations of Augustin, and the ideas originated in part with him, but
were not brought into poetical form till long afterwards by Peter Damiani.^

He left no will, for in his voluntary poverty he had no earthly property to dispose of, except
his library ; this he bequeathed to the church, and it was fortunately preserved from the depre-
dations of the Arian barbarians.*

Soon after his death Hippo was taken and destroyed by the Vandals.' Africa was lost to the
Romans. A few decades later the whole West-Roman empire fell in ruins. The culmination of
the African church was the beginning of its decline. But the work of Augustin could not perish.
His ideas fell like living seed into the soil of Europe, and produced abundant fruits in nations
and countries of which he had never heard.*

1 Possidius, c. 28, gives a vivid picture of the ravages of the Vandals, which have become proverbial. Comp. also Gibbon, ch. xxxiii.

2 I freely combine several passages.

3 Comp. Opera, torn. vi. p. 117 (Append.) ; Daniel: Thesaurus hyinnol. i. 116 sqq., and iv. 203 sq., and Mone : Lat. Hyinner, i.
422 sqq., jNIone ascribes the poem to an unknown writer of the sixth century, but Trench [Sacred Latin Poetry, 2d ed., 315) and others
attribute it to Cardinal Peter Damiani, the friend of Pope Hildebrand (d. 1072). Augustin wrote his poetrj' in prose.

< Possidius says. Vita, c. 31 : " Testamentum nullum fecit, quia unde facer et, pauper Dei noti habuit. Ecclesice bibliothecant
otnnesque codices diligenter posteris custodiendos semper jubebai."

5 The inhabitants escaped to the sea. There appears no bishop of Hippo after Augustin. In the seventh century the old city was
utterly destroyed by the Arabians, but two miles from it Bona was built of its ruins. Comp. Tillemont, xiii. 945, and Gibbon, ch.
xxxiii. Gibbon says, that Bona, " in the sixteenth century, contained about three hundred families of industrious, but turbulent
manufacturers. The adjacent territory' is renowned for a pure air, a fertile soil, and plenty of exquisite fruits." Since the French
conquest of Algiers, Bona was rebuilt in 1832, and is gradually assuming a French aspect. It is now one of the finest towns in
Algeria, the key to the province of Constantine, has a public garden, several schools, considerable commerce, and a population of
over ten thousand of French, Moors, and Jews, the great majority of whom are foreigners. The relics of St. Augustin have been
recently transferred from Pavia to Bona. See the letters of abbe Sibour to Poujoulat sur la translation de la relique de saint
Augustin de Pavie a Hippone , in Poujoulat's Histoire de saint Augustin, tom. i. p. 413 sqq.

6 Even in Africa Augustin's spirit reappeared from time to time notwithstanding the barbarian confusion, as a light in darkness, first
in ViGiLius, bishop of Thapsus, who, at the close of the fifth century, ably defended the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity and the
person of Christ, and to whom the authorship of the so-called Athanasian Creed has sometimes been ascribed ; in Fulgentius,


PROLEGOMENA.


CHAPTER III.— Estimate of St. Augustin.

Augustin, the man with upturned eye, with pen in the left hand, and a burning heart in the
right (as he is usually represented), is a philosophical and theological genius of the first order,
towering like a pyramid above his age, and looking down commandingly upon succeeding
centuries. He had a mind uncommonly fertile and deep, bold and soaring ; and with it, what
is better, a heart full of Christian love and humility. He stands of right by the side of the
greatest philosophers of antiquity and of modern times. We meet him alike on the broad
highways and the narrow footpaths, on the giddy Alpine heights and in the awful depths of
speculation, wherever philosophical thinkers before him or after him have trod. As a theologian
he is facile princeps, at least surpassed by no church father, schoolman, or reformer. With royal
munificence he scattered ideas in passing, which have set in mighty motion other lands and later
times. He combined the creative power of TertuUian with the churchly spirit of Cyprian, the
speculative intellect of the Greek church with the practical tact of the Latin. He was a
Christian philosopher and a philosophical theologian to the full. It was his need and his delight
to wrestle again and again with the hardest problems of thought, and to comprehend to the utmost
the divinely revealed matter of the faith. ^ He always asserted, indeed, the primacy of faith,
according to his maxim: Fides prcBcedit intellectum ; appealing, with theologians before him, to
the well known passage of Isaiah vii. 9 (in the LXX.) : ^^ Nisi credideritis, non inteiiigetis.'" *
But to him faith itself was an acting of reason, and from faith to knowledge, therefore, there
was a necessary transition.^ He constantly looked below the surface to the hidden motives of
actions and to the universal laws of diverse events. The Metaphysician and the Christian
believer coalesced in him. His meditatio passes with the utmost ease into oratio, and his oratio
into meditatio. With profundity he combined an equal clearness and sharpness of thought.
He was an extremely skilful and a successful dialectician, inexhaustible in arguments and in
answers to the objections of his adversaries.

He has enriched Latin literature with a greater store of beautiful, original, and pregnant
proverbial sayings, than any classic author, or any other teacher of the church.*


bishop of Ruspe, one of the chief oppon^ts of Semi-Pelagianism, and the later Arianism, who with sixty catholic bishops of Africa
was banished for several years by the Aiian Vandals to the island of Sardinia, and who was called the Augustin of the sixth century
(died 533) ; and in Facundus of Hermiane (died 570), and Fulgentius Ferrandus, and Liberatus, two deacons of Carthage, whO'
took a prominent part in the Three Chapter controversy.

1 Or, as he wrote to a friend about the year 410, Epist. 120, c. i, | 2 (torn. ii. p. 347, ed. Bened. Venet. ; in older ed., ^/. 122) : " Ut
quod credis intelligas . . . non tit fidein respuas, sed ea gutB fidei firtnitate jam tenes, etiam rationis luce conspicias." He-
continues, ibid. c. 3 : "Absit nainque, ut hoc in nobis Deus oderit, in quo nos reliquis animalibus excellentiores creavit. Absii,
inquam, ut idea credamus, ne rationem accipiamus vel quaramus ; cum etiam credere non possemus, nisi rationales aninias haber-
emus." In one of his earliest works, Contra Academ. 1. iii. c. 20, § 43, he says of himself : " Ita sum affectus, ut quid sit verujn non
credendo solum, sed etiam inielligendo apprehendere impaiienter desiderem."

S'Eai' mr) 7ri<rTeu<7-r)Te, ouSe \i.r\ <ruv7)Te. But the proper translation of the Hebrew is : "If ye will not believe [in me, ^3 for '3],
surely ye shall not be established (or, not remain)."

3 Comp. De prad. sand. cap. 2, g 5 (tom. x. p. 792) : " Ipsum credere nihil aliud est quam cum assensione cogitare. Non enim
omnis qtii cogitat, credit, cum idea cogitant, plerique ne credant ; sed cogitat omnis qui credit, et credendo cogitat et cogitando
credit. Fides si non cogitetur, nulla est." Ep. 120, cap. i, g 3 (tom. ii. 347), and Ep. 137, c. 4, g 15 (tom. ii. 408) : " Intellectui ftdes
aditum apcrit, infidclitas claudit" Augustin's view of faith and knowledge is discussed at large by Gangauf, Metaphysische Psy
chologie dc's heil. Augzistinus, i. pp. 31-76, and by Nourrisson, La philosophic de saint Augustin, tom. ii. 282-290.

, * Prosper Aquitanus collected in the year 450 or 451 from the works of Augustin 392 sentences (see the Appendix to the tenth vol.
of the Bened. ed. p. 223 sqq., and in Migne's ed. of Prosper Aquitanus, col. 427-496), with reference to theological purport and the
Pelagian controversies. We recall some of the best which he has omitted :

" Novutu Testamenttan ill Vetere latct, I'etus in Novo patet."

" Distingue tempora, et concordabit Scriptura."

" Cor 7iostrum inquietum est, donee requiescat in Te."

" Da qjiodjubes, etjube quod vis."

" Non vincit nisi Veritas, victoria veritatis est caritas."

" Ubi amor, ibi trinitas."

" Fides prcecedit intellectum."

" Deo servire vera libertas est."

" Nulla in/elicitas /rangit , quent felicitas nulla corriimpit."

The famous maxim of ecclesiastical harmony : " In necessariis unitas^in dubiis (or, non necessartis) libertas, in omnibus {in
uirisque) caritas," — which is often ascribed to Augustin, dates in this form not from him, but from a much later period. Dr. LtJCKB


8 PROLEGOMENA.


He had a creative and decisive hand in ahiiost every dogma of the Latin church, completing
some, and advancing others. The centre of his system is the free redeeming grace of God
IN Christ, operating through the actual, historical church. He is evangehcal or
Pauhne in his doctrine of sin and grace, but cathohc (that is, old-cathohc, not Roman Cathohc)
in his doctrine of the church. The Pauline element comes forward mainly in the Pelagian con-
troversy, the catholic-churchly in the Donatist ; but each is modified by the other.

Dr. Baur incorrectly makes freedom the fundamental idea of the Augustinian system. But
this much better suits the Pelagian ; while Augustin started (like Calvin and Schleiermacher) from
the idea of the absolute dependence of man upon God. He changed his idea of freedom
during the Pelagian controversy. Baur draws an ingenious and suggestive comparison
between Augustin and Origen, the two greatest intellects among the church fathers. " There is
no church teacher of the ancient period," says he,^ " who, in intellect and in grandeur and con-
sistency of view, can more justly be placed by the side of Origen than Augustin ; none who,
with all the difference in individuality and in mode of thought, so closely resembles him. How
far both towered above their times, is most clearly manifest in the very fact that they alone, of
all the theologians of the first six centuries, became the creators of distinct systems, each pro-
ceeding from a definite idea, and each completely carried out ; and this fact proves also 'how
much the one system has that is analogous to the other. The one system, like the other, is
founded upon the idea oi freedom ; in both there is a specific act, by which the entire develop-
ment of human life is determined ; and in both this is an act which lies far outside of the
temporal consciousness of the individual ; with this difference alone, that in one system the act
belongs to each separate individual himself, and only falls outside of his temporal life and
consciousness ; in the other, it lies within the sphere of the temporal history of man, but is only
the act of one individual. If in the system of Origen nothing gives greater offence than the
idea of the pre-existence and fall of souls, which seems to adopt heathen ideas into the Christian
faith, there is in the system of Augustin the same overleaping of individual life and conscious-
ness, in order to explain from an act in the past the present sinful condition of man ; but the
pagan Platonic point of view is exchanged for one taken from the Old Testament.
What therefore essentially distinguishes the system of Augustin from that of Origen, is only this :
the fall of Adam is substituted for the pre-temporal fall of souls, and what in Origen still wears
a heathen garb, puts on in Augustin a purely Old Testament form."

The learning of Augustin was not equal to his genius, nor as extensive as that of Origen and
Eusebius, but still considerable for his time, and superior to that of any of the Latin fathers,
with the single exception of Jerome. He had received in the schools of Madaura and Carthage
the usual philosophical and rhetorical preparation for the forum, which stood him in good stead
also in theology. He was familiar with Latin literature, and was by no means blind to the
excellencies of the classics, though he placed them far below the higher beauty of the Holy
Scriptures. The Hortensius of Cicero (a lost work) inspired him during his university course
with enthusiasm for philosophy and for the knowledge of truth for its own sake ; the study of
Platonic and Neo-Platonic works (in the Latin version of the rhetorician Victorinus) kindled in
him an incredible fire ; ^ though in both he missed the holy name of Jesus and the cardinal
virtues of love and humility, and found in them only beautiful ideals without power to conform

(in a special treatise on the antiquity of the author, the original form, etc., of this sentence, Gottingen, 1850) traces the authorship to
Rupert Meldenius, an irenical German theologian of the seventeenth century. Baxter, also, who lived during the intense conflict of
English Puritanism and Episcopacy, and grew weary of the " fury of theologians," adopted a similar sentiment. The sentence is
held by many who differ widely in the definition of what is " necessary " and'what is " doubtful." The meaning of " charity in all
things" is above doubt, and a moral duty of every Christian, though practically violated by too many in all denominations.

1 Vorlesungen iiber die christl. Do^iengeschichte, vol. I. P. II. p. 30 sq.

^Adv. Academicos, 1. ii. c. 2, g 5 : " Etiam mihi ipsi de me incredibile incendiutn concitarunt ." And in several passages of the
Civitas Dei (viii. 3-12 ; x.xii. 27) he speaks very favourably of Plato, and also of Aristotle, and thus broke the way for the high authority
of the Aristotelian philosophy with the scholastics of the middle age.


PROLEGOMENA.


him to them. His City of God, his book on heresies, and other writings, show an extensive
knowledge of ancient philosophy, poetry, and history, sacred and secular. He refers to the
most distinguished persons of Greece and Rome ; he often alludes to Pythagoras, Plato, Aris-
totle, Plotin, Porphyry, Cicero, Seneca, Horace, Vergil, to the earlier Greek and Latin fathers,
to Eastern and Western heretics. But his knowledge of Greek literature was mostly derived
from Latin translations. With the Greek language, as he himself frankly and modestly con-
fesses, he had, in comparison with Jerome, but a superficial acquaintance.^ Hebrew he did not
understand at all. Hence, with all his extraordinary familiarity with the Latin Bible, he made
many mistakes in exposition. He was rather a thinker than a scholar, and depended mainly on
his own resources, which were always abundant.

Notes. — We note some of the most intelligent and appreciative estimates of Augustin. Erasmus {Ep. dedicat.
ad Alfons. archiep. Tolet. 1529) says, with an ingenious play upon the name Aurelius Augustinus : " Quid habet
orbis ckrutianus hoc scriptore inagis aiiretim vcl aiigustius ? ttt ipsa vocabula nequaqtiani fortiiito, scd numinis pro-
videntia videantur indita viro. Auro sapientiis iiihil pretiosius : fulgore eloquentia: cum sapientia conjunctcE nihil
mirabilius. . . . Non arbitror alium esse doctorefn, in quern opulenttcs ille ac benignus Spiritus dotes suas omnes
largius effuderit, quam in Augustinum" The great philosopher Leibnitz [PrccfaL ad Thcodic. \ 34) calls him
"virum sane magnum et ingenii stupendi," and " vastissimo ingenio prceditum." Dr. Baur, without sympathy with
his views, speaks enthusiastically of the man and his genius. Among other things he says ( Vorlesungen ilber Dog-
mengeschichte, i. i. p. 61) : "There is scarcely another theological author so fertile and withal so able as Augustin.
His scholarship was not equal to his intellect; yet even that is sometimes set too low, when it is asserted
that he had no acquaintance at all with the Greek language ; for this is incoiTect, though he had attained no great
proficiency in Greek." C. Bindemann (a Lutheran divine) begins his thorough monograph (vol. i. preface) with
the well-deserved eulogium : " St. Augustin is one of the greatest personages in the church. He is second in im-
portance to none of the teachers who have wrought most in the church since the apostolic time; and it can well be
said that among the church fathers the first place is due to him, and in the time of the Reformation a Luther alone,
for fulness and depth of thought and grandeur of character, may stand by his side. He is the summit of the devel-
opment of the mediaeval Western church ; from him descended the mysticism, no less than the scholasticism, of the
middle age ; he was one of the strongest pillars of the Roman Catholicism, and from his works, next to the Holy
Scriptures, especially the Epistles of Paul, the leaders of the Reformation drew most of that conviction by which a
new age was introduced." Staudenmaier, a Roman Catholic theologian, counts Augustin among those minds in
which an hundred others dwell [Scotus Erigena, i. p. 274). The Roman Catholic philosophers A. Gunther and
Th. Gangauf, put him on an equality with the greatest philosophers, and discern in him a providential personage
endowed by the Spirit of God for the instruction of all ages. A striking characterization is that of the Old Catholic
Dr. Huber (in his instructive work : Die Philosophic der Kirchenvater, Munich, 1859, p. 312 sq.) : "Augustin is a
unique phenomenon in Christian history. No one of the other fathers has left so luminous traces of his existence.
Though we find among them many rich and powerful minds, yet we find in none the forces of personal character,

1 It is sometimes asserted that he had no knowledge at all of the Greek. So Gibhon, for example, says (ch. xxxiii.) : " The
superficial learning of Augustin was confined to the Latin language." But this is a mistake. In his youth he had a great aversion to
the glorious language of Hellas because he had a bad teacher and was forced to it [Con/, i. 14). He read the writings of Plato in a Latin
translation (vii. 9). But after his baptism, during his second residence in Rome, he resumed the study of Greek with greater zest, for
the sake of his biblical studies. In Hippo he had, while presbyter, good opportunity to advance in it, since his bishop, Aurelius, a
native Greek, understood his mother tongue much better than the Latin. In his books he occasionally makes reference to the Greek.
In his work Contra Jul. i. c. 6 § 21 (tom. x. 510), he corrects the Pelagian Julian in a translation from Chrj'sostom, quoting the original.
" Effo ipsa verba Groeca guos a Joanne dicta sunt ponam : hia. tovto koi to TraiSta jSan-Ti'^onev, (caiToi aiiapTi^fiara ovk exovra, guod
est Latine : Idea et infantes baptizamus, quatnvis peccata non kabentes." Julian had freely rendered this : " cum non sint coinguinati
peccato," and had drawn the inference : " Sanctus Joannes Constantinopolitanus [John Chrysostom] negat esse in parvulis originate
peccatum." Augustin helps himself out of the pinch by arbitrarily supplying /ro/r/a to ajiopT^nara, so that the idea of sin inherited
from another is not excluded. The Greek fathers, however, did not consider hereditary corruption to be proper sin or guilt at all, but
only defect, weakness, or disease. In the City of God, lib. xix. c. 23, he quotes a passage from Porphyrin's (.k Koyioiv <JiAoo-o(|)ia, and
in book xviii. 23, he explains the Greek monogram ixi>i»s. He gives the derivation of several Greek words, and correctly distingtiishes
between such synonyms as yeri/aw and ti'ktoj, evxT ^"'^ Trpoo-cvx"?, nvorj and n-i/eOjiia. It is probable that he read Plotin, and the
Panarion of Epiphanius or the summary of it, in Greek (while the Church History of Eusebius he knew only in the translation of
Rufinus). But in his exegetical and other works he very rarely consults the Septuagint or Greek Testament, and was content with
the very imperfect Itala, or the improved version of Jerome (the Vulgate). The Benedictine editors overestimate his knowledge of
Greek. He himself frankly confesses that he knew ver>- little of it. De Trinit. 1. iii. Procem. (" GraceccE lingitce non sit nobis tantus
habitus, ut talium rerum libris legendis et intelligendis ullo tnodo reperiamur idonei"), and Contra literas Petiliani (written in
400), 1. ii. c. 38 (" Et ego quidem Graecoe lingttte perparum assecutus sum,et prope nihiV). On the philosophical learning of Augustin
may be compared Nourrisson, /. c. ii. p. 92 sqq.


lO PROLEGOMENA.


mind, heart, and will, so largely developed and so harmoniously working. jVo one surpasses him in wealth of per-
ceptions and dialectical sharpness of thoughts, in depth and fervour of religious sensibility, in greatness of aims and
energy of action. He therefore also marks the culmination of the patristic age, and has been elevated by the
acknowledgment of succeeding times as the first and the universal church father. — His whole character reminds us
in many respects of Paul, with whom he has also in common the experience of being called from manifold eiTors
to the service of the gospel, and like whom he could boast that he had laboured in it more abundantly than all the
others. And as Paul among the Apostles pre-eminently determined the development of Christianity, and became,
more than all others, the expression of the Christian mind, to which men ever afterwards return, as often as in the
life of the church that mind becomes turbid, to draw from him, as the purest fountain, a fresh understanding of the
gospel doctrine, — so has Augustin turned the Christian nations since his time for the most part into his paths, and
become pre-eminently their trainer and teacher, in the study of whom tlwy always gain a renewal and deepening of
their Christian consciousness. Not the middle age alone, but the Reformation also, was ruled by him, and whatever
to this day boasts of the Christian spirit, is connected at least in part with Augustin." Villemain, in his able and
eloquent "Tableau de V eloquence Chretienne au IV^ siiclc" (Paris, 1849, P- 373)> commences his sketch of Augus-
tin as follows: "Notts arrivons a Thonime le plus itonnant de P Eglise latiiie, d celui qui portat le plus d imagination
dans la theologie, le plus d'' Eloquence et mhtie sensibility dans la scholastique ; ce fut saint Atigustin. Do7inez-hd un
autre siecle, placez-le dans meilliure civilisation; et jamais ho?m7ie 71' aura paru doue d'un genie plus vaste et plus
facile. Metaphysique, histoire, antiquites, science des moers, connaissance des a)-ts, Augustin avait tout evibrasse. II
icrit stir la musiqtie comme sur le libre arbitre ; il explique le phenomene intellectual la de memoir e, cotnme ilraisonne
sur la decadence de V empire rom-ain. Soti esprit stibtil et vigouretix a sotivent consume dans des problemes mystiques
une force de sagacite qtu siiffirait aux plus sublimes conceptions." Frederic Ozanam, in his "La civilisation au
cinqiiierne siecle" (translated by A. C. Glyn, 1868, Vol. I. p. 272), counts Augustin among the three or four gi-eat
metaphysicians of modern times, and says that his task was " to clear the two roads open to Christian philosophy
and to inaugurate its two methods of mysticism and dogmatism." NouRRlssoN, whose work on Augustin is
clothed with the authority of the Institute of France, assigns to him the first rank among the masters of human
thought, alongside of Plato and Leibnitz, Thomas Aquinas and Bossuet. "Si une critiqtie toujotirs respectuetise,
tnais dune inviolable sincerite, est tine des formes les plus hautcs de P admiration, j' estitne, au contraire, n'' avoir fait
qtHexalter ce grand coeiir^ ce psychologue consolant et imtt, ce tnitaphysicien subtil et sublime, en tin mot, cet attachant
et poHiqtie ghiie, dont la place reste marquee, ati premier rang, parmi les maitres de la pensee htimaine, a coti de
Platon et de Descartes, d'Aristote et de saint Thomas, de Leibnitz et de Bossuet.'" [La philosopkie de saint Augustin,
Par. 1866, torn. i. p. vii.) Pressense (in art. Aug., in Smith & Wace, Diet, of Christ. Biography, I. 222) : "Aug.
still claims the honour of having brought out in all its light the fundamental doctrine of Christianity ; despite the errors
of his system, he has opened to the church the path of every progress and of every reform, by stating with the utmost
vigour the scheme of free salvation which he had learnt in the school of St. Paul." Among English and American
writers. Dr. Shedd, in the Introduction to his edition of the Confessiotts (i860), has furnished a truthful and forcible
description of the mind and heart of St. Augustin. I add the striking judgment of the octogenarian historian Dr. Karl
Hase [Kirschengeschichte atif der Grundlage akademischer Vorlesungen, Leipzig 1885, vol. I. 522): "The full
significance of Augustin as an author can be measured only from the consideration of the fact that in the middle ages
both scholasticism and mysticism lived of his riches, and that afterwards Luther and Calvin drew out of his fulness.
We find in him both the sharp understanding which makes salvation depend on the clearly defined dogma of the
church, and the loving absorption of the heart in God which scarcely needs any more the aid of the church. His
writings reflect all kinds of Christian thoughts, which lie a thousand years apart and appear to be contradictions.
How were they possible in so systematic a thinker ? Just as much as they were possible in Christianity, of which he
was a microcosmus. From the dogmatic abyss of his hardest and most illiberal doctrines arise such liberal sentences
as these : ' Him I shall not condemn in whom I find any thing of Christ ; ' ' Let us not forget that in the very enemies
are concealed the future citizens.' "

CHAPTER lY.—TJie Writings of St. Augustin.

The numerous writings of Augustin, the composition of which extended through four and
forty years, are a mine of Christian knowledge, and experience. They abound in lofty ideas,
noble sentiments, devout effusions, clear statements of truth, strong arguments against error,
and passages of fervid eloquence and undying beauty, but also in innumerable repetitions,
fanciful opinions, and playful conjectures of his uncommonly fertile brain. ^

1 Ellies Dupin {BibliotMque ecclesiastique, torn. iii. i" partie, p. 8i8) and Nourrisson (/. c. torn. ii. p. 449) apply to Augustin the
term magnus opinator, which Cicero used of himself. There is, however, this important difference that Augustin, along with his many-
opinions on speculative questions in philosophy and theology, had very positive convictions in all essential doctrines, while Cicero was
a mere eclectic in philosophy.


PROLEGOMENA. 1 1


His style is full of life and vigour and ingenious plays on words, but deficient in simplicity,
purity and elegance, and by no means free from the vices of a degenerate rhetoric, wearisome
prolixity, and from that vagabimda loquacitas, with which his adroit opponent, Julian of Eclanum,
charged him. He would rather, as he said, be blamed by grammarians, than not understood by
the people ; and he bestowed little care upon his style, though he many a time rises in lofty
poetic flight. He made no point of literary renown, but, impelled by love to God and to the
church, he wrote from the fulness of his mind and heart. ^ The writings before his conversion,
a treatise on the Beautiful (^De Pulchro et Aptd), the orations and eulogies which he delivered as
rhetorician at Carthage, Rome, and Milan, are lost. The professor of eloquence, the heathen
philosopher, the Manichaean heretic, the sceptic and free thinker, are known to us only from his
regrets and recantations in the Confessions and other works. His literary career for us com-
mences in his pious retreat at Cassiciacum where he prepared himself for a public profession of
his faith. He appears first, in the works composed at Cassiciacum, Rome, and near Tagaste, as
a Christian philosopher, after his ordination to the priesthood as a theologian. Yet even in
his theological works he everywhere manifests the metaphysical and speculative bent of his mind.
He never abandoned or depreciated reason, he only subordinated it to faith and made it subser-
vient to the defence of revealed truth. Faith is the pioneer of reason, and discovers the territory
which reason explores.

The following is a classified view of his most important works. ^

I. Autobiographical works. To these belong the Cojifessions and the Retractations ; the
former acknowledging his sins, the latter retracting his theoretical errors. In the one he subjects
his life, in the other his writings, to close criticism ; and these productions therefore furnish the
best standard for judging of his entire labours.*

The Confessions are the most profitable, at least the most edifying, product of his pen ;
indeed, we may say, the most edifying book in all the patristic literature. They were accord-
ingly the most read even during his lifetime,* and they have been the most frequently published
since. ^ A more sincere and more earnest book was never written. The historical part, to the
tenth book, is one of the devotional classics of all creeds, and second in popularity only to the
"Imitation of Christ," by Thomas a Kempis, and Bunyan's "Pilgrim's Progress." Certainly
no autobiography is superior to it in true humility, spiritual depth, and universal interest.
Augustin records his own experience, as a heathen sensualist, a Manichsean heretic, an anxious
inquirer, a sincere penitent, and a grateful convert. He finds a response in every human soul
that struggles through the temptations of nature and the labyrinth of error to the knowledge of

1 He was not " intoxicated with the exuberance of his own verbosity," as a modern English statesman (Lord Beaconsfield) charged
his equally distinguished rival (Mr. Gladstone) in Parliament.

2 In his Rt-tractatiotis, he himself reviews ninety-three of his works (embracing two hundred and thirty-two books, see ii. 67), in
chronological order ; in the first book those which he wrote while a layman and presbyter, in the second those which he wrote when a
bishop. See also the extended chronological index in Schonemann's Biblioth. historico-literaria Patrum Latinoru?n, vol. ii. (Lips.
1794), p. 340 sqq. (reprinted in the supplemental volume, xii., of Migne's ed. of the Opera, ■^. 24 sqq.) ; and other systematic and
alphabetical lists in the eleventh volume of the Bened. ed. (p. 494 sqq., ed. Venet.), and in Migne, torn. xi.

* For this reason the Benedictine editors have placed the Retractations and the Confessions at the head of his works.

*He himself says of them, Retract. 1. ii. c. 6 : " Multisfratribiis eos [Conyessionum libros tredecini] viultum placiiisse et placere
scio." Comp. De donon perseverantiee , c. 20 : " Quid autem ineorum opusculorian frequentius et delectabilius iiuiotescere potuit
giiatn libri Confessionwn mearuin ?" Comp. Ep. 231 Dario comiti.

8 ScHoNNEMANN (in the supplemental volume of Migne's ed. of Augustin, p. 134 sqq.) cites a multitude of separate editions of the
Confessions in Latin, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, French, English, and German, from A. d. 1475 to 1776. Since that time several
new editions have been added. One of the best Latin editions is that of Karl von Raumer (Stuttgart, 1856^, who used to read the
Confessions with his students at Erlangen once a week for many years. In his preface he draws a comparison between them and
Rousseau's Confessions and Hamann's Gedanken iiber meinen Lebenslauf English and German translations are noticed above in
the Lit. Dr. Shedd (in his ed., Pref. p. xxvii) calls the Confessions the best commentary yet written upon the seventh and eighth
chapters of Romans. " That quickening of the human spirit, which puts it again into vital and sensitive relations to the holy and
eternal; that illumination of the mind, whereby it is enabled to perceive with clearness the real nature of truth and righteousness;
that empowering of the will, to the conflict of victory — the entire process of restoring the Divine image in the soul of man — is delin-
eated in this book, with a vividness and reality never exceeded by the uninspired mind." . . . " It is the life of God in the soul
of a strong man, rushing and rippling with the freedom of the life of nature. He who watches can almost see the growth ; he who
listens can hear the perpetual motion ; and he who is in sympathy will be swept along."


1 2 PROLEGOMENA.


truth and the beauty of holiness, and after many sighs and tears finds rest and peace in the arms
of a merciful Saviour. The style is not free from the faults of an artificial rhetoric, involved
periods and far-fetched paronomasias ; but these defects are more than atoned for by passages of
unfading beauty, the devout spirit and psalm-like tone of the book. It is the incense of a sacred
mysticism of the heart which rises to the throne on high. The wisdom of some parts of the
Confessions may be doubted.^ The world would never have known Augustin's sins, if he had
not told them; nor were they of such a nature as to destroy his respectability in the best heathen
society of his age j but we must all the more admire his honesty and humility.

Rousseau's "Confessions," and Goethe's "Truth and Fiction," may be compared with
Augustin's Confessions as works of rare genius and of absorbing psychological interest, but they
are written in a radically different spirit, and by attempting to exalt human nature in its un-
sanctified state, they tend as much to expose its vanity and weakness, as the work of the bishop
of Hippo, being written with a single eye to the glory of God, raises man from the dust of
repentance to a new and imperishable life of the Spirit.^

Augustin composed the Confessions about the year 397, ten years after his conversion. The
first nine books contain, in the form of a continuous prayer and confession before God, a general
sketch of his earlier life, of his conversion, and of his return to Africa in the thirty-fourth year
of his age. The salient points in these books are the engaging history of his conversion in
Milan, and the story of the last days of his noble mother in Ostia, spent as it were at the very
gate of heaven and in full assurance of a blessed reunion at the throne of glory. The last three
books and a part of the tenth are devoted to speculative philosophy ; they treat, partly in tacit
opposition to Manichseism, of the metaphysical questions of the possibility of knowing God,
and the nature of time and space ; and they give an interpretation of the Mosaic cosmogony in
the style of the typical allegorical exegesis usual with the fathers, but foreign to our age ; they
are therefore of little value to the general reader, except as showing that even abstract meta-
physical subjects may be devotionally treated.

The Retractations were produced in the evening of his life (427 and 428), when, mindful of
the proverb : " In the multitude of words there wanteth not transgression," " and remembering
that we must give account for every idle word,* he judged himself, that he might not be judged.*
He revised in chronological order the numerous works he had written before and during his
episcopate, and retracted or corrected whatever in them seemed to his riper knowledge false or
obscure, or not fully agreed with the orthodox catholic faith. Some of his changes were reac-
tionary and no improvements, especially those on the freedom of the will, and on religious
toleration. In all essential points, nevertheless, his theological system remained the same from
his conversion to this time. The Retractations give beautiful evidence of his love of truth, his
conscientiousness, and his humility.®

To this same class should be added the Letters of Augustin, of which the Benedictine
editors, in their second volume, give two hundred and seventy (including letters to Augustin) in
chronological order from a. d. 386 to a. d. 429. These letters treat, sometimes very minutely,

1 We mean his sexual sins. He kept a concubine for sixteen years, the mother of his only child, Adeodatus, and after her separation
he formed for a short time a similar connection in Milan ; but in both cases he was faithtul. Conf. IV. 2 [tinam habebavi . . . servans
tori Jidetn") ; VI. 15. Erasmus thought very leniently of this sin as contrasted with the conduct of the priests and abbots of his
time. Augustin himself deeply repented of it, and devoted his life to celibacy.

* NoURRissoN (1. c. torn. i. p. 19) calls the Confessions " cet ouvrage unique, souvent imite, toujours parodie , ok il s' accuse, se con-
dam ne et s' hutnilie , pri^re ardente, recit entrainant, 7netaphysique incomparable, histoire de tout un monde qui se reflite dans
rhistoire d' une ame." Comp. also an article on the Confessions in " The Contemporary Review " for June, 1867, pp. 133-160.

3 Prov. X. 19. This verse (ex multiloquio non effugies peccatum") the Semi-Pelagian Gennadius {De viris illustr. sub Aug.) applies
against Augustin in excuse for his erroneous doctrines of freedom and predestination.

4 Matt. xii. 36.

6 I Cor. xi. 31. Comp. his Prologus to the two books of Retractationes.

« J. MoRELL Mackenzie (in W. Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, vol. i. p. 422) happily calls
the Retractations of Augustin " one of the noblest sacrifices ever laid upon the altar of truth by a majestic intellect acting in obedience
to the purest conscientiousness."


PROLEGOMENA. 13


of all the important questions of his time, and give us an insight of his cares, his ofiicial fidelity,
his large heart, and his effort to become, like Paul, all things to all men.

When the questions of friends and pupils accumulated, he answered them in special works ;
and in this way he produced various collections of Quc£stiones and Respotisiones, dogmatical,
exegetical, and miscellaneous (a. d. 390, 397, &c.).

II. Philosophical treatises, in dialogue ; almost all composed in his earlier life ; either
during his residence on the country-seat Cassiciacum in the vicinity of Milan, where he spent
half a year before his baptism in instructive and stimulating conversation, in a sort of academy
or Christian Platonic banquet with Monnica, his son Adeodatus, his brother Navigius, his
friend Alypius, and some cousins and pupils ; or during his second residence in Rome \ or soon
after his return to Africa.^

To this class belong the works; Contra Acadetnicos libri tres (386), in which he combats the
skepticism and probabilism of the New Academy, — the doctrine that man can never reach the
truth, but can at best attain only probability ; De vita beata (386), in which he makes true
blessedness to consist in the perfect knowledge of God ; De ordine, — on the relation of evil to
the divine order of the world''' (386) ; Soliloquia (387), communings with his own soul concern-
ing God, the highest good, the knowledge of truth, and immortality ; De immortalitate animce
(387), a continuation of the Soliloquies ; De quantitate a?iimce (387), discussing sundry questions
of the size, the origin, the incorporeity of the soul; De musica libri vi (387-389) ; De magistro
(389), in which, in a dialogue with his son Adeodatus, a pious and promising, but precocious
youth, who died soon after his return to Africa (389), he treats on the importance and virtue of
the word of God, and on Christ as the infallible Master.* To these may be added the later
work, De afiima et ejus origi/ie (419). Other philosophical works on grammar, dialectics (or ars
bene disputandi), rhetoric, geometry, and arithmetic, are lost.*

These works exhibit as yet little that is specifically Christian and churchly ; but they show a
Platonism seized and consecrated by the spirit of Christianity, full of high thoughts, ideal views,
and discriminating argument. They were designed to present the different stages of human
thought by which he himself had. reached the knowledge of the truth, and to serve others as
steps to the sanctuary. They form an elementary introduction to his theology. He afterwards,
in his Retractations, withdrew many things contained in them, like the Platonic view of the pre-


1 In torn. i. of the ed. Bened., immediately after the Retractationes and Confessiones, and at the close of the volume. On these
philosophical writings, see Brucker : Historia critica philosophice. Lips. 1766, tom. iii. pp. 485-507: H. Ritter : Geschichie der
Philosophie, vol. vi. p. 153 sqq. ; Ueberweg, History of Philosophy, I. 333-346 (Am. ed.) ; Erdmann, Grundriss der Geschichte der
Philosophie, I. 231-240 ; Bindemann, /. c. I. 282 sqq. ; Huber, /. c. I. 242 sqq. ; Gangauf, /. c. p. 25 sqq., and Nourrisson, /. c. ch. i.
and ii. Nourrisson makes the just remark (i. p. 53) : " Si la philosophie est la recherche de la vcrite. jamais sans doute il ne s' est ren-
contre une ante plus philosoplie que celle de saint Augustin. Car jamais atne n'a supporte avec pltis d' impatience les anxietes du
doute et n a/ait plus d' efforts pour dissiper les fantbmes de I'erreur."

2 Or on the question : " Utrum omnia bona et viala divince providentice ordo contineat ?" Comp. Retract, i. 3.

3 Augustin, in his Confessions (1. ix. c. 6), expresses himself in this touching way about this son of his illicit love : " We took with
us [on returning from the country to Milan to receive the sacrament of baptism] also the boy Adeodatus, the son of my carnal sin.
Thou hadst formed him well. He was but just fifteen years old, and he was superior in mind to many grave and learned men, I
acknowledge Thy gifts, O Lord, my God, who Greatest all, and who canst reform our deformities : for I had no part in that boy but sin.
And when we brought him up in Thy nurture. Thou, only Thou, didst prompt us to it ; I acknowledge Thy gifts. There is my book
entitled, De magistro: he speaks with me there. Thou knowest that all things there put into his mouth were in his mind when he was
sixteen years of age. That maturity of mind was a terror to me ; and who but Thou is the artificer of such wonders ? Soon Thou didst
take his life from the earth; and I think more quiedy of him now, fearing no more for his boyhood, nor his youth, nor his whole life.
We took him to ourselves as one of the same age in '1 hy grace, to be trained in Thy nurture ; and we were baptised together; and all
trouble about the past fled from us." He refers to him also in De vita beata, § 6 : " There was also with us, in age the youngest of all,
but whose talents, if affection deceives me not, promise something great, my son Adeodatus." In the same book (g 18), he mentions an
answer of his : " He is truly chaste who waits on God, and keeps himself to Him only."

* The books on grammar, dialectics, rhetoric, and the ten Categories of Aristotle, in the Appendix to the first volume of the Bened.
ed., are spurious. For the genuine works of Augustin on these subjects were written in a different form (the dialogue) and for a higher
purpose, and were lost in his own day. Comp. Retract, i. c. 6. In spite of this, Prantl {Geschichte der Logik in Abendlatide, pp.
665-674, cited by Huber, /. c. p. 240) has advocated the genuineness of the Priticipia dialecticce, and Huber inclines to agree. Gan-
gauf, /. c. p. 5, and Nourrisson, i. p. 37, consider them spurious.


14 PROLEGOMENA.


existence of the soul, and the Platonic idea that the acquisition of knowledge is a recollection or
excavation of the knowledge hidden in the mind.^ The philosopher in him afterwards yielded
more and more to the theologian, and his views became more positive and empirical, though in
some cases narrower also and more exclusive. Yet he could never cease to philosophise, and
even his later works, especially De Trinitate, and De Civitate Dei, are full of profound specula-
tions. Before his conversion he followed a particular system of philosophy, first the Manichaean,
then the Platonic ; after his conversion he embraced the Christian philosophy, which is based on
the divine revelation of the Scriptures, and is the handmaid of theology and religion ; but at
the same time he prepared the way for the catholic ecclesiastical philosophy, which rests on the
authority of the church, and became complete in the scholasticism of the middle age.

In the history of philosophy he deserves a place in the highest rank, and has done greater
service to the science of sciences than any other father, Clement of Alexandria and Origen not
excepted. He attacked and refuted the pagan philosophy as pantheistic or dualistic at heart ; he
shook the superstitions of astrology and magic ; he expelled from philosophy the doctrine of
emanation, and the idea that God is the soul of the world ; he substantially advanced psychology;
he solved the question of the origin and the nature of evil more nearly than any of his predecessors,
and as nearly as most of his successors ; he was the first to investigate thoroughly the relation of
divine omnipotence and omniscience to human freedom, and to construct a theodicy ; in short,
he is properly the founder of a Christian philosophy, and not only divided with Aristotle the
empire of the mediaeval scholasticism, but furnished also living germs for new systems of philoso-
phy, and will always be consulted in the speculative discussions of Christian doctrines.

The philosophical opinions of Augustin are ably and clearly summed up by Ueberweg as
follows : ^

" Against the skepticism of the Academics Augustin urges that man needs the knowledge of truth for his hap-
piness, that it is not enough merely to inquire and to doubt, and he finds a foundation for all our knowledge, a
foundation invulnerable against every doubt, in the consciousness we have of our sensations, feelings, our willing, and
thinking, in short, of all our psychical processes. From the undeniable existence and possession by man of some
truth, he concludes to the existence of God as the truth per se ; but our conviction of the existence of the material
world he regards as only an irresistible belief. Combating heathen leligion and philosophy, Augustin defends the
doctrines and institutions peculiar to Christianity, and maintains, in particular, against the Neo-Platoniste, whom he
rates most highly among all the ancient philosophers, the Christian theses that salvation is to be found in Christ
alone, that divine worship is due to no other being beside the triune God, since he created all things himself, and
did not commission inferior beings, gods, demons, or angels to create the material world ; that the soiil with its
body will rise again to eternal salvation or damnation, but will not return periodically to renewed life upon the
earth ; that the soul does not exist before the body, and that the latter is not the prison of the former, but that the
soul begins to exist at the same time with the body ; that the world both had a beginning and is perishable, and that
only God and the souls of angels and men are eternal. — Against the dualism of the Manichoeans, who regarded
good and evil as equally primitive, and represented a portion of the divine substance as having entered into the
region of evil, in order to war against and conquer it, Augustin defends the monism of the good principle, or of
the purely spiritual God, explaining evil as a mere negation or privation, and seeking to show from the finiteness of
the things in the world, and from their differing degrees of perfection, that the evils in the world are necessary,
and not in contradiction with the idea of creation ; he also defends in opposition to Manichreism, and Gnosticism
in general, the Catholic doctrine of the essential harmony between the Old and New Testaments. Against the
Donatists, Augustin maintains the unity of the Church. In opposition to Pelagius and the Pelagians, he asserts
that divine grace is not conditioned on human worthiness, and maintains the doctrine of absolute predestination, or,
that from the mass of men who, through the disobedience of Adam (in whom all mankind were present potentially),
have sunk into corruption and sin, some are chosen by the free election of God to be monuments of his grace, and are
brought to believe and be saved, while the greater number, as monuments of his justice, are left to eternal damnation."

1 "H ndt^rjo-is ovK aWo Ti >j ai'a»ii'r;(ri5. On this Plato, in the Phsedo, as is well known, rests his doctrine of pre-existence Augustin
was at first in favor of the idea, Solil. ii. 20, n. 35; afterwards he rejected it, Retract, i. 4, §4; but after all he assumes in his anthro-
pology a sort of unconscious, yet responsible, pre-existence of the whole human race in Adam as its organic head, and hence taught a
universal fall in Adam's fall.

2 History 0/ Philosophy , vol. i. 333 sq., translated by Prof. Geo. S. Morris.


PROLEGOMENA. 15


III. Apologetic works against Pagans and Jews. Among these the twenty-two books, De
Civitate Dei, are still well worth reading. They form the deepest and richest apologetic work of
antiquity; begun in 413, after the occupation of Rome by the Gothic king Alaric, finished in
426, and often separately published. They condense his entire theory of the world and of man,
and are the first attempt at a comprehensive philosophy of universal history under the dualistic
view of two antagonistic currents or organized forces, a kingdom of this world which is doomed
to final destruction, and a kingdom of God which will last forever.^

This work has controlled catholic historiography ever since, and received the official approval of
Pope Leo XIII., who, in his famous Encyclical Iinmortale Dei (Nov. i, 1885), incidentally alludes
to it in these words: "Augustin, in his work, De Civitate Dei, set forth so clearly the efficacy
of Christian wisdom and the way in which it is bound up with the well-being of civil society,
that he seems not only to have pleaded the cause of the Christians at his own time, but to have
triumphantly refuted the calumnies against Christianity for all time."

From the Protestant point of view Augustin erred in identifying the kingdom of God with
the visible Catholic Church, which is only a part of it.

IV. Religious-Theological works of a general nature (in part anti-Manichsean) : De
utilitate credendi, against the Gnostic exaltation of knowledge (392); De fide et symbolo, a dis-
course which, though only presbyter, he delivered on the Apostles' Creed before the council at
Hippo at the request of the bishops in 393; De doctrina Christiana iv libri {t^(^i ; the fourth
book added in 426), a compend of exegetical theology for instruction in the interpretation of
the Scriptures according to the analogy of the faith ; De catechizandis nidibus likewise for cate-
chetical purposes (400) ; Enchiridon, or De fide, spe et caritate, a brief compend of the doctrine
of faith and morals, which he wrote in 421, or later, at the request of Laurentius; hence also
called Manuale ad Laurentium?

V. Polemic-Theological works. These are the most copious sources of the history of
Christian doctrine in the patristic age. The heresies collectively are reviewed in the book De
hceresibiis ad Quodvultdemn, written between 428 and 430 to a friend and deacon in Carthage,
and give a survey of eighty-eight heresies, from the Simonians to the Pelagians.^ In the work
De vera religione (390), Augustin proposed to show that the true religion is to be found not with
the heretics and schismatics, but only in the catholic church of that time.

The other controversial works are directed against the particular heresies of Manichseism,
Donatism, Arianism, Pelagianism and Semi-Pelagianism. Augustin, with all the firmness of his
convictions, was free from personal antipathy, and used the pen of controversy in the genuine
Christian ^^\x\\., fortiter in re, suaviter in modo. He understood Paul's alr^^'^eveiv Iv ayd-r^^ and
forms in this respect a pleasing contrast to Jerome, who had by nature no more fiery temperament
than he, but was less able to control it. "Let those," he very beautifully says to the Manichseans,
" burn with hatred against you, who do not know how much pains it costs to find the truth,
how hard it is to guard against error ; — -"but I, who after so great and long wavering came to know
the truth, must bear myself towards you with the same patience which my fellow-believers showed
towards me while I was wandering in blind madness in your opinions." *

1 In the Bened. ed. torn. vii. Comp. Retract, ii. 43, and Ch. Hist. III. g 12. The City 0/ God a.nd the Confessions are the only writings
of Augustin which Gibbon thought worth while to read (chap, xxxiii.). Huber (/. c. p. 315) says: "Augustin's philosophy of history, as
he presents it in his Civitas Dei, has remained to this hour the standard philosophy of history for the church orthodoxy, the bounds of
which this orthodoxy, unable to perceive in the motions of the modern spirit the fresh morning air of a higher day of history, is scarcely
able to transcend." Nourrisson devotes a special chapter to the consideration of the two cities of Augustin, the City of the World and
the City of God (torn. ii. 43-88). Compare also the Introduction to Saisset's Traduction de la Cite de Diett, Par. 1855, and Reinken's
(old Cath. Bishop), Geschichtsphilosophie des heil. Aug. 1866. Engl, translation of the City 0/ God by Dr. Marcus Dods, Edinburgh,
1872, 2 vols., and in the second vol. of this Library 0/ the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers.

2 Separately edited by Krabinger, Tijbingen, 1861.

2 Ihis work is also incorporated in the Corpus hcereseologicuin of Fr. Oehler, torn. i. pp. 192-225,
4 Contra Epist. Ulanichcei guaiii vacant fundamenti, 1. i. 2.


1 6 PROLEGOMENA.


1. The anti-Manich^an works date mostly from his earlier life, and in time and matter
follow immediately upon his philosophical writings.^ In them he afterwards found most to
retract, because he advocated the freedom of the will against the Manichsean fatalism. The
most important are : De moi-ibus ecclesice caiholicce, et de moribiis Manichceoriim, two books
(written during his second residence in Rome, 388) ; De vera religione (390) ; Unde mahim, et
de libero arbitrio, usually simply De libera arbitrio, in three books, against the Manichsean doc-
trine of evil as a substance, and as having its seat in matter instead of free will (begun in 388,
finished in 395) ; De Genesi contra Manichceos, a defence of the biblical doctrine of creation
(389) ; De duabus animabus, against the psychological dualism of the Manichaeans (392) ; Dis-

putatio contra Fortunatiim (a triumphant refutation of this Manichsean priest of Hippo in August,
392) ; Contra Epistolam Manichcei quam vocant fundamenti (397) ; Contra Faustum Manichceum,
in thirty-three books (400-404) ; De natura boni (404), &:c.

These works treat of the origin of evil ; of free will ; of the harmony of the Old and
New Testaments, and of revelation and nature ; of creation out of nothing, in opposition to
dualism and hylozoism ; of the supremacy of faith over knowledge ; of the authority of the
Scriptures and the Church ; of the true and the false asceticism, and other disputed points ; and
they are the chief source of our knowledge of the Manichgean Gnosticism and of the arguments
against it.

Having himself belonged for nine years to this sect, Augustin was the better fitted for the
task of refuting it, as Paul was peculiarly prepared for the confutation of the Pharisaic Judaism.
His doctrine of the nature of evil is particularly valuable. He has triumphantly demonstrated
for all time, that evil is not a corporeal thing, nor in any way substantial, but a product of the
free will of the creature, a perversion of substance in itself good, a corruption of the nature
created by God.

2. Against the Priscillianists, a sect in Spain built on Manichsean principles, are directed
the hook Ad Paulum Orosium contra Priscillianistas et Origenistas (^^11^ "j"^ the book Contra
mendacium, addressed to Consentius (420); and in part the 190th Epistle (alias Ep. 157),
to the Bishop Optatus, on the origin of the soul (418), and two other letters, in which he
refutes erroneous views on the nature of the soul, the limitation of future punishment, and the
lawfulness of fraud for supposed good purposes.

3. The ANTi-DoNATiSTic works, composed between the years 393 and 420, argue against
separatism, and contain Augustin's doctrine of the church and church-discipline, and of the
sacraments. To these belong : Psalmus contra partem Donati (a. d. 393), a polemic popular
song without regular metre, intended to offset the songs of the Donatists ; Contra epistolam
Parmeniani, written in 400 against the Carthaginian bishop of the Donatists, the successor of
Donatus ; De baptismo contra Donastistas, in favor of the validity of heretical baptism (400) ;
Contra literas Petiliani (about 400), against the view of Cyprian and the Donatists, that the
efficacy of the sacraments depends on the personal worthiness and the ecclesiastical status of
the officiating priest; Ad Catholicos Epistola contra Donatistas, or De unitate ecclesice (402);
Contra Cresconium gramniaticum Donastistam (406) ; Breviculus Collationis cum Do?iatistis,
a short account of the three days' religious conference with the Donatists (411); De cor-
rectio?ie Donatistanan (41 7) ; Contra Gaudefitiiim, Donat. Episcopiim, the last anti-Donatistic
work (420). ■''

These works are the chief patristic authority of the Roman Catholic doctrine of the Church
and against the sects. They are thoroughly Romanizing in spirit and aim, and least satisfactory
to Protestant readers. Augustin defended in his later years even the principle of forcible

1 The earliest anti-Manichaean writings {De libero arbitrio ; De moribus eccl. cath. et de Moribus lilanich.) are in torn. i. ed.
Bened. ; the latter in torn. viii.

2 Tom. viii. p. 6ii sqq.

3 All these in torn. ix. Comp. Church Hist. III. §§69 and 70.


PROLEGOMENA. 17


coercion and persecution against heretics and schismatics by a false exegesis of the words in the
parable "Compel them to come in "(Luke xiv. 23). The result of persecution was that both
Catholics and Donatists in North Africa were overwhelmed in ruin first by the barbarous Vandals,
who were Arian heretics, and afterwards by the Mohammedan conquerors.

4. The anti-Arian works have to do with the deity of Christ and of the Holy Spirit, and
with the Holy Trinity. By far the most important of these are the fifteen books De Trinitate
(400-416); — the most profound and discriminating production of the ancient church on the
Trinity, in no respect inferior to the kindred works of Athanasius and the two Gregories, and
for centuries final to the dogma.* This may also be counted among the positive didactic works,
for it is not directly controversial. The Collatio cum Maximino Ariajio, an obscure babbler,
belongs to the year 428.

5. The numerous anti-Pelagian works of Augustin are his most influential and most
valuable, at least for Protestants. They were written between the years 412 and 429. In them
Augustin, in his intellectual and spiritual prime, develops his system of anthropology and
soteriology, and most nearly approaches the position of Evangelical Protestantism : On the
Guilt and the Remission of Sins, and Infant Baptism (412) ; On the Spirit and the Letter (413) ;
On Nature and Grace (415); On the Acts of Pelagius (417); On the Grace of Christ, and
Original Sin (^41^') ; Oti Marriage and Concicpiscence (419); On Grace and Free Will (426);
On Discipline and Grace (427); Against Julian of Eclanum (two large works, written between
421 and 429, the second unfinished, and hence called Opus imperfectuni) ; On the Predestination
of the Saints (428); On the Gift of Perseverance (429) ; &c.^

These anti-Pelagian writings contain what is technically called the Augustinian system of
theology, which was substantially adopted by the Lutheran Church, yet without the decree of
reprobation, and in a more rigorous logical form by the Calvinistic Confessions. The system
gives all glory to God, does full justice to the sovereignty of divine grace, effectually humbles
and yet elevates and fortifies man, and furnishes the strongest stimulus to gratitude and the
firmest foundation of comfort. It makes all bright and lovely in the circle of the elect. But
it is gloomy and repulsive in its negative aspect towards the non-elect. It teaches a universal
damnation and only a partial redemption, and confines the offer of salvation to the minority
of the elect; it ignores the general benevolence of God to all his creatures; it weakens or
perverts the passages which clearly teach that " God would have all men to be saved " ; it suspends
their eternal fate upon one single act of disobedience ; it assumes an unconscious, and yet respon-
sible pre-existence of Adam's posterity and their participation in his sin and guilt ; it reflects
upon the wisdom of God in creating countless millions of beings with the eternal foreknow-
ledge of their everlasting misery ; and it does violence to the sense of individual responsibility
for accepting or rejecting the gospel-offer of salvation. And yet this Augustinian system,
especially in its severest Calvinistic form, has promoted civil and religious liberty, and
trained the most virtuous, independent, and heroic types of Christians, as the Huguenots, the
Puritans, the Covenanters, and the Pilgrim Fathers. It is still a mighty moral power, and will
«iot lose its hold upon earnest characters until some great theological genius produces from the
inexhaustible mine of the Scriptures a more satisfactory solution of the awful problem which the
universal reign of sin and death presents to the thinking mind.

In Augustin the anti-Pelagian system was checked and moderated by his churchly and
sacramental views, and we cannot understand him without keeping both in view. The same
apparent contradiction we find in Luther, but he broke entirely with the sacerdotal system of


1 Tom. viii. ed. Bened. p. 749 sqq. Comp. Ck. Hist. III. §131. The work was stolen from him by some impatient friends before
revision, and before the completion of the twelfth book, so that he became much discouraged, and could only be moved to finish it
by urgent entreaties.

« Opera, tom. x., in two parts, with an Appendix. The same in Migne. W. Bright, of Oxford, has published Select Anti-Pela-
Zian Treatises 0/ St. Aug., in Latin, 1880. On the Pelagian controversy comp. Ch. Hist. III. §^146-160.


1 8 PROLEGOMENA.


Rome, and made the doctrine of justification by faith the chief article of his creed, whicl
Augustin never could have done. Calvin was more logical than either, and went back beyonc
justification and Adam's fall, yea, beyond time itself, to the eternal counsel of God which pre
ordains, directs and controls the whole history of mankind to a certain end, the triumph of hi
mercy and justice.

VI. ExEGETiCAL works. The best of these are : De Genesi ad literam (The Genesis won
for word), in twelve books, an extended exposition of the first three chapters of Genesis
particularly the history of the creation literally interpreted, though with many mystica
and allegorical interpretations also (written between 401 and 415);^ Enarrationes i;
Fsalmos (mostly sermons) ; ^ hundred and twenty-four Homilies on the Gospel of Johi
(416 and 417);' ten Homilies on the First Epistle of John (417); the Exposition of tb
Sermon on the Mount (393) ; the Harmony of the Gospels {De consensu evangelistarum, 400)
the Epistle to the Galatians (394) ; and an unfinished commentary on the Epistle to tin
Romans.*

Augustin deals more in lively, profound, and edifying thoughts on the Scriptures than ii
proper grammatical and historical exposition, for which neither he nor his readers had tin
necessary linguistic knowledge, disposition, or taste. He grounded his theology less upoi
exegesis than upon his Christian and churchly mind saturated with Scriptural truths. He excel
in spiritual insight, and is suggestive even when he misses the natural meaning.

Vn. Ethical and Ascetic works. Among these belong three hundred and ninety-si:
Sermones (mostly very short) de Scripturis (on texts of Scripture), de tempore (festival sermons)
de Sanctis (in memory of apostles, martyrs, and saints), and de diversis (on various occasions)
some of them dictated by Augustin, some taken down by hearers.^ Also various moral treatises
De continentia (395) ; De mendaico (395), against deception (not to be confounded with th(
similar work already mentioned Contra mendacium, against the fraud-theory of the Priscillianists
written in 420) ; De agone Christiano (396) ; De opere monachonim, against monastic idlenesi
(400) ; De bono conjiigali adv. Joviniatmm (400) ; De virginitate (401) ; De fide et opeiHbus (413)
De adulterinis conjugiis, on i Cor. vii. 10 sqq. (419); De bono viduitatis (418); De patientic
(418) ; De cura pro nwiiids gerenda, to Paulinus of Nola (421) ; De utilitate jejimii ; De diUgendt
Deo ; Meditationes ;'^ &c.

As we survey this enormous literary labor, augmented by many other treatises and letters no^^
lost, and as we consider his episcopal labors, his many journeys, and his adjudications of contro-
versies among the faithful, which often robbed him of whole days, we must be really astounded
at the fidelity, exuberance, energy, and perseverance of this father of the church. Surely, such
a life was worth the living.

1 Tom. iii. 117-324. Not to be confounded with two other books on Genesis, in which he defends the biblical doctrine of creatior
against the IManichasans. In this exegetical work he aimed, as he says, Retract, ii. c. 24, to interpret Genesis " non secundum alle
goricas signijicationes , sed secundum rerum gestarian proprietatevt." The work is more original and spirited than the He-vacmcror
of Basil or of Ambrose.

2 Tom. iv., the whole volume. The English translation of the Com. on the Psalms occupies six volumes of the Oxford Library of
the Fathers.

8 Tom. iii. 289-824. Translated in Clark's ed. of Augustin's works.

< All in tom. iii. Translated in part.

6 Tom. V. contains beside these a multitude (317) of doubtful and spurious sermons, likewise divided into four classes. To these
must be added recently discovered sermons, edited from manuscripts in Florence, Monte Cassino, etc., by M. Denis (1792), O. F,
Fkangipane (1820), A. L. Caillau (Paris, 1836), and Angelo Mai (in the Nova Bibliotheca Patruin).

6 Most of them in tom. vi. ed. Bened. On the scripta deperdita, dubia et spuria of Augustin, see the index by Schonemann, /. c.
p. 50 sqq., and in the supplemental volume of Migne's edition, pp. 34-40. The so-called Meditations of Augustin (German translatior
by August Krohne, Stuttgart, 1854) are a later compilation by the abbot of Fescamp in France, at the close of the twelfth century,
from the writings of Augustin, Gregory the Great, Anselm, and others.


PROLEGOMENA. 19


CHAPTER V. — The Influence of St. Aitgustin upon Posterity, and his delation to Catholicism

and Protesta7itism.

In conclusion we must add some observations respecting the influence of Augustin on the
Church and the world since his time, and his position with reference to the great antagonism of
Cathohcism and Protestantism. All the church fathers are, indeed, the common inheritance
of both parties; but no other of them has produced so permanent effects on both, and no
other stands in so high regard with both, as Augustin. Upon the Greek Church alone has
he exercised little or no influence ; for this Church stopped with the undeveloped synergistic
anthropology of the previous age, and rejects most decidedly, as a Latin heresy, the doc-
trine of the double procession of the Holy Spirit (the Filioque) for which Augustin is chiefly
responsible.^

1. Augustin, in the first place, contributed much to the development of the doctrinal basis
which Catholicism and Protestantism hold in iommon against such radical heresies of antiquity
as Manichseism, Arianism, and Pelagianism. In all these great intellectual conflicts he was in
general the champion of the cause of Christian truth against dangerous errors. Through his
influence the canon of Holy Scripture (including, indeed, the Old Testament Apocrypha)
was fixed in its present form by the councils of Hippo (393) and Carthage (397). He. con-
quered the Manichsean dualism, hylozoism, and fatalism, and saved the biblical idea of God and
of creation, and the biblical doctrine of the nature of sin and its origin in the free will of man.
He developed the Nicene dogma of the Trinity, in opposition to tritheism on the one hand,
and Sabellianism on the other, but also with the doubtful addition of the Filioque, and in oppo-
sition to the Greek, gave it the form in which it has ever since prevailed in the West. In
this form the dogma received classical expression from his school in the falsely so called
Athanasian Creed, which is not recognized by the Greek Church, and which better deserves the
name of the Augustinian Creed.

In Christology, on the contrary, he added nothing new, and he died shortly before the great
Christological conflicts opened, which reached their oecumenical settlement at the council of
Chalcedon, twenty years after his death. Yet he anticipated Leo in giving currency in the
West to the important formula: " Two natures in one person." ^

2. Augustin is also the principal theological creator of the Latin- Catholic system as distinct
from the Greek Catholicism on the one hand, and from evangelical Protestantism on the other.
He ruled the entire theology of the middle age, and became the father of scholasticism in virtue
of his dialectic mind, and the father of mysticism in virtue of his devout heart, without being
responsible for the excesses of either system. For scholasticism thought to comprehend the
divine with the understanding, and lost itself at last in empty dialectics; and mysticism

1 The church fathers of the first six centuries are certainly far more Catholic than Protestant, and laid the doctrinal foundation of
the orthodox Greek and Roman churches. But it betrays a contracted, slavish, and mechanical view of history, when Roman Catholic
divines claim the fathers as their exclusive property ; forgetting that they taught many things which are as inconsistent with the papal
as with the Protestant Creed, and that they knew nothing of certain dogmas which are essential to Romanism (such as the infallibility
of the pope, the seven sacraments, transubstantiation, purgatory, indulgences, auricular confession, the immaculate conception of the
Virgin Mary, etc.). " 1 recollect well," says Dr. Newman, the former intellectual- leader of Oxford Tractarianism (in his Letter to
Dr. Pusey on his Eirenicon, 1866, p. 5), "what an outcast I seemed to myself, when I took down from the shelves of my library the
volumes of St. Athanasius or St. Basil, and set myself to study them ; and how, on the contrary, when at length I was brought into
Catholic communion, I kissed them with delight, with a feeling that in them I had more than all that I had lost, and, as though I were
directly addressing the glorious saints, who bequeathed them to the Church, I said to the inanimate pages, ' You are now mine, and I
am yours, beyond any mistake.' " With the same right the Jews might lay exclusive claim to the writings of Moses and the prophets.
The fathers were living men, representing the onward progress and conflicts of Christianity in their time, unfolding and defending great
truths, but not unmixed with many errors and imperfections which subsequent times have corrected. Those are the true children of
the fathers who, standing on the foundation of Christ and the apostles, and, kissing the New Testament rather than any human
writings, follow them only as far as they followed Christ, and who carry forward their work in the onward march of evangelical catholic
Christianity.

2 He was summoned to the council of Ephesus, which condemned Nestorianism in 431, but died a year before it met. He prevailed
upon the Gallic monk, Leporius, to retract Nestorianism. His Christology is in many points defective and obscure. Comp. Dorner's
History 0/ Christology , ii. pp. 88-98 (Germ. ed.). Jerome did still less for this department of doctrine.


20 PROLEGOMENA.


endeavoured to grasp the divine with feeling, and easily strayed into misty sentimentalism ;
Augustin sought to apprehend the divine with the united power of mind and heart, of bold
thought and humble faith. ^ Anselm, Bernard of Clairvaux, Thomas Aquinas, and Bonaventura,
are his nearest of kin in this respect. Even now, since the Catholic Church has become a
Roman Church, he enjoys greater consideration in it than Ambrose, Hilary, Jerome, or Gregory
the Great. All this cannot possibly be explained without an interior affinity.^

His very conversion, in which, besides the Scriptures, the personal intercourse of the hierar-
chical Ambrose and the life of the ascetic Anthony had great influence, was a transition not
from heathenism to Christianity (for he was already a Manichaean Christian), but from heresy
to the historical, orthodox, episcopally organized church, as, for the time, the sole authorized
vehicle of the apostolic Christianity in conflict with those sects and parties which more or less
assailed the foundations of the Gospel. It was, indeed, a full and unconditional surrender of
his mind and heart to God, but it was at the same time a submission of his private judgment
to the authority of the church which led him to the faith of the gospel.^ In the same spirit he
embraced the ascetic life, without which, according to the Catholic principle, no high religion
is possible. He did not indeed enter a cloister, like Luther, whose conversion in Erfurt was
likewise essentially catholic, but he lived in his house in the simplicity of a monk, and made and
kept the vow of voluntary poverty and celibacy.*

He adopted Cyprian's doctrine of the church, and completed it in the conflict with Donat-
ism by transferring the predicates of unity, holiness, universality, exclusiveness, and maternity,
directly to the actual church of the time, which, with a firm episcopal organization, an unbroken
succession, and the Apostles' Creed, triumphantly withstood the eighty or the hundred opposing
sects in the heretical catalogue of the day, and had its visible centre in Rome. In this church
he had found rescue from the shipwreck of his life, the home of true Christianity, firm ground
for his thinking, satisfaction for his heart, and a commensurate field for the wide range of his
powers.^ The predicate of infallibility alone he does not plainly bring forward ; he assumes a
progressive correction of earlier councils by later ; and in the Pelagian controversy he asserts
the same independence towards pope Zosimus, which Cyprian before him had shown towards
pope Stephen in the controversy on heretical baptism, with the advantage of having the right
on his side, so that Zosimus found himself compelled to yield to the African church. But after

1 Wigger's {Pra^nat. Darstelhoig des Augustinismus und Pelagianisinus, i. p. 27) finds the most peculiar and remarkable point
of Augustin's character in his singular union of intellect and imagination, scholasticism and mysticism, in which neither can be said to
predominate. So also Huber, /. c. p. 313.

- NoURRissoN, the able expounder of the philosophy of Augustin, says (/. c. torn. i. p. iv) : "Je ne crois pas, qii excepte saint Paul,
aucun homme ait contribue dai'antag-e, par sa parole comine par ses ecrits, d organiser, a interpreter, a repandre le christianisiiie ;
et, apres saint Paul, mil appareinment, non pas meine le glorieux , V invincible Athanase, n a travaille d'une maniere azissi piiissante
a fonder V unite catholigue."

3 We recall his famous anti-Manichsean dictum : "Ego evangelio non crederem, nisi tne catholicce ecclesice commoveret auctoritas.
The Protestant would reverse this maxim, and ground his faith in the church on his faith in Christ and in thegospel. So with the
well-known maxim of Irenseus : " Ubi ecclesia, ibi Spiritus Dei, et ubi Spiritus Dei, ibi ecclesia." According to the spirit of Protest,
antism it would be said conversely : " \Vhere the Spirit of God is, there is the church, and where the church is, there is the Spirit
of God."

* According to genuine Christian principles it would have been far more noble, if he had married the African woman with whom he
had lived in illicit intercourse for thirteen years, who was always faithful to him, as he was to her, and had borne him his beloved and
highly gifted Adeodatus ; instead of casting her off, and, as he for a while intended, choosing another for the partner of his life, whose
excellences were more numerous. The superiority of the evangelical Protestant morality over the Catholic asceticism is here palpable.
But with the prevailing spirit of his age he would hardly have enjoyed so great regard, nor accomplished so much good if he had been
married. Celibacy was the bridge from the heathen degradation of marriage to the evangelical Christian exaltation and sanctification
of the family life.

6 On Augustin's doctrine of the church, see Ch. Hist. III. § 71, and especially the thorough account by R. 'Kothu: A n/dnge der ckristl.
Rirche und Hirer Verfassung, vol. i. (1837), pp. 679-711. "Augustin," says he, " decidedly adopted Cyprian's conception [of the
church] in all essential points. And once adopting it, he penetrated it in its whole depth with his wonderfully powerful and exuberant
soul, and, by means of his own clear, logical mind, gave it the perfect and rigorous system which perhaps it still lacked" (p. 679 sqq.).
" Augustin's conception of the doctrine of the church was about standard for succeeding times " (p. 685). See also an able article of
Prof Reuter, of Gottingen, on Augustin's views concerning episcopacy, tradition, infallibility, in Brieger's " Zeitschrift fur Hist. Theol."
for 1885 (Bk. VIII. pp. 126-187).


PROLEGOMENA. 21


the condemnation of the Pelagian errors by the Roman see (418), he declared that "the case
is finished, if only the error were also finished." ^

He was the first to give a clear and fixed definition of the sacrament, as a visible sign of
invisible grace, resting on divine appointment ; but he knows nothing of the number seven ;
this was a much later enactment. In the doctrine of baptism he is entirely Catholic, though
in logical contradiction with his dogma of predestination ; he maintained the necessity of
baptism for salvation on the ground of John iii. 5 and Mark xvi. 16, and derived from it the
horrible dogma of the eternal damnation of all unbaptized infants, though he reduced their
condition to a mere absence of bliss, without actual suffering.^ In the doctrine of the holy
communion he stands, like his predecessors, Tertullian and Cyprian, nearer to the Calvinistic
than any other theory of a spiritual presence and fruition of Christ's body and blood. He
certainly can not be quoted in favor of transubstantiation. He was the chief authority of
Ratramnus and Berengar in their opposition to this dogma.

He contributed to promote, at least in his later writings, the Catholic faith of miracles,^ and
the worship of Mary ; * though he exempts the Virgin only from actual sin, not from original,
and, with all his reverence for her, never calls her " mother of God."^

At first an advocate of religious liberty and of purely spiritual methods of opposing error,
he afterwards asserted the fatal principle of forcible coercion, and lent the great weight of his
authority to the system of civil persecution, at the bloody fruits of which in the middle age he
himself would have shuddered ; for he was always at heart a man of love and gentleness, and
personally acted on the glorious principle : " Nothing conquers but truth, and the victory of
truth is love."®

Thus even truly great and good men have unintentionally, through mistaken zeal, become
the authors of incalculable mischief.

3. But, on the other hand, Augustin is, of all the fathers, nearest to evangelical Protestantism,
and may be called, in respect of his doctrine of sin and grace, the first forerunner of the
Reformation. The Lutheran and Reformed churches have ever conceded to him, without
scruple, the cognomen of Saint, and claimed him as one of the most enlightened witnesses of
the truth and most striking examples of the marvellous power of divine grace in the transfor-
mation of a sinner. It is worthy of mark, that his Pauline doctrines, which are most nearly

1 Hence the famous word : "Roma locuta est, eausa finita est," which is often quoted as an argument for the modern Vatican dogma
of papal infallibiUty. But it is not found in this form, though we may admit that it is an epigrammatic condensation of sentences of Au-
gustin. The nearest approach to it is in his Sermo CXXXI. cap. lo, g lo (Tom. VII. 645) : "lam enim de hac causa duo concilia missa
sunt ad sedem afiostolicam (Rome), inde etiant rescripta venerunt. Causa finita est , utiiuim aliquando error finiatur." Comp.
Reuter, I.e. p. 157.

2 Respecting Augustin's doctrine of baptism, see the thorough discussion in W. "^ kia.' i, History of Infant Bafitisjii , vol. i. p. 173 sqq.
(Oxford ed. of 1862). His view of the slight condemnation of all unbaptized children contains the germ of the scholastic fancy of the
limbus infantum and \^^ poena damni, as distinct from the lower regions of hell and Xhs peena sensus.

3 In his former writings he expressed a truly philosophical view concerning miracles {De vera relig. c. 25, § 47 ; c. 50, § 98 ; De
utilit. credendi, c. 16, \ 34 ; De peccat. meritis et remiss. 1. ii. c. 32, g 52, and De civit. Dei, xxii. c. 8) ; but in his Retract. 1. i. c. 14,
g 5, he corrects or modifies a former remark in his book De titilit. credendi, stating that he did not mean to deny the continuance of
miracles altogether, but only such great miracles as occurred at the time of Christ (" quia non tanta ncc o^nnia, non quia nulla fiunt").
See Ch. Hist. III. g§ 87 and 88, and the instructive monograph of the younger Nitzsch : Augustinus' Lehre vom Wunder, Berlin, 1865
(97 PP-)-

4 See Ch. Hist. III. ?§ 81 and 82.

6 Comp. Tract, in Evang. Joannis, viii. c. 9, where he says : " Cur ergo ait ntatri filius ; Quid tnihi et tibi est, mulier T nondum
venit hora mea (John ii. 4). Dominus noster Jesus Christus et Deus erat et homo : secundum quod Deus erat, matretn non habcbat ;
secundum quod homo erat, habebat. Mater ergo [Maria] erat carnis, mater humanitatis, mater infirmitatis quant suscepit propter
nos." This strict separation of the Godhead from the manhood of Jesus in his birth from the Virgin would have exposed Augustin
in the East to the suspicion of Nestorianism. But he died a year before the council of Ephesus, at which Nestorius was con-
demned.

« See Ch. Hist. III. ? 27, p. 144 sq. He changed his view partly from his experience that the Donatists, in his own diocese, were con.
verted to the catholic unity " timore legum imperialium," and were afterwards perfectly good Catholics. He adduces also a misinter.
pretation of Luke xiv. 23, and Prov. ix. 9: "Da sapienti occasionem et sapientior erit." Ep. gj, ad I'incentiiim Rogatistam, § 17
(torn. ii. p. 237 sq. ed. Bened.). But he expressly discouraged the infliction of death on heretics, and adjured the proconsul Donatus
Ep. 100, by Jesus Christ, not to repay the Donatists in kind. '' Corrigi eos cupimus, non necari."


22 PROLEGOMENA.


akin to Protestantism, are the later and more mature parts of his system, and that just these
found great acceptance with the laity. The Pelagian controversy, in which he developed his
anthropology, marks the culmination of his theological and ecclesiastical career, and his latest
writings were directed against the Pelagian Julian and the Semi-Pelagians in Gaul, who were
brought to his notice by two friendly laymen, Prosper and Hilary. These anti-Pelagian
works have wrought mightily, it is most true, upon the Catholic church, and have held in
check the Pelagianizing tendencies of the hierarchical and monastic system, but they have
never passed into its blood and marrow. They waited for a favourable future, and nourished
in silence an opposition to the prevailing system.

In the middle age the better sects, which attempted to simplify, purify, and spiritualize the
reigning Christianity by return to the Holy Scriptures, and the Reformers before the Reforma-
tion, such as Wiclif, Hus, Wessel, resorted most, after the apostle Paul, to the bishop of Hippo
as the representative of the doctrine of free grace.

The Reformers were led by his writings into a deeper understanding of Paul, and so pre-
pared for their great vocation. No church teacher did so much to mould Luther and Calvin ;
none furnished them so powerful weapons against the dominant Pelagianism and formalism ;
none is so often quoted by them with esteem and love.^

All the Reformers in the outset, Melanchthon and Zwingle among them, adopted his denial
of free will and his doctrine of predestination, and sometimes even went beyond him into the
abyss of supralapsarianism, to cut out the last roots of human merit and boasting. In this point
Augustin holds the same relation to the Catholic church, as Luther to the Lutheran ; that is, he
is a heretic of unimpeachable authority, who is more admired than censured even in his ex-
travagances ; yet his doctrine of predestination was indirectly condemned by the pope in Jan-
senism, as Luther's view was rejected as Calvinism by the Formula of Concord.^ For Jansenism
was nothing but a revival of Augustinianism in the bosom of the Roman Catholic church.^

1 Luther pronounced upon the church fathers (with whom, however, excepting Augustin, he was but slightly acquainted) very
condemnatory judgments, even upon Basil, Chrysostom, and Jerome (for Jerome he had a downright antipathy, on account of his advo-
cacy of fasts, virginity, and monkery) ; he was at times dissatisfied even with Augustin, because he after all did not find in him his sola
fide, his articulus stantzs vel cadentis ecclesioe, and says of him : " Augustin often erred ; he cannot be trusted. Though he was good
and holy, yet he, as well as other fathers, was wanting in the true faith." But this cursory utterance is overborne by numerous com-
mendations; and all such judgments of Luther must be taken cum grano salis. He calls Augustin the most pious, grave, and sincere
of the fathers, and the patron of divines, who taught a pure doctrine and submitted it in Christian humility to the Holy Scriptures, etc.,
and he thinks, if he had lived in the sixteenth century, he would have been a Protestant {si hoc seculo viveret, nobiscum sentiret)^ while
Jerome would have gone with Rome. Compare his singular but striking judgments on the fathers in Lutheri Colloquia, ed. H. E.
Bindseil, 1863, tom. iii. 149, and many other places. Gangauf, a Roman Catholic (a pupil of the philosopher Giinther), concedes (/. c.
p. 28, note 13) that Luther and Calvin built their doctrinal system mainly on Augustin, but, as he correctly thinks, with only partial
right. NouRRissoN, likewise g. Roman Catholic, derives Protestantism from a corrupted (!) Augustinianism, and very superficially
makes Lutheranism and Calvinism essentially to consist in the denial of the freedom of the will, which was only one of the questions
of the Reformation. "On ne saurait le meconna'itre , de F Augustinianisme corrompu, mais enfin de V AugTistinianis-nie precede le
Protestantisnie. Car, sans parler de Wiclif et de Huss, qui, nourris de saint Au^stin, soutiennent, avec le realisme platonicien,
la doctrine de la predestination : Luther et Calvin ne fotit guere autre chose, dans lettrs principaux otivrages, que cultiver des
semences d" Augustinianisine" (/ c. ii. p. 176). But the Reformation is far more, of course, than a repristination of an old contro-
versy; it is a new creation, and marks the epoch of modern Christianity which is different both from the mediaeval and from ancient or
patristic Christianity.

2 It is well known that Luther, as late as 1326, in his work, De servo arbitrio, against Erasmus, which he never retracted, pro-
ceeded upon the most rigorous notion of the divine omnipotence, wholly denied the freedom of the will, declared it a mere lie {ineruni
inendaciutn), pronounced the calls of the Scriptures to repentance a divine irony, and based eternal salvation and eternal perdition upon
the secret will of God ; in all this he almost exceeded Calvin. See particulars in the books on doctrine-history ; the inaugural disserta-
tion of Jul. Muller : Lutheri de pmdestinatione et libero arbitrio doctrina, Gott. 1832 ; and a historical treatise on predestination
by Carl Beck in the "Studien und Kritiken" for 1847. We add, as a curiosity, the opinion of Gibbon (ch. xxxiii.), who, however,
had a very limited and superficial knowledge of Augustin : " The rigid system of Christianity which he framed or restored, has been
entertained, with public applause, and secret reluctance, by the Latin church. The church of Rome has canonized Augustin, and rep-
robated Calvin. Yet as the real difference between them is invisible even to a theological microscope, the Molinists are oppressed by
the authority of the saint, and the Jansenists are disgraced by their resemblance to the heretic. In the mean while the Protestant Ar-
minians stand aloof, and deride the mutual perplexity of the disputants. Perhaps a reasoner, still more independent, may smile in his
turn when he peruses an Arminian commentary on the Epistle to the Romans." Nourrisson (ii. 179), from, his Roman stand-point,
likewise makes Lutheranism to consist " essentiellonent dans la question du libre arbitre." But the principle of Lutheranism, and
of Protestantism generally, is the supremacy of the Holy Scriptures as a rule of faith, and salvation by free grace through faith in Christ.

3 On the mighty influence of Augustin in the seventeenth century in France, especially on the noble Jansenists, see the works on
Jansenism, and also Nourrisson, /. c. tom. ii. pp. 186-276.


PROLEGOMENA. 23


The excess of Augustin and the Reformers in this direction is due to the earnestness and
energy of their sense of sin and grace. The Pelagian looseness could never beget a reformer.
It was only the unshaken conviction of man's own inability, of unconditional dependence on
God, and of the almighty power of his grace to give us strength for every good work, which
could do this. He who would give others the conviction that he has a divine vocation for the
church and for mankind, must himself be penetrated with the faith of an eternal, unalterable
decree of God, and must cling to it in the darkest hours.

In great men, and only in great men, great opposites and apparently antagonistic truths live
together. Small minds cannot hold them. The catholic, churchly, sacramental, and sacerdotal
system stands in conflict with the evangelical Protestant Christianity of subjective, personal
experience. The doctrine of universal baptismal regeneration, in particular, which presupposes
a universal call (at least within the church), can on principles of logic hardly be united with the
doctrine of an absolute predestination, which limits the decree of redemption to a portion of
the baptized. Augustin supposes, on the one hand, that every baptized person, through the
inward operation of the Holy Ghost, which accompanies the outward act of the sacrament, receives
the forgiveness of sins, and is translated from the state of nature into the state of grace, and
thus, qua baptizatus, is also a child of God and an heir of eternal life ; and yet, on the other
hand, he makes all these benefits dependent on the absolute will of God, who saves only a
certain number out of the "mass of perdition," and preserves these to the end. Regeneration
and election, with him, do not, as with Calvin, coincide. The former may exist without the
latter, but the latter cannot exist without the former. Augustin assumes that many are actually
born into the kingdom of grace only to perish again \ Calvin holds that in the case of the
non-elect baptism is an unmeaning ceremony ; the one putting the delusion in the inward effect,
the other in the outward form. The sacramental, churchly system throws the main stress upon
the baptismal regeneration, to the injury of the eternal election ; the Calvinistic or Puritan
system sacrifices the virtue of the sacrament to the election ; the Lutheran and high Anglican
systems seek a middle ground, without being able to give a satisfactory theological solution
of the problem. The Anglican Church, however, allows the two opposite views, and sanctions
the one in the baptismal service of the. Book of Common Prayer, the other in her Thirty-nine
Articles, and other standards, as interpreted by the low church or evangelical party in a moder-
ately Calvinistic sense.

It was an evident ordering of God, that Augustin's theology, like the Latin Bible of
Jerome, appeared just in that transitional period of history, in which the old civilization was
passing away before the flood of barbarism, and a new order of things, under the guidance of
the Christian religion, was in preparation. The church, with her strong, imposing organization
and her firm system of doctrine, must save Christianity amidst the chaotic turmoil of the great
migration, and must become a training-school for the barbarian nations of the middle age.^

In this process of training, next to the Holy Scriptures, the scholarship of Jerome and the
theology and fertile ideas of Augustin were the most important intellectual agents.

1 GrizOT, the Protestant historian and statesman, very correctly says in his Histoire generate de la chnlisation en Europe
Deuxieme lecon, p. 45 sq. ed. Bruxelles, 1850) : "S'il n'efit pas He une eglise,je ne sais ce gui en serait avenu au milieu de la chute
de V empire romain. . , . Si le christianistne ti'eiit ete coinnie dans les premiers ieinps, gu'une croyance, un sentiment, une con-
viction indivtduelle, on peut croire gu'il aurait succotnie au milieu de la dissolution de V empire et de I' invasion des barhares. II a
succombe plus tard, en Asie et dans tons le nord de I' A/rique, sous une invasion de meme nature, sous V invasion des barbares mus-
almans : il a succombe alors, quoiqu il fid a tetat d' institution, d'eglise constiiuee. A bieii plus /arte raison le meme fait aurait pu
arriver au jnoment de la chute de V empire romain. II n'y avail alors aucun des moyens par lesguels aiijourd hui les influences
morales s' etablissent ou resistent independaniment des institutions, aucun des moyens par lesguels une pure verite, une pure idee
acguiert un grand empire sur les esprits , gouverne les actions, determine des evenemens. Rien de semblable n' existait au IV^siecle,
pour donner aux idees, aux sentiments personels , une pareille autorite. II est clair gu' il fallait une societe fortement organisee,
yortement gouvemee , pour lutter contre un par eil desastre, pour sortir victorieuse d'un tel ouragan. Je ne crois pas trop dire en
affirtnant gu' a la fin du IV' et au commenceme7it du I " siecle, c' est I'eglise chretienne qui a sauve le ckristianisme ; c est I'eglise avec
ses institutions, ses magistrals , son pouvoir , gui s' est de/endue vigoureicsemcnt contre la dissolution interieure de l' empire, contre la
barbaric, gui a conguis les barbares, gui est devenue le lien, le tnoyen, le principe de civilisation entre le mo7ide romain et le monde
barbare."


24 PROLEGOMENA.


Augustin was held in so universal esteem that he could exert influence in all directions, and
even in his excesses gave no offence. He was sufificiently catholic for the principle of church
authority, and yet at the same time so free and evangelical that he modified its hierarchical and
sacramental character, reacted against its tendencies to outward, mechanical ritualism, and kept
alive a deep consciousness of sin and grace, and a spirit of fervent and 'truly Christian piety,
until that spirit grew strong enough to break the shell of hierarchical tutelage, and enter a new
stage of its development. No other father could have acted more beneficently on the Catholi-
cism of the middle age, and more successfully provided for the evangelical Reformation than
St. Augustin, the worthy successor of Paul, and the precursor of Luther and Calvin.

He had lived at the time of the Reformation, he would in all probability have taken the
lead of the evangelical movement against the prevailing Pelagianism of the Roman Church,
though he would not have gone so far as Luther or Calvin. For we must not forget that,
notwithstanding their strong affinity, there is an important difference between Catholicism
and Romanism or Popery. They sustain a similar relation to each other as the Judaism of the
Old Testament dispensation, which looked to, and prepared the way for, Christianity, and
the Judaism after the crucifixion and after the destruction of Jerusalem, which is antagonistic to
Christianity. Catholicism covers the entire ancient and mediaeval history of the church, and
includes the Pauline, Augustinian, or evangelical tendencies which increased with the corrup-
tions of the papacy and the growing sense of the necessity of a " reformatio in capite et membris.'^
Romanism proper dates from the council of Trent, which gave it symbolical expression and
anathematized the doctrines of the Reformation. Catholicism is the strength of Romanism,
Romanism is the weakness of Catholicism. Catholicism produced Jansenism, Popery con-
demned it. Popery never forgets and never learns anything, and can allow no change in do^:-
trine (except by way of addition), without sacrificing its fundamental principle of infallibility,
and thus committing suicide. But Catholicism may ultimately burst the chains of Popery which
have so long kept it confined, and may assume new life and vigour.

Such a personage as Augustin, still holding a mediating place between the two great divisions
of Christendom, revered alike by both, and of equal influence with both, is furthermore a
welcome pledge of the elevating prospect of a future reconciliation of Catholicism and Protest-
antism in a higher unity, conserving all the truths, losing all the errors, forgiving all the sins,
forgetting all the enmities of both. After all, the contradiction between authority and freedom,
the objective and the subjective, the churchly and the personal, the organic and the individual,
the sacramental and the experimental in religion, is not absolute, but relative and temporary,
and arises not so much from the nature of things, as from the deficiencies of man's knowledge
and piety in this world. These elements admit of an ultimate harmony in the perfect state of
the church, corresponding to the union of the divine and human natures, which transcends the
limits of finite thought and logical comprehension, and is yet completely realized in the person
of Christ. They are in fact united in the theological system of St. Paul, who had the highest
view of the church, as the mystical " body of Christ," and " the pillar and ground of the truth,"
and who was at the same time the great champion of evangelical freedom, individual responsi-
bility, and personal union of the believer with his Saviour. We believe in and hope for one

HOLY CATHOLIC APOSTOLIC CHURCH, ONE COMMUNION OF SAINTS, ONE FLOCK, ONE ShEPHERD.

The more the different churches become truly Christian, the nearer they draw to Christ, and the
more they labor for His kingdom which rises above them all, the nearer will they come to one
another. For Christ is the common head and vital centre of all believers, and the divine har-
mony of all discordant human sects and creeds. In Christ, says Pascal, one of the greatest
and noblest disciples of Augustin, In Christ all contradictions are solved.


CHIEF EVENTS IN THE LIFE OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


(AS GIVEN, NEARLY, IN THE BENEDICTINE EDITION).


A.D. A. D.

354. Augustin born at Tagaste, Nov. 13 ; his
parents, Patricius and Monnica ; shortly
afterwards enrolled among the Catechu- 388.
mens.

370. Returns home from studying Rhetoric at 389.
Madaura, after an idle childhood, and from
idleness falls-into dissipation and sin. 392.

371. Patricius dies; Augustin supported at Car- 394.
thage by his mother, and his friend Romani- 395.
anus ; forms an illicit connection.

372. Birth of his son Adeodatus. 396.

373. Cicero's Hortensius awakens in him a strong
desire for true wisdom. 397.

374. He falls into the Manichaean heresy, and
seduces several of his acquaintances mto it. 398.
His mother's earnest prayers for him ; she 402.
is assured of his recovery. 404.

376, Teaches Grammar at Tagaste ; but soon

returns to Carthage to teach Rhetoric — 408.
gains a prize. 411.

379. Is recovered from study of Astrology — writes
his books De pulcJiro et apto.

382. Discovers the Manichasans to be in error, but 413.
falls into scepticism. Goes to Rome to teach
Rhetoric. 417.

385. Removes to Milan ; his errors gradually
removed through the teaching of Ambrose, 420.
but he is held back by the flesh ; becomes 424.
again a Catechumen. 426.

386. Studies St. Paul ; converted through a voice 428.
from heaven ; gives up his profession ; writes ^29.
against the Academics; prepares for Baptism. 430.

387. Is baptized by Bishop Ambrose, with his son


Adeodatus. Death of his m.other, Monnica,
in her fifty-sixth year, at Ostia.
Aug. revisits Rome, and then returns to
Africa. Adeodatus, full of promise, dies.
Aug. against his will ordained Presbyter at
Hippo by Valerius, its Bishop.
Writes against the Manichasans.
Writes against the Donatists.
Ordained Assistant Bishop to Valerius, toward
the end of the year.

Death of Bishop Valerius. Augustin elected
his successor.

Aug. writes the Confessions, and the De
Tinitate against the Arians.
Is present at the fourth Council of Carthage.
Refutes the Epistle of Petilianus, a Donatist.
Applies to Caecilianus for protection against
the savageness of the Donatists.
Writes De urbis Romce obsidione.
Takes a prominent part in a conference
between the Catholic Bishops and the Don-
atists.

Begins the composition of his great work
De Civitate Dei, completed in 426.
Writes De gestis PalcestiiicB synodi circa
Pelagiiim.

Writes against the Priscillianists.
Writes against the Semipelagians.
Appoints Heraclius his successor.
Writes the Retractations.
Answers the Epistles of Prosper and Hilary.
Dies Aug. 28, in the third month of the
siege of Hippo by the Vandals.

25


THE CONFESSIONS

OF

ST. AUGUSTIN.


TRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED BY

J. G. PILKINGTON, M.A.,

VICAR OF ST. mark's, WEST HACKNEY; AND SOMETIME CLERICAL SECRETARY OF THE

BISHOP OF LONDON'S FUND.


" Thou hast formed us for Thyself, and our hearts are restless till they
find rest in Thee." — Cojifessions, i. I.

" The joy of the solemn service of Thy house constraineth to tears,
when it is read of Thy younger son [Luke xv. 24] ' that he was
dead, and is alive again ; he was lost, and is found.' " — Ibid. viii. 6.

27


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.


" If St. Augustin," says Nourrisson,i « j,^^ Igf^ nothing but his Confessions and the City of God, one could
readily understand the respectful sympathy that surrounds his memory. How, indeed, could one fail to admire in
the City of God 'Cn^ flight of genius, and in the Confessions, what is better still, the effusions of a great soul ?" It
may be safely predicted, that while the mind of man yearns for knowledge, and his heart seeks rest, the Confessions
will retain that foremost place in the world's literature which it has secured by its sublime outpourings of devotion
and profound philosophical spirit. There is in the book a wonderful combination of childlike piety and intellectual
power. Desjardins' idea,^ that, while in Augustin's other works we see the philosopher or the controversialist, here
we see the man, is only to be accepted as a comparative statement of Augustin's attitude in the Confessions ; for
philosophy and piety are in many of his reflections as it were molten into one homogeneous whole. In his highest
intellectual flights we find the breathings of faith and love, and, amid the profoundest expressions of penitential
sorrow, gleams of his metaphysical genius appear.

It may, indeed, be from the man's showing himself so little, as distinguished from the philosopher, that some
readers are a little disappointed in the book. They have expected to meet with a copiousness of biographic details,
and have found, commingled with such as are given, long disquisitions on Manichaeanism, Time, Creation, and
Memory. To avoid such disappointment we must ascertain the author's design. The book is emphatically not an
autobiography. There is in it an outline of the author's life up to his mother's death ; but only so much of detail is
given as may subser\-e his main purpose. That purpose is clearly explained in the fourth section of his Tenth
Book. It was that the impenitent on reading it might not say, " I cannot," and " sleep in despair," but rather that,
looking to that God who had raised the writer from his low estate of pride and sin to be a pillar of the Church, he
might take courage, and "awake in the sweetness of His grace, by which he that is weak is made strong; " and
that those no longer in sin might rejoice and praise God as they heard of the past lusts of him who was now freed
from them.* This, his design of encouraging penitence and stimulating praise, is referred to in his Retractations,^
and in his Letter to Darius?

These two main ideas are embodied in the very meaning of the title of the book, the word confession having,
as Augustin constantly urges, two meanings. In his exposition of the Psalms we read : " Confession is understood
in two senses, of our sins, and of God's praise. Confession of our sins is well known, so well known to all the
people, that whenever they hear the name of confession in the lessons, whether it is said in praise or of sin, they
beat their breasts." ^ Again : " Confession of sin all know, but confession of praise few attend to." ^ " The former
but showeth the wound to the physician, the latter giveth thanks for health." ** He would therefore have his hearers
make the sacrifice of praise their ideal, since, in the City of God, even in the New Jerusalem, there will be no longer
confession of sin, but there will be confession of praise.^ It is not surprising, that with this view of confession he
should hinge on the incidents of his life such considerations as tend to elevate the mind and heart of the reader.
"When, for example, he speaks of his youthful sins,i^ he diverges into a disquisition on the motives to sin ; when his
friend dies,'^ he moralizes on death ; and — to give one example of a reverse process — his profound psychological
review of memory ^^ recalls his former sin (which at times haunts him in his dreams), and leads up to devout reflec-
tions on God's power to cleanse from sin. This undertone of penitence and praise which pervades the Confessions
in all its episodes, like the golden threads which run through the texture of an Eastern garment, presents one of its
peculiar charms.

It would not be right to overlook a charge that has been brought against the book by Lord Byron. He says,
"Augustin in his fine Confessions tos^q^ the reader envy his transgressions." Nothing could be more reckless or

1 Philosophie de St. Augustin, Preface. 2 Essai sur les Can/, de St. Aug. p. 5. ' Confessions , x. sec. 4.

* See the passage quoted immediately after this Preface. ^ Ep. ccxxxi. sec. 6.

* Enarr. in Ps. cxli. sec. 19 : see also in Ps. cxvii. sec. i, xxix. sec. 19, xciv. sec. 4, and xxix. sec. ig.

T Enarr. in Ps. cxxxvii. sec. 2. 8 Enarr. in Ps. ex. sec. 2. » In Ps. xliv. sec. 33, xcix. sec. 16.

10 Book ii. sees. 6-iS. n Book iv. sees. 11-15. ** Book x. sees. 41, 42.

29


30 TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

further from the truth than this charge. There is here no dwelling on his sin, or painting it so as to satisfy a pru-
rient imagination. As we have already remarked, Augustin's manner is not to go into detail further than to find a
position from which to "edify" the reader, and he treats this episode in his life with his characteristic delicacy and
reticence. His sin was dead ; and he had carried it to its burial with tears of repentance. And when, ten years
after his baptism, he sets himself, at the request of some, to a consideration of what he then was at the moment of
making his confessions,' he refers hardly at all to this sin of his youth ; and such allusions as he does make are of
the most casual kind. Instead of enlarging upon it, he treats it as past, and only speaks of temptation and sin as
they are common to all men. Many of the French writers on the Confessions ^ nistitute a comparison in this matter
between the confessions of Augustin and those of Rousseau. Pressense '^ draws attention to the delicacy and
reserve which characterise the one, and the arrogant defiance of God and man manifested in the other. The con-
fessions of the one he speaks of as " tin grand acte de repentir et d'' amour ; " and eloquently says, " In it he seems,
like the Magdalen, to have spread his box of perfumes at the foot of the Saviour ; from his stricken heart there
exhales the incense most agreeable to God — the homage of true penitence." The other he truly describes as
uttering "a ciy of triumph in the very midst of his sin, and robing his shame in a royal purple." Well may Des-
jardins * express surprise at a book of such foulness coming from a genius so great ; and perhaps his solution of the
enigma is not far from the truth, when he attributes it to an overweening vanity and egotism.^

It is right to point out, in connection with this part of our subject, that in regard to some at least of Augustin's
self-accusations,^ there may be a little of that pious exaggeration of his sinfulness which, as Lord Macaulay points
out in his essays on Bunyan,^ frequently characterises deep penitence. But however this may be, justice requires us
to remember, in considering his transgression, that from his very childhood he had been surrounded by a condition
of civilisation presenting manifold temptations. Carthage, where he spent a large part of his life, had become,
since its restoration and colonization under Augustus Ceesar, an " exceeding gi-eat city," in wealth and importance
next to Rome.^ "African Paganism," says Pressense,^ "was half Asiatic; the ancient worship of nature, the
adoration of Astarte, had full licence in the city of Carthage ; Dido had become a mythological being, whom this
dissolute city had made its protecting divinity, and it is easy to recognise in her the gi'eal goddess of Phoenicia under
a new name." The luxury' of the period is described by Jerome and Tertullian, when they denounce the custom
of painting the face and tiring the head, and the prodigality that would give 25,000 golden crowns for a veil,
immense revenues for a pair of ear-rings, and the value of a forest or an island for a head-dress.'" And Jerome, in
one of his epistles, gives an illustration of the Church's relation to the Pagan world at that time, when he represents
an old priest of Jupiter with his grand-daughter, a catechumen, on his knee, who responds to his caresses by singing
canticles.'' It was a time when we can imagine one of Augustin's parents going to the Colosseum, and enjoying
the lasciviousness of its displays, and its gladiatorial shows, with their contempt of human life ; while the other
carefully shunned such scenes, as being under the ban of the teachers of the Church.'^ It was an age in which there
was action and reaction between religion and philosophy ; but in which the power of Christianity was so great in
its influences on Paganism, that some received the Christian Scriptures only to embody in their phraseology the ideas
of heathenism. Of this last point Manichseanism presents an illustration. Now all these influences left their mark
on Augustin. In his youth he plunged deep into the pleasures of his day ; and we know how he endeavoured to
find in Manichseanism a solution of those speculations which haunted his subtle and inquiring mind. Augustin at
this time, then, is not to be taken as a type of what Christianity produced. He is to a gieat extent the outgrowth of
the Pagan influences of the time. Considerations such as these may enable us to judge of his early sin more justly
than if we measured it by our own privileges and opportunities.

The style of Augustin is sometimes criticised as not having the refinement of Virgil, Horace, or Cicero. But
it should be remembered that he wrote in a time of national decay ; and further, as Desjardins has remarked in the
introduction to his essay, he had no time "to cut his phrases." From the period of his conversion to that of his
death, he was constantly engaged in controversy with this or that heresy ; and if he did not write with classical
accuracy, he so inspired the language with his genius, and moulded it by his fire,'^ that it appears almost to pulsate
with the throbbings of his brain. He seems likewise to have despised 7nere elegance, for in his Confessions}*^ when

1 Book X. sec. 4.

2 In addition to those referred to, there is one at the beginning of vol. ii. of Saint-Marc Girardin's Essais de Literature et de Morale,
devoted to this subject. It has some good points in it, but has much of that sentimentality so often found in French criticisms.

3 Le Christianisme au Quatrihne Steele, p. 269. < Essai sur les Con/., etc. p. 12.

6 He concludes : " La folie de son orgtieil, voila le mot de I'enigpne, ou l' enigme n' en a pas." — Ibid. p. 13.

8 Compare Confessions, ii. sec. 2, and iii. sec. i, with iv. sec. 2.

' In vol. i. of his Crit. and Hist. Essays, and also in his Miscellaneous Writings . 8 Herodian Hist. vii. 6.

8 Le Christianisme , etc. as above, p. 274. W Quoted by Nourrisson, Pliilosophie, etc. ii. 436. ^l Ibid. ii. 434, 435.

12 See Confessions, iii. sec. 2, note, and vi. sec. 13, note.

1* See Poujoulat, Lettres de St. Aicgusiin, Introd. p. 12, who compares the language of the time to Ezekiel's Valley of Dry Bones,
and says Augustin inspired it with life,
l* Confessions , v. sec. 10.


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE. 31

speaking of the style of Faustus, he says, " What profit to me was the elegance of my cup-bearer, since he offered
me not the more precious draught for which I thirsted? " In this connection the remarks of Collenges ^ are worthy
of note. He says, when anticipating objections that might be made to his own style : " It was the last of my study ;
my opinion always was what Augustin calls diligens negligentia was the best diligence as to that ; while I was yet a
very young man I had learned out of him that it was no solecism in a preacher to use ossitm for os^ for (saith he) an
iron key is better than one made of gold if it will better open the door, for that is all the use of the key. I had
learned out of Hierom that a gaudry of phrases and words in a pulpit is but sigmim insipieniicB. The words of a
preacher, saith he, ou^t punge re, non palpare, to prick the heart, not to smooth and coax. The work of anorat or
is too precarious for a minister of the gospel. Gregory observed that our Saviour had not styled us the stigar but
the salt of the earth, and Augustin observeth, that tliiough Cyprian in one epistle showed much of a florid orator,
to show he could do it, yet he never would do so any more, to show he would not."

There are several features in the Confessions deserving of remark, as being of special interest to the philosopher,
the historian or the divine.

1. Chiefest amongst these is the intense desire for knowledge and the love of truth which characterised Augustin.
This was noticeable before his conversion in his hungering after such knowledge as Manichseanism and the philosophy
of the time could afford. ^ It is none the less observable in that better time, when, in his quiet retreat at Cassicia-
cum, he sought to strengthen the foundations of his faith, and resolved to give himself up to the acquisition of divine
knowledge. •* It was seen, too, in the many conflicts in which he was engaged with Donatists, Manichseans, Arians,
and Pelagians, and in his earnest study of the deep things of God. This love of knowledge is perhaps conveyed in
the beautiful legend quoted by Nourisson,* of the monk wrapped in spirit, who expressed astonishment at not seeing
Augustin among the elect in heaven. " He is higher up," he was answered, " he is standing before the Holy Trinity
disputing thereon for all eternity."

While from the time of his conversion we find him holding on to the fundamental doctrines of the faith with
the tenacity of one who had experienced the hollowness of the teachings of philosophy,^ this passion for truth led
him to handle most freely subjects of speculation in things non-essential.® But whether viewed as a controversialist,
a student of Scripture, or a bishop of the Church of God, he ever manifests those qualities of mind and heart that
gained for him not only the affection of the Church, but the esteem of his unorthodox opponents. To quote Guizot's
discriminating words, there was in him " ce melange de passion et de douceur, d'' autorite et de sympathie, d''etendue
d'' esprit et de rigueur logique, qui lui do?ttiait tin si rare pouvoir^ ^

2. It is to this eager desire for truth in his many-sided mind that we owe those trains of thought that read like
forecasts of modern opinion. We have called attention to some such anticipations of modern thought as they recur
in the notes throughout the book ; but the speculations on Memor}', Time, and Creation, which occupy so large a
space in Books Ten and Eleven, deserve more particular notice. The French essayists have entered very fully into
these questions. M. Saisset, in his admirable introduction to the De Civitate Dei^ reviews Augustin's theories as to
the mysterious problems connected with the idea of Creation. He says, that in his subtle analysis of Time, and in his
attempt at reconciling " the eternity of creative action with the dependence of things created, ... he has touched with
a bold and delicate hand one of the deepest mysteries of the human mind, and that to all his glorious titles he has added
another, that of an ingenious psychologist and an eminent metaphysician." Desjardins likewise commends the depth
of Augustin's speculations as to Time,* and maintains that no one's teaching as to Creation has shown more clear-
ness, boldness, and vigor — avoiding the perils of dualism on the one hand, and atheism on the other. i" In his remarks
on Augustin's disquisitions on the phenomena of Memon% his praise is of a more qualified character. He compares
his theories with those of Malebranche, and, while recognising the practical and animated character of his descrip-
tions, thinks him obscure in his delineation of the manner in which absent realities reproduce themselves on the
memory.'^

We have had occasion in the notes to refer to the Unseen Universe. The authors of this powerful "Apologia" for
Christianity propose it chiefly as an antidote to the materialistic disbelief in the immortality of the soul amongst sci-
entific men, which has resulted in this age from the recent advance in physical science ; just as in the last century
English deism had its rise in a similar influence. It is curious, in connection with this part of our subject, to note

1 The Intercourses of Divine Love betwixt Christ and His Church, Preface (16S3).

2 See Confessions , iv. sec. i, note. '^ Ibid. ix. sec. 7, note, and compare x. sec. 55, note.
* Philosophic , etc. as above, i. 320. 6 See Confessions , xiii. sec. 33, note. ^ Ibid. xi. sec. 3, note 4.
' Histoire de la Civilisation en France, i. 203 (1829). Guizot is speaking of Augustin's attitude in the Pelagian controversy.

8 A portion of this introduction will be found translated in Appendix ii. of M. Saisset's Essay on Religious Philosophy (Clark).

9 Essai, etc. as before, p. 129. i" Essai, etc. p. 130.

n Ibid. pp. I20--I23. Nourrisson's criticism of Augustin's views on Memory may well be compared with that of Desjardins. He
speaks of the powerful originality of Augustin — who is ingenious as well as new — and says some of his disquisitions are " the most
admirable which have inspired psychological observation." And further, one does not meet in all the books of St. Augustin any
philosophical theories which have greater depth than that on Memory." — Philosophic , etc. as above, i. 133.


32 TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

that in leading up to the conclusion at which he arrives, M. Saisset quotes a passage from the City of God^ which
contains an adumbration of the theoiy of the above work in regard to the eternity of the invisible universe.* Verily,
the saying of the wise man is true : " The thing that hath been, it is that wliich shall be ; and that which is done, is
that which shall be done : and there is no new thing under the sun." ^

3. We have already, in a previous paragraph, biiefly adverted to the influence Christianity aud Paganism had one
on the other. The history of Christianity has been a steady advance on Paganism and Pagan philosophy ; but it can
hardly be denied that in this advance there has been an absorption — and in some periods in no small degree — of
some of their elements. As these matters have been examined in the notes, we need not do more than refer the
reader to the Index of Subjects for the evidence to be obtained in this respect from the Confessions on such matters
as Baptism, False Miracles, and Prayers for the Dead.

4. There is one feature in the Confessions which we should not like to pass unnoticed. A reference to the J?e-
tractations * will show that Augustin highly appreciated the spiritual use to which the book might be put in the edifica-
tion of the brethren. We believe that it will prove most useful in this way ; and spiritual benefit will accnie in pro-
portion to the steadiness of its use. We would venture to suggest that Book X., from section 37 to the end, may be
profitably used as a manual of self-examination. We have pointed out in a note, that in his comment on the 8th
Psalm he makes our Lord's three temptations to be types of all the temptations to which man can be subjected ; and
makes them correspond in their order, as given by St. Matthew, to " the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes,
and the Pride of Life," mentioned by St. John.* Under each of these heads we have, in this part of the Confessions,
a most severe examination of conscience ; and the impression is deepened by his allegorically likening the three
divisions of temptation to the beasts of the field, the fish of the sea, and the birds of the air.® We have already
remarked, in adverting to allegorical interpretation,' that where "the strict use of the history is not disregarded," to
use Augustin's expression, allegorizing, by way of spiritual meditation, may be profitable. Those who employ it
with this idea will find their interpretations greatly aided, and made more systematic, by realizing Augustin's methods
here and in the last two books of the Confessions, — as when he makes the sea to represent the wicked world, and the
fruitful earth the Church.^

It only remains to call attention to the principles on which this translation and its annotations have been made.
The text of the Benedictine edition has been followed ; but the head-lines of the chapters are taken from the edition
of Bruder, as being the more definite and full. After carefully translating the whole of the book, it has been com-
pared, line by line, with the translation of Watts ^ (one of the most nervous translations of the seventeenth century),
and that of Dr. Pusey, which is confessedly founded upon that of Watts. Reference has also been made, m the
case of obscure passages, to the French translation of Du Bois, and the English translation of the first Ten Books
alluded to in the note on Bk. ix. ch. 12. The references to Scripture are in the words of the Authorized Version wherever
the sense will bear it ; and whenever noteworthy variations from our version occur, they are indicated by references
to the old Italic version, or to the Vulgate. In some cases, where Augustin has clearly referred to the LXX. in
order to amend his version thereby, such variations are indicated.^" The annotations are, for the most part, such as
have been derived from the translator's own reading. Two exceptions, however, must be made. Out of upwards of
four hundred notes, some forty are taken from the annotations in Pusey and Watts, but in every case these have been
indicated by the initials E. B. P. or W. W. Dr. Pusey's annotations (which will be found chiefly in the earlier part
of this work) consist almost entirely of quotations from other works of Augustin. These annotations are very copious,
and Dr. Pusey explains that he resorted to this method "partly because this plan of illustrating St. Augustin out of
himself had been already adopted by M. Du Bois in his Latin edition . . . and it seemed a pity not to use valuable
materials ready collected to one's hand. The far greater part of these illustrations are taken from that edition." It
seemed the most proper course, in using such notes of Du Bois as appeared suitable for this edition, to take them
from Dr. Pusey's edition, and, as above stated, to indicate their source by his initials. A Textual Index has been
added, for the first time, to this edition, and both it and the Index of Subjects have been prepared with the greatest
possible care.

J. G. P.

St. Mark's Vicarage, West Hackney, 1876.

1 Book xii. chap. 15.

* This position is accepted by Leibnitz in his Essais de Theodicee. See also M. Saisset, as above, ii. 196-8 (Essay by the translator).

* Eccles. i. 9. * Quoted immediately after this preface. * i John ii. 16.

* See Confessions, v. sec. 4, note, and x. sec. 41 , note. ' See ibid. vi. sec. 5, note.

8 See Confessions , xiii. sec. 20, note 3, and sec. 21, note i.

9 "St. Augustin's Confessions translated, and with some marginal notes illustrated by William Watts, Rector of St. Alban's,
Wood St. (1631)."

10 For whatever our idea maybe as to the extent of his knowledge of Greek, it is beyond dispute that he frequently had recourse to
the Greek of the Old and New Testament with this view. See Nourrisson, Philosophic, etc. ii. p. 96.


THE OPINION OF ST. AUGUSTIN


CONCERNING HIS


CONFESSIONS, AS EMBODIED IN HIS RETRACTATIONS, ii. 6


1. " The Thirteen Books of my Confessions whether they refer to my evil or good, praise
the just and good God, and stimulate the heart and mind of man to approach unto Him. And,
as far as pertaineth unto me, they wrought this in me when they were written, and this they work
when they are read. What some thmk of them they may have seen, but that they have given
much pleasure, and do give pleasure, to many brethren I know. From the First to the Tenth
they have been written of myself; in the remaining three, of the Sacred Scriptures, from the
text, ' In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth,' even to the rest of the Sabbath
(Gen. i. i, ii. 2)."

2. "In the Fourth Book, when I acknowledged the distress of my mind at the death of a
friend, saying, that our soul, though one, had been in some manner made out of two ; and there-
fore, I say, perchance was I afraid to die lest he should die wholly whom I had so much loved
(chap, vi.) ; — this seems to me as if it were a light declamation rather than a grave confession,
although this folly may in some sort be tempered by that ' perchance ' which follows. And in
the Thirteenth Book (chap, xxxii.) what I said, viz. : that the ' firmament was made between the
spiritual upper waters, and the corporeal lower waters,' was said without due consideration ; but
the thing is very obscure."

[In ^/. ad Darium, Ep. ccxxxi. c. 6, written a. d. 429, Augustin says: "Accept, my son,
the books containing my Confessions which you desired to have. In these behold me that you
may not praise me more than I deserve ; there believe what is said of me, not by others, but by
myself; there mark me, and see what I have been in myself, by myself; and if anything in me
please you, join me in praising Him to whom, and not to myself, I desired praise to be given.
For ' He hath made us, and not we ourselves ' (Ps. 1. 3). Indeed, we had destroyed ourselves,
but He who made us has made us anew {jjui fecit, rcfecit). When, however, you find me in
these books, pray for me that I may not fail, but be perfected {ne defciam, sed perficiar). Pray,
my son, pray. I feel what I say; I know what I ask." — P. S.]

\^De Dono Perseverantice, c. 20 (53) : " Which of my smaller works could be more widely
known or give greater pleasure than my Confessions ? And although I published them before the
Pelagian heresy had come into existence, certainly in them I said to my God, and said it
frequently, 'Give what Thou commandest, and command what Thou wiliest' {Conf. x. 19, 31,
37). Which words of mine, Pelagius at Rome, when they were mentioned in his presence by
a certain brother and fellow-bishop of mine, could not bear. , . . Moreover in those same
books ... I showed that I was granted to the faithful and daily tears of my mother, that
I should not perish. There certainly I declared that God by His grace converted the will of
men to the true faith, not only when they had been turned away from it, but even when they
were opposed to it." — P. S.]

33


CONTENTS OF THE CONFESSIONS.


BOOK FIRST.

COMMENCING WITH THE INVOCATION OF GOD, AUGUSTIN RELATES IN DETAIL THE BEGINNING OF HIS
LIFE, HIS INFANCY AND BOYHOOD UP TO HIS FIFTEENTH YEAR ; AT WHICH AGE HE ACKNOWL-
EDGES THAT HE WAS MORE INCLINED TO ALL YOUTHFUL PLEASURES AND VICES THAN TO THE
STUDY OF LETTERS.

PAGE

Chapter I. — He proclaims the greatness of God, whom he desires to seek and invoke, being awakened by

Him, 45

Chapter II. — That the God whom we invoke is in us, and we in Him, 45

Chapter III. — Everywhere God wholly filleth all things, but neither heaven nor earth containeth Him, . . 46

Chapter IV. — The majesty of God is supreme, and His virtues inexplicable, 46

Chapter V. — He seeks rest in God, and pardon of his sins, 46

Chapter VI. — He describes his infancy, and lauds the protection and eternal providence of God, .... 47

Chapter VII. — He shows by examples that even infancy is prone to sin, " 48

Chapter VIII. — That when a boy he learned to speak, not by any set method, but from the acts and words

of his parents, 49

Chapter IX. — Concerning the hatred of learning, the love of play, and the fear of being whipped notice-
able in boys ; and of the folly of our elders and masters, 49

Chapter X. — Through a love of ball-playing and shows, he neglects his studies and the injunctions of his

parents, 50

Chapter XL — Seized by disease, his mother being troubled, he earnestly demands baptism, which on re-
covery is postponed — his father not as yet believing in Christ 50

Chapter XII. — Being compelled, he gave his attention to learning, but fully acknowledges that this was the

work of God, 50

Chapter XIII. — He delighted in Latin studies, and the empty fables of the poets, but hated the elements

of literature and the Greek language, 5 1

Chapter XIV. — Why he despised Greek literature, and easily learned Latin, 5 1

Ch.\PTER XV. — He entreats God, that whatever useful things he learned as a boy may be dedicated to Him, 52
Chapter XVI. — He disapproves of the mode of educating youth, and he points out why wickedness is

attributed to the gods by the poets, 52

Chapter XVII — He continues on the unhappy method of training youth in literary subjects, 53

Chapter XVIII. — Men desire to observe the rules of learning, but neglect the eternal rules of everlasting

safety, 53


BOOK SECOND.


HE ADVANCES TO PUBERTY, AND INDEED TO THE EARLY PART OF THE SIXTEENTH YEAR OF HIS AGE,
IN WHICH, HAVING ABANDONED HIS STUDIES, HE INDULGED IN LUSTFUL PLEASURES, AND, WITH
HIS COMPANIONS, COMMITTED THEFT.

Chapter I. — He deplores the wickedness of his youth, 55

Chapter H. — Stricken with exceeding grief, he remembers the dissolute passions in which, in his sixteenth

year, he used to indulge, 55

Chapter III. — Concerning his father, a freeman of Thagaste, the assister of his son's studies, and on the

admonitions of his mother on the preservation of chastity, 5^

35


36 CONTENTS OF THE CONFESSIONS.

PAGE

Chapter IV. — He commits theft with his companions, not urged on by poverty, but from a certain distaste

for well-doing, 57

Chapter V. — Concerning the motives to sin, which are not in the love of evil, but in the desire of obtaining

the property of others 57

Chapter VI. — Why he delighted in that theft, when all things which under the appearance of good invite

to vice, are true and perfect in God alone, 58

Chapter VII. — He gives thanks to God for the remission of his sins, and reminds every one that the

Supreme God may have preserved us from greater sins, 59

Chapter VIII. — In his theft he loved the company of his fellow-sinners, 59

Chapter IX. — It was a pleasure to him also to laugh when seriously deceiving others, 59

Chapter X. — With God there is true rest and life unchanging, 59


BOOK THIRD.


OF THE SEVENTEENTH, EIGHTEENTH, AND NINETEENTH YEARS OF HIS AGE, PASSED AT CARTHAGE,
WHEN, HAVING COMPLETED HIS COURSE OF STUDIES, HE IS CAUGHT IN THE SNARES OF A LI-
CENTIOUS PASSION, AND FALLS INTO THE SNARES OF THE MANICH^ANS.

Chapter I. — Deluded by an insane love, he, though foul and dishonourable, desires to be thought elegant

and urbane, 60

Chapter H. — In public spectacles he is moved by an empty compassion. He is attacked by a troublesome

spiritual disease, 60

Chapter III. — Not even when at church does he suppress his desires. In the school of Rhetoric he abhors

the acts of subverters, » 6l

Chapter IV. — In the nineteenth year of his age (his father having died two years before) he is led by the

Hortensius of Cicero to philosophy, to God, and a better mode of thinking, 61

Chapter V. — He rejects the Sacred Scriptures as too simple, and as not to be compared with the dignity of

Tully, 62

Chapter VI. — Deceived by his own fault, he falls into the errors of the Manichseans, who gloried in the

true knowledge of God, and in a thorough examination of things, 62

Chapter VII. — He attacks the doctrine of the Manichaeans concerning evil. God, and the righteousness

of the patriarchs, 63

Chapter VIII. — He argues against the same as to the reason of offences, 65

Chapter IX. — That the judgment of God and men as to human acts of violence is different, 66

Chapter X. — He reproves the triflings of the Manichaeans as to the fruits of the earth, 66

Chapter XI. — He refers to the tears and the memorable dream concerning her son, granted by God to his

mother, 66

Chapter XII. — The excellent answer of the bishop when referred to by his mother as to the conversion of

her son, 67


BOOK FOURTH.


THEN FOLLOWS A PERIOD OF NINE YEARS FROM THE NINETEENTH YEAR OF HIS AGE, DURING WHICH,
HAVING LOST A FRIEND, HE FOLLOWED THE MANICH^ANS — AND WROTE BOOKS ON THE FAIR AND
FIT, AND PUBLISHED A WORK ON THE LIBERAL ARTS, AND THE CATEGORIES OF ARISTOTLE.

Chapter I. — Concerning that most unhappy time in which he, being deceived, deceived others ; and con-
cerning the mockers of his confession, 68

Chapter II. — He teaches rhetoric, the only thing he loved, and scorns the soothsayers who promised him

victory, 68

Chapter HI. — Not even the most experienced men could persuade him of the vanity of astrology, to which

he was devoted, 69

Chapter IV. — Sorely distressed by weeping at the death of his friend, he provides consolation for himself, . 70

Chapter V. — Why weeping is pleasant to the wTetched, 7 1


CONTENTS OF THE CONFESSIONS. 37

PAGE

Chapter VI. — His friend being snatched away by death, he imagines that he remains only as half, ... 71

Chapter VII. — Troubled by restlessness and grief, he leaves his country a second time for Carthage, ... 71

Chapter VIII. — That his grief ceased by time, and the consolation of friends, 72

Chapter IX. — That the love of a human being, however constant in loving and returning love, perishes ;

while he who loves God never loses a friend, 72

Chapter X. — That all things exist that they may perish, and that we are not safe unless God watches

over us, 7^

Chapter XL — That portions of the world are not to be loved; but that God, their Author, is immutable, and

His word eternal, 73

Chapter XII. — Love is not condemned, but love in God, in whom there is rest through Jesus Christ, is to

be preferred, 73

Chapter XIII. — Love originates from grace and beauty enticing us, 74

Chapter XIV. — Concerning the books which he wrote "on the Fair and Fit," dedicated to Hierius, ... 74
Ch.apter XV. — While writing, being blinded by corporeal images, he failed to recognise the spiritual nature

of God, 75

Chapter XVI. — He very easily understood the liberal arts and the categories of Aristotle, but without true

fruit, 77


BOOK FIFTH.


HE DESCRIBES THE TWENTY-NINTH YEAR OF HIS AGE, IN WHICH, HAVING DISCOVERED THE FALLA-
CIES OF THE MANICHyEANS, HE PROFESSED RHETORIC AT ROME AND MILAN. HAVING HEARD
AMBROSE, HE BEGINS TO COME TO HIMSELF.

Chapter I. — That it becomes the soul to praise God, and to confess unto Him, 79

CH.A.PTER II. — On the vanity of those who wish to escape the Omnipotent God, 79

Chapter III. — Having heard Faustus,'\he most learned bishop of the Manichseans, he discerns that God,

the Author both of things animate and inanimate, chiefly has care for the humble, 80

CH.A.PTER IV. — That the knowledge of terrestrial and celestial things does not give happiness, but the knowl-
edge of God only, 81

Chapter V. — Of Manichseus pertinaciously teaching false doctrines, and proudly arrogating to himself the

Holy Spirit, 8i

Chapter VI. — Faustus was indeed an elegant speaker, but knew nothing of the liberal sciences, '..... 82
Chapter VII. — Clearly seeing the fallacies of the Manichaeans, he retires from them, being remarkably aided

by God S3

Chapter VIII. — He sets out for Rome, his mother in vain lamenting it, 84

Chapter IX. — Being attacked by fever, he is in gi^eat danger, 84

Chapter X. — When he had left the Manichseans, he retained his depraved opinions concerning God, sin,

and the origin of the Saviour, 85

Chapter XL — Helpidius disputed well against the Manichaeans as to the authenticity of the New Testa-
ment, 87

Chapter XII. — Professing rhetoric at Rome, he discovers the fraud of his scholars, 87

Chapter XIII. — He is sent to Milan, that he, about to teach rhetoric, may be known by Ambrose, .... 87
Chapter XIV. — Having heard the Bishop, he perceives the force of the Catholic faith, yet doubts, after the

manner of the modern Academics, 88


BOOK SIXTH.


ATTAINING HIS THIRTIETH YEAR, HE, UNDER THE ADMONITION OF THE DISCOURSES OF AMBROSE,
DISCOVERED MORE AND MORE THE TRUTH OF THE CATHOLIC DOCTRINE, AND DELIBERATES AS
TO THE BETTER REGULATION OF HIS LIFE.

Chapter I. — His mother having followed him to Milan, declares that she will not die before her son shall

have embraced the Catholic faith, 89

Chapter II. — She, on the prohibition of Ambrose, abstains from honouring the memory of the martyrs, . . 90


38 CONTENTS OF THE CONFESSIONS.

PAGE

Chapter III. — As Ambrose was occupied with business and study, Augustin could seldom consult him

concerning the Holy Scriptures, 91

Chapter IV. — He recognises the falsity of his own opinions, and commits to memory the saying of Ambrose, 91
Chapter V. — Faith is the basis of human life ; man cannot discover that truth which Holy Scripture has

disclosed, 92

Chapter VI. — On the source and cause of true joy, — the example of the joyous beggar being adduced, . . 93

Chapter VII. — He leads to reformation his friend Alypius, seized with madness for the Circensian games, . 94
Chapter VIII. — The same when at Rome, being led by others into the Amphitheatre, is delighted with the

gladiatorial games, 95

Chapter IX. — Innocent Alypius, being apprehended as a thief, is set at liberty by the cleverness of an

architect, 96

Chapter X. — The wonderful integrity of Alypius in judgment. The lasting friendship of Nebridius with

Augustin, 97

Chapter XI. — Being troubled by his grievous errors, he meditates entering on a new life, 98

Chapter XII. — Discussion with Alypius concerning a life of celibacy, 98

Chapter XIII. — Being urged by his mother to take a wife, he sought a maiden that was pleasing unto him, 99

Chapter XIV, — The design of establishing a common household with his friends is speedily hindered, . . 99

Chapter XV. — He dismisses one mistress, and chooses another, loo

Chapter XVI. — The fear of death and judgment called him, believing in the immortality of the soul, back

from his wickedness, him who aforetime believed in the opinions of Epicurus, . 100


BOOK SEVENTH.


HE RECALLS THE BEGINNING OF HIS YOUTH, I.e. THE THIRTY-FIRST YEAR OF HIS AGE, IN WHICH
VERY GRAVE ERRORS AS TO THE NATURE OF GOD, AND THE ORIGIN OF EVIL, BEING DISTIN-
GUISHED, AND THE SACRED BOOKS MORE ACCURATELY KNOWN, HE AT LENGTH ARRIVES AT A
CLEAR KNOWLEDGE OF GOD, NOT YET RIGHTLY APPREHENDING JESUS CHRIST.

Chapter I. — He regarded not God, indeed, under the form of a human body, but as a corporeal substance

diffused through space, 102

Chapter II. — The disputation of Nebridius against the Manichseans on the question, " Whether God be

corruptible or incorruptible ? " 103

Chapter HI. — That the cause of evil is the free judgment of the will, 103

Chapter IV. — That God is not corruptible, who, if He were, would not be God at all, 104

Ch.a^pter V. — Questions concerning the origin of evil in regard to God, who, since He is the chief good,

cannot be the cause of evil, 104

Chapter VI. — He refutes the divinations of the astrologers deduced from the constellations, 105

Chapter VII. — He is severely exercised as to the origin of evil, 106

Chapter VIII. — By God's assistance he by degrees arrives at the truth, 107

Chapter IX. — He compares the doctrine of the Platonists concerning the Aoyof with the much more ex-
cellent doctrine of Christianity, 107

Chapter X. — Divine things are the more clearly manifested to him who withdraws into the recesses of his

heart, 109

Chapter XI. — That creatures are mutable and God alone immutable, no

Chapter XII. — Whatever things the good God has created are very good, no

Chapter XIII. — It is meet to praise the Creator for the good things which are made in heaven and earth, . no
Chapter XIV. — Being displeased with some part of God's creation, he conceives of two original sub-
stances, HI

Chapter XV. — Whatever is, owes its being to God, m

Chapter XVI. — Evil arises not from a substance, but from the perversion of the will, in

Chapter XVII. — Above his changeable mind, he discovers the unchangeable Author of Truth, ill

Chapter XVIII. — Jesus Christ, the Mediator, is the only way of safety, 112

Chapter XIX. — He does not yet fully understand the saying of John, "That the Word was made flesh," . 112

Chapter XX. — He rejoices that he proceeded from Plato to the Holy Scriptures, and not the reverse, . . 113

Chapter XXI. — What he found in the sacred books which are not to be found in Plato, 114


CONTENTS OF THE CONFESSIONS. 39

BOOK EIGHTH.

HE FINALLY DESCRIBES THE THIRTY-SECOND YEAR OF HIS ACxE, THE MOST MEMORABLE OF HIS
WHOLE LIFE, IN WHICH, BEING INSTRUCTED BY SIMPLICIANUS CONCERNING THE CONVERSION OF
OTHERS, AND THE MANNER OF ACTING, HE IS, AFTER A SEVERE STRUGGLE, RENEWED IN HIS
WHOLE MIND, AND IS CONVERTED UNTO GOD.

Chapter I. — He, now given to divine things, and yet entangled by the lusts of love, consults Simplicianus

in reference to the renewing of his mind, Il6

Chapter II. — The pious old man rejoices that he read Plato and the Scriptures, and tells him of the rhet-
orician Victorinus having been converted to the faith through the reading of the sacred books, .... 117
Chapter III. — That God and the angels rejoice more on the return of one sinner than of many just persons, 119
Chapter IV. — He shows by the example of Victorinus that there is more joy in the conversion of nobles, . 119

Chapter V. — Of the causes which alienate us from God, 120

Chapter VI. — Pontitianus' account of Antony, the founder of Monachism, and of some who imitated him, 121
Chapter VII. — He deplores his wretchedness, that having been born thirty-two years, he had not yet found

the truth, I23

Chapter VIII. — The conversation with Alypius being ended, he retires to the garden, whither his friend

follows him, 124

Chapter IX. — That the mind commandeth the mind, but it willeth not entirely, 125

Chapter X. — He refutes the opinion of the Manichseans as to two kinds of minds, one good and the other

evil, 125

Chapter XI. — In what manner the Spirit struggled with the flesh, that it might be freed from the bondage

of vanity, 126

Chapter XII. — Having prayed to God, he pours forth a shower of tears, and, admonished by a voice, he
opens the book and reads the words in Rom. xiii. 13; by which, being changed in his whole soul, he
discloses the divine favour to his friend and his mother, 127


BOOK NINTH.


HE SPEAKS OF HIS DESIGN OF FORSAKING THE PROFESSION OF RHETORIC; OF THE DEATH OF HIS
FRIENDS, NEBRIDIUS AND VERECUNDUS ; OF HAVING RECEIVED BAPTISM IN THE THIRTY-THIRD
YEAR OF HIS AGE ; AND OF THE VIRTUES AND DEATH OF HIS MOTHER MONICA.

Chapter I. — He praises God, the author of safety, and Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, acknowledging his own

wickedness, 129

Ch.\pter II. — As his lungs were affected, he meditates withdrawing himself from public favour, 129

Chapter III. — He retires to the villa of his friend Verecundus, who was not yet a Christian, and refers to

his conversion and death, as well as that of Nebridius, 130

Chapter IV. — In the country he gives his attention to literature, and explains the fourth Psalm in connec-
tion with the happy conversion of Alypius. He is troubled with toothache, 131

Chapter V. — At the recommendation of Ambrose, he reads the prophecies of Isaiah, but does not under-
stand them, 133

Chapter VI. — He is baptized at Milan with Alypius and his son Adeodatus ; the book De Magistro, . . . 133
Chapter VII. — Of the Church hymns instituted at Milan; of the Ambrosian persecution raised by Justina;

and of the discovery of the bodies of two martyrs, 134

Chapter VIII. — Of the conversion of Evodius ; and the death of his mother when returning with him to

Africa; and whose education he tenderly relates, 135

Chapter IX. — He describes the praiseworthy habits of his mother ; her kindness towards her husband and

her sons, 136

Chapter X.— A conversation he had with his mother conceraing the kingdom of heaven, 137

Chapter XI. — His mother, attacked by fever, dies at Ostia, I38

Chapter XII. — How he mourned his dead mother, 139

Chapter XIII. — He entreats God for her sins, and admonishes his readers to remember her piously, . . . 140


40 CONTENTS OF THE CONFESSIONS.

BOOK TENTH.

HAVING MANIFESTED WHAT HE WAS AND WHAT HE IS, HE SHOWS THE GREAT FRUIT OF HIS CONFESSION;

AND BEING ABOUT TO EXAMINE BY WHAT METHOD GOD AND THE HAPPY LIFE MAY BE FOUND, HE

ENLARGES ON THE NATURE AND POWER OF MEMORY. THEN HE EXAMINES HIS OWN ACTS, THOUGHTS,

AND AFFECTIONS, VIEWED UNDER THE THREEFOLD DIVISION OF TEMPTATION; AND COMMEMORATES

THE LORD, THE ONE MEDIATOR OF GOD AND MEN.

PAGE

Chapter I. — In God alone is the hope and joy of man, 142

Ch.\pter II. — That all things are manifest to God. That confession unto Him is not made by the words

of the flesh, but of the soul, and the cry of reflection, 142

Chapter III. — He who confesseth rightly unto God best knoweth himself 142

Chapter IV. — That in his Confessions he may do good, he considers others, 143

Chapter V. — That man knoweth not himself wholly, 143

Chapter VI. — The love of God, in His nature superior to all creatures, is acquired by the knowledge of

the senses and the exercise of reason, 144

Chapter VH. — That God is to be found neither from the powers of the body nor of the soul, .... 145

Chapter VHI. — Of the nature and the amazing power of memory, 145

Chapter IX. — Not only all things, but also literature and images, are taken from the memory, and are

brought forth by the act of remembering, 146

Chapter X. — Literature is not introduced to the memory through the senses, but is brought forth from

its more secret places 146

Chapter XI. — What it is to learn and to think 147

Chapter XII. — On the recollection of things mathematical, . 147

Chapter XIII. — Memory retains all things, 147

Chapter XIV. — Concerning the manner in which joy and sadness may be brought back to the mind and

memory, 147

Chapter XV. — In memory there are also images of things which are absent, 148

Chapter XVI. — The privitation of memory is forgetfulness, . . . . « 148

Chapter XVII. — God cannot be attained unto by the power of memory, which beasts and birds possess, . 149

Chapter XVIII. — A thing when lost could not be found unless it were retained in the memory, .... 149

Chapter XIX. — What it is to remember, 150

Chapter XX. — W^e should not seek for God and the happy life unless we had known it, 150

Chapter XXI. — How a happy life may be retained iii the memory, 150

Chapter XXII.— A happy life is to rejoice in God, and for God 151

Chapter XXIII. — All wish to rejoice in the Truth, 151

Chapter XXIV.— He who finds truth, finds God, 152

Chapter XXV. — He is glad that God dwells in his memory, 152

Chapter XXVI. — God everywhere answers those who take counsel of Him, 152

Chapter XXVII. — He grieves that he was so long without God, 152

Chapter XXVIII. — On the misery of human life, 153

Chapter XXIX. — All hope is in the mercy of God, 153

Chapter XXX. — Of the perverse images of dreams, which he wishes to have taken away, 153

Chapter XXXI. — About to speak of the temptations of the "lust of the flesh," he first complains of the

lust of eating and drinking, 154

Chapter XXXII. — Of the charms of perfumes yhich are more easily overcome, 156

Chapter XXXIII. — He overcame the pleasure of the ear, although in the church he frequently delighted

in the song, not in the thing sung, 15^

Chapter XXXIV. — Of the very dangerous allurements of the eyes; on account of beauty of form, God,

the Creator, is to be praised, 156

Chapter XXXV. — Another kind of temptation is curiosity, which is stimulated by the "lust of the eyes," 157

Chapter XXXVI. — A third kind is "pride," which is pleasing to man, not to God 158

Chapter XXXVII. — He is forcibly goaded on by the love of praise, 159

Chapter XXXVIII. — Vain-glory is the highest danger, 160

Chapter XXXIX. — Of the vice of those who, while pleasing themselves, displease God, 160

Chapter XL. — The only safe resting-place for the soul is to be found in God, 161

Chapter XLI. — Having conquered his triple desire, he arrives at salvation, 161

Chapter XLII. — In what manner many sought the Mediator, 161

Chapter XLIII. — That Jesus Christ, at the same time God and man, is the true and most efficacious

Mediator, 162


CONTENTS OF THE CONFESSIONS. 41


BOOK ELEVENTH.

THE DESIGN OF HIS CONFESSIONS BEING DECLARED, HE SEEKS FROM GOD THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE HOLY
SCRIPTURES, AND BEGINS TO EXPOUND THE WORDS OF GENESIS I. I, CONCERNING THE CREATION OF
THE WORLD. THE QUESTIONS OF RASH DISPUTERS BEING REFUTED, "WHAT DID GOD BEFORE HE
CREATED THE WORLD.'" THAT HE MIGHT THE BETTER OVERCOME HIS OPPONENTS, HE ADDS A COPIOUS
DISQUISITION CONCERNING TIME.

PAGE

Chapter I. — By confession he desires to stimulate towards God his own love and that of his readers, . . 163

Chapter II. — He begs of God, that through the Holy Scriptures he may be led to truth, 163

Chapter III. — He begins from the creation of the world, — not understanding the Hebrew text, .... 164

Chapter IV. — Heaven and earth cry out that they have been created by God, 165

Chapter V. — God created the world not from any certain matter, but in His own word, 165

Ch.\pter VI. — He did not, however, create it by a sounding and passing word, 165

Chapter VII. — By His co-eternal Word He speaks, and all things are done 166

Chapter VIII. — That Word itself is the beginning of all things, in the which we are instructed as to

evangelical truth, 166

Chapter IX. — Wisdom and the Beginning 166

Chapter X. — The rashness of those who inquire what God did before He created heaven and earth, . . 167
Chapter XI. — They who ask this have not as yet known the eternity of God, which is exempt from the

relation of time 167

Chapter XII. — What God did before the creation of the world, 167

Chapter XIII. — Before the time created by God, times were not 167

Chapter XIV. — Neither time past nor future, but the present, only really is, 168

Chapter XV. — There is only a moment of present time, 168

Chapter XVI. — Time can only be perceived or measured while it is passing 169

Chapter XVII. — Nevertheless there is time past and future 169

Ch.-vpter XVIII. — Past and future times cannot be thought of but as present, 169

Chapter XIX. — We are ignorant in what manner God teaches future things 170

Chapter XX. — In what manner time may be properly designated 170

Chapter XXI. — How time may be measured, 170

Chapter XXII. — He prays God that He would explain this most entangled enigma, 170

Chapter XXIII. — That time is a certain extension, 171

Chapter XXIV. — That time is not a motion of the body which we measure by time 171

Chapter XXV. — He calls on God to enlighten his mind, 172

Chapter XXVI. — We measure longer events by shorter in time, 172

Chapter XXVII. — Times are measured in proportion as they pass by, 172

Chapter XXVIII. — Time in the human mind, which expects, considers, and remembers 173

Chapter XXIX. — That human life is a distraction, but that, through the mercy of God, he was intent on

the prize of his heavenly calling, 174

Chapter XXX. — Again he refutes the empty question, '• What did God before the creation of the

world ? " 174

Chapter XXXI. — How the knowledge of God differs from that of man, 174


BOOK TWELFTH.


HE CONTINUES HIS EXPLANATION OF THE FIRST CHAPTER OF GENESIS ACCORDING TO THE SEPTUAGINT, AND
BY ITS ASSISTANCE HE ARGUES, ESPECIALLY CONCERNING THE DOUBLE HEAVEN, AND THE FORMLESS
MATTER OUT OF WHICH THE WHOLE WORLD MAY HAVE BEEN CREATED; AFTERWARDS OF THE INTER-
PRETATIONS OF OTHERS NOT DISALLOWED, AND SETS FORTH AT GREAT LENGTH THE SENSE OF THE
HOLY SCRIPTURE.

Chapter I. — The discovery of truth is difficult, but God has promised that he who seeks shall find, . . 176

Chapter II. — Of the double heaven, — the visible, and the heaven of heavens, 176

j Chapter HI. — Of the darkness upon the deep, and of the invisible and formless earth, 176

Chapter IV. — From the formlessness of matter, the beautiful world has arisen 176


42 CONTENTS OF THE CONFESSIONS.

PAGE

Chapter V. — What may have been the form of matter 177

Chapter VI. — He confesses that at one time he himself thought erroneously of matter, 177

Chapter VII. — Out of nothing God made heaven and earth 177

Chapter VIII. — Heaven and earth were made " in the beginning; " afterwards the world, during six days,

from shapeless matter, 178

Chapter IX. — That the heaven of heavens was an intellectual creature, but that the earth was invisible

and formless before the days that it was made, 178

Chapter X. — He begs of God that he may live in the true light, and may be instructed as to the mysteries

of the sacred books, 178

Chapter XI. — What may be discovered to him by God, 178

Chapter XII. — From the formless earth, God created another heaven and a visible and formed earth, . 179
Chapter XIII. — Of the intellectual heaven and formless earth, out of which on another day the firma-
ment was formed, 179

Chapter XIV. — Of the depth of the Sacred Scripture, and its enemies, 180

Chapter XV. — He argues against adversaries concerning the heaven of heavens, 180

Ch.'VPTER XVI. — He wishes to have no intercourse with those who deny Divine Truth, 181

Chapter XVII. — He mentions five explanations of the words of Genesis i. i 182

Chapter XVIII. — What error is harmless in Sacred Scripture, 182

Chapter XIX. — He enumerates the things concerning which all agree, 183

Chapter XX. — Of the words, " In the beginning," variously understood, 183

Chapter XXI. — Of the explanation of the words, "The earth was invisible," 183

Chapter XXII. — He discusses whether matter was from eternity, or was made by God, 184

Chapter XXIII. — Two kinds of disagreements in the books to be explained, 185

Chapter XXIV. — Out of the many true things, it is not asserted confidently that Moses understood this

or that 185

Chapter XXV. — It behoves interpreters, when disagreeing concerning obscure places, to regard God the

Author of truth, and the rule of charity, 185

Chapter XXVI. — What he might have asked of God had he been enjoined to write the book of Genesis, 186

Chapter XXVII. — The style of speaking in the book of Genesis is simple and clear, 186

Chapter XXVIII. — The words, "In the beginning," and, "The heaven and the earth," are differently

understood, 187

Chapter XXIX.— Concerning the opinion of those who explain it, " At first He made," 187

Chapter XXX. — In the great diversity of opinions, it becomes all to unite charity and Divine Truth, . . 188

Chapter XXXI. — Moses is supposed to have perceived whatever of truth can be discovered in his words, 188
Chapter XXXII. — First, the sense of the writer is to be discovered, then that is to be brought out which

Divine Truth intended, 188


BOOK THIRTEENTH.

OF THE GOODNESS OF GOD EXPLAINED IN THE CREATION OF THINGS, AND OF THE TRINITY AS FOUND IN
THE FIRST WORDS OF GENESIS. THE STORY CONCERNING THE ORIGIN OF THE WORLD (GEN. I.) IS
ALLEGORICALLY EXPLAINED, AND HE APPLIES IT TO THOSE THINGS WHICH GOD WORKS FOR SANCTIFIED
AND BLESSED MAN. FINALLY, HE MAKES AN END OF THIS WORK, HAVING IMPLORED ETERNAL REST
FROM GOD.

»

Chapter I. — He calls upon God, and proposes to himself to worship Him, 190

Chapter II. — All creatures subsist from the plenitude of divine goodness, 190

Chapter III.— Genesis i. 3,— Of " Light," he understands as it is seen in the spiritual creatures, .... 191
Chapter IV. — All things have been created by the grace of God, and are not of Him as standing in need

of created things, 19^

Chapter V. — He recognises the Trinity in the first two verses of Genesis, 191

Chapter VI. — Why the Holy Ghost should have been mentioned after the mention of heaven and earth, 191

Chapter VII. — That the Holy Spirit brings to us God, 192

Chapter VIII.— That nothing whatever, short of God, can yield to the rational creature a happy rest, . 192

Chapter IX. — Why the Holy Spirit was only "borne over" the waters, 192

Chapter X. — That nothing arose save by the gift of God, • 193


CONTENTS OF THE CONFESSIONS. 43

PAGE

Chapter XI. — That the symbols of the Trinity in man, To Be, To Know, and To Will, are never

thoroughly examined, 193

Chapter XII. — Allegorical explanation of Genesis, chap, i., concerning the origin of the Church and its

worship, 194

Chapter XIII. — That the renewal of man is not completed in this world, 194

Chapter XIV. — That out of the children of the night and of the darkness, children of the light and of

the day are made, 195

Ch.\pter XV. — Allegorical explanation of the firmament and upper works, ver. 6, 195

Chapter XVI. — That no one but the Unchangeable Light knows himself, 196

Chapter XVII. — Allegorical explanation of the sea and the fruit-bearing earth, vers. 9 and 11, .... 196

Chapter XVIII. — Of the lights and stars of heaven — of day and night, ver. 14, 197

Chapter XIX. — All men should become lights in the firmament of heaven, 198

Chapter XX. — Concerning reptiles and flying creatures (ver. 20), — the sacrament of Baptism being

regarded, 199

Chapter XXI. — Concerning the living soul, birds and fishes (ver. 24), — the sacrament of the Eucharist

being regarded, 199

Chapter XXII. — He explains the divine image (ver. 26) of the renewal of the mind, 200

Chapter XXIII. — That to have power over all things (ver. 26) is to judge spiritually of all, 201

Chapter XXIV. — Why God has blessed men, fishes, flying creatures, and not herbs and the other animals

(ver. 2S), 202

Chapter XXV. — He explains the fruits of the earth (ver. 29) of works of mercy 203

Chapter XXVI. — In the confessing of benefits, computation is made not as to the "gift," but as to the

" fruit," — that is, the good and right will of the giver, 203

Chapter XXVII. — Many are ignorant as to this, and ask for miracles, which are signified under the

names of "fishes" and "whales," 204

Chapter XXVIII.— He proceeds to the last verse, "All things are very good,"— that is, the work being

altogether good 204

Chapter XXIX.— Although it is said eight times that "God saw that it was good," yet time has no

relation to God and His Word, 205

Chapter XXX. — He refutes the opinions of the Manichaeans and the Gnostics concerning the origin of

the world, 205

Chapter XXXI. — We do not see " that it was good*," but through the Spirit of God, which is in us, . . 205

Chapter XXXII. — Of the particular works of God, more especially of man, 205

Chapter XXXIII. — The world was created by God out of nothing, 206

Chapter XXXIV. — He briefly repeats the allegorical interpretation of Genesis (chap, i.), and confesses

that we see it by the Divine Spirit, 206

Chapter XXXV. — He prays God for that peace of rest which hath no evening, 207

Chapter XXXVI.— The seventh day, without evening and setting, the image of eternal life and rest in

God 207

Chapter XXXVH. — Of rest in God, who ever worketh, and yet is ever at rest, 207

Chapter XXXVIII.— Of the difference between the knowledge of God and of men, and of the repose

which is to be sought from God only, 207


THE THIRTEEN BOOKS

OF THE

CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUR. AUGUSTIN.

BISHOP OF HIPPO.


BOOK I.


COMMENCING WITH THE INVOCATION OF GOD, AUGUSTIN RELATES IN DETAIL THE BEGINNING OF
HIS LIFE, HIS INFANCY AND BOYHOOD, UP TO HIS FIFTEENTH YEAR; AT WHICH AGE HE
ACKNOWLEDGES THAT HE WAS MORE INCLINED TO ALL YOUTHFUL PLEASURES AND VICES THAN
TO THE STUDY OF LETTERS.


CHAP. I. — HE PROCLAIMS" THE GREATNESS OF
GOD, WHOM HE DESIRES TO SEEK AND IN-
VOKE, BEING AWAKENED BY HIM.

I. Great art Thou, O Lord, and greatly to
be praised ; great is Tliy power, and of Thy
wisdom there is no end.^ And man, being a
part of Thy creation, desires to praise Thee, —
man, who bears about with him his mortality,
the witness of his sin, even the witness that
Thou "resistest the proud," ^ — yet man, this
part of Thy creation, desires to praise Thee.^
Thou movest us to delight in praising Thee ;
for Thou hast formed us for Thyself, and our
hearts are restless till they find rest in Thee.*
Lord, teach me to know and understand which
of these should be first, to call on Thee, or to
praise Thee ; and likewise to know Thee, or to
call upon Thee. But who is there that calls
upon Thee without knowing Thee? For he
that knows Thee not may call upon Thee as


1 Ps. cxlv. 3, and cxlvii. 5.

2 Jas. iv. 6, and i Pet. v. 5.

* Augustin begins with praise, and the whole book vibrates with
praise. He says elsewhere (in Ps. cxlix.), that "as a new song fits
not well an old man's lips, he should sing a new song who is a new
creature and is living a new life ; " and so from the time of his new
birth, the " new song" of praise went up from him, and that " not
of the lip only," but {ibid, cxlviii.) conscientia ling^ia vita.

<And the rest which the Christian has here is but an earnest
of the more perfect rest hereafter, when, as Augustin says {De Gen.
ad. Lit. xii. 26), " all virtue will be to love what one sees, and the
highest felicity to have what one loves." [Watts, followed by
Pusey, and Shedd, missed the paronomasia of the Latin : " cor
nostrum inguicium est dnnec reqttiescat in Te," by translating :
" our heart is restless, until it repose in Thee." It is the finest
sentence in the whole book, and furnishes one of the best argu-
ments for Christianity as the only religion which leads to that
rest in God.— P. S.]


other than Thou art. Or perhaps we call on
Thee that we may know Thee. "But how
shall they call on Him in whom they have not
believed ? or how shall they believe without a
preacher ? " * And those who seek the Lord
shall praise Him.® For those who seek shall find
Him,' and those who find Him shall praise Him.
Let me seek Thee, Lord, in calling on Thee,
and call on Thee in believing in Thee ; for Thou
hast been preached unto us. O Lord, my faith
calls on Thee, — that faith which Thou hast im-
parted to me, which Thou hast breathed into me
through the incarnation of Thy Son, through the
ministry of Thy preacher.^

CHAP. II. — THAT THE GOD WHOM WE INVOKE IS
IN US, AND WE IN HIM.

2. And how shall I call upon my God — my
God and my Lord ? For when I call on Him
I ask Him to come into me. And what place
is there in me into which my God can come —
into which God can come, even He who made
heaven and earth? Is there anything in me, O
Lord my God, that can contain Thee? Do in-
deed the very heaven and the earth, which Thou
hast made, and in which Thou hast made me.


6 Rom. X. 14.
<> Ps. xxii. 26.

7 Matt. vii. 7.

8 That is, Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, who was instrumental in his

conversion (vi. sec. i ; viii. sec. 28, etc.l. " Before conversion," as
Leighton observes on i Pet. ii. i, 2, "wit or eloquence may draw a
man to the word, and possibly prove a happy bait to catch him (as
St. Augustin reports of his hearing St. Ambrose), but, once bom
again, then it is the milk itself that he desires for itself."

45


46


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book I.


contain Thee ? Or, as nothing could exist with-
out Thee, doth whatever exists contain Thee ?
Why, then, do I ask Thee to come into me, since
I indeed exist, and could not exist if Thou wert
not in me ? Because I am not yet in hell, though
Thou art even there; for "if I go down into
hell Thou art there. "^ I could not therefore
exist, could not exist at all, O my God, unless
Thou wert in me. Or should I not rather say,
that I could not exist unless I were in Thee from
whom are all things, by whom are all things, in
whom are all things?* Even so. Lord; even
so. Where do I call Thee to, since Thou art in
me, or whence canst Thou come into me ? For
where outside heaven and earth can I go that
from thence my God may come into me who has
said, I fill heaven and earth" ?*

CHAP, hi: — EVERYWHERE GOD WHOLLY FILLETH
ALL THINGS, BUT NEITHER HEAVEN NOR EARTH
CONTAINETH HIM.

3. Since, then. Thou fillest heaven and earth,
do they contain Thee? Or, as they contain
Thee not, dost Thou fill them, and yet there re-
mains something over ? And where dost Thou
pour forth that which remaineth of Thee when
the heaven and earth are filled ? Or, indeed, is
there no need that Thou who containest all
things shouldest be contained of any, since those
things which Thou fillest Thou fillest by con-
taining them ? For the vessels which Thou fill-
est do not sustain Thee, since should they even
be broken Thou wilt not be poured forth. And
when Thou art poured forth on us,* Thou art
not cast down, but we are uplifted ; nor art Thou
dissipated, but we are drawn together. But, as
Thou fillest all things, dost Thou fill them with
Thy whole self, or, as even all things cannot alto-
gether contain Thee, do they contain a part, and
do all at once contain the same part ? Or has
each its own proper part — the greater more, the
smaller less? Is, then, one part of Thee greater,
another less? Or is it that Thou art wholly
everywhere whilst nothing altogether contains
Thee?''

CHAP. IV. — THE MAJESTY OF GOD IS SUPREME, AND
HIS VIRTUES INEXPLICABLE.

4. What, then, art Thou, O my God — what,
I ask, but the Lord God ? For who is Lord but
the Lord? or who is God save our God ?® Most
high, most excellent, most potent, most omnipo-
tent ; most piteous and most just ; most hidden

1 Ps. cxxxix. 8.

2 Rom. xi. 36,
8 Jer. xxiii. 24.
* Acts ii. 18.

6 In this section, and constantly throughout the Confessions, he
adverts to the materialistic views concerning God held by the Mani-
chseans. See also sec. 10; iii, sec. 12; iv. sec. 31, etc. etc.

« Ps. xviii. 31.


and most near ; most beauteous and most strong,
stable, yet contained of none; unchangeable, yet
changing all things ; never new, never old ;
making all things new, yet bringing old age
upon the proud and they know it not ; always
working, yet ever at rest ; gathering, yet need-
ing nothing; sustaining, pervading, and protect-
ing; creating, nourishing, and developing; seek-
ing, and yet possessing all things. Thou lovest,
and burnest not ; art jealous, yet free from care ;
repentest, and hast no sorrow; art angry, yet
serene ; changest Thy ways, leaving unchanged
Thy plans; recoverest what Thou findest, having
yet never lost ; art never in want, whilst Thou
rejoicest in gain ; never covetous, though re-
quiring usury.' That Thou mayest owe, more
than enough is given to Thee ; ® yet who hath
anything that is not Thine ? Thou payest debts
while owing nothing ; and when Thou forgivest
debts, losest nothing. Yet, O my God, my life,
my holy joy, what is this that I have said ? And
what saith any man when He speaks of Thee ?
Yet woe to them that keep silence, seeing that
even they who say most are as the dumb.**

CHAP. V. HE SEEKS REST IN GOD, AND PARDON

OF HIS SINS,

5. Oh ! how shall I find rest in Thee ? Who
will send Thee into my heart to inebriate it, so
that I may forget my woes, and embrace Thee,
my only good ? What art Thou to me ? Have
compassion on me, that I may speak. What am
I to Thee that Thou demandest my love, and
unless I give it Thee art angry, and threatenest
me with great sorrows? Is it, then, a light sor-
row not to love Thee ? Alas ! alas ! tell me of
Thy compassion, O Lord my God, what Thou
art to me. " Say unto my soul, I am thy salva-
tion."^" So speak that I may hear. Behold,
Lord, the ears of my heart are before Thee ; open
Thou them, and "say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation." When I hear, may I run and lay
hold on Thee. Hide not Thy face from me.
Let me die, lest I die, if only I may see Thy
face."

6. Cramped is the dwelling of my soul; do
Thou expand it, that Thou mayest enter in. It
is in ruins, restore Thou it. There is that about
it which must offend Thine eyes ; I confess and


f Matt. XXV. 27.

* Supererogatvr tibi, ut deheas.

9 "As it is impossible for mortal, imperfect, and perishable man
to comprehend the immortal, perfect and eternal, we cannot expect
that he should be able to express in praise the fulness of God's attri-
tiutes. The Talmud relates of a rabbi, who did not consider the
terms, ' the great, mighty, and fearful God,' which occur in the daily
prayer, as being sufficient, but added some more attributes — ' What ! '
exclaimed another rabbi who was present, ' imagines! thou to be able
toexhaust the praise of God? Thy praise is blasphemy. Thou hadst
better be quiet.' Hence the Psalmist's exclamation, after finding that

the praises of God were inexhaustible : D 771)1 iT'DIT Tlj 'Silence
is praise to Thee.' " — Breslau.

10 Ps. XXXV. 3.

1' Moriar ne moriar, ut earn videatn. See Ex. xxxiii. 20.


Chap. VI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


47


know it, but who will cleanse it ? or to whom
shall I cry but to Thee ? Cleanse me from my
secret sins/ O Lord, and keep Thy servant from
those of other men. I believe, and therefore do
I speak ; ^ Lord, Thou knowest. Have I not
confessed my transgressions unto Thee, O my
God ; and Thou hast put away the iniquity of
my heart ?* I do not contend in judgment with
Thee,* who art the Truth ; and I would not de-
ceive myself, lest my iniquity lie against itself.^
I do not, therefore, contend in judgment with
Thee, for "if Thou, Lord, shouldest mark ini-
quities, O Lord, who shall stand ? " ®

CHAP. VI. HE DESCRIBES HIS INFANCY, AND

LAUDS THE PROTECTION AND ETERNAL PROVI-
DENCE OF GOD.

7. Still suffer me to speak before Thy mercy —
me, '* dust and ashes. ' ' ' Suffer me to speak, for,
behold, it is Thy mercy I address, and not de-
risive man. Yet perhaps even Thou deridest
me ; but when Thou art turned to me Thou wilt
have compassion on me.^ For what do I wish
to say, O Lord my God, but that I know not
whence I came hither into this — shall I call it
dying life or living death ? Yet, as I have heard
from my parents, from whose substance Thou
didst form me, — for I myself cannot remember
it, — Thy merciful comforts sustained me. Thus
it was that the comforts of a woman's milk en-
tertained me; for neither my mother nor my
nurses filled their own breasts, but Thou by them
didst give me the nourishment of infancy accord-
ing to Thy ordinance and that bounty of Thine
which underlieth all things. For Thou didst
cause me not to want more than Thou gavest,
and those who nourished me willingly to give me
what Thou gavest them. For they, by an in-
stinctive affection, were anxious to give me what
Thou hadst abundantly supplied. It Avas, in
truth, good for them that my good should come
from them, though, indeed, it was not from
them, but by them ; for from Thee, O God, are
all good things, and from my God is all my
safety.' This is what I have since discovered,
as Thou hast declared Thyself to me by the

1 Ps. xix. 12, 13. " Be it that sin may never see the light, that it
may be like a child born and buried in the womb; yet as that child
is a man, a true man, there closeted in that hidden frame of nature,
so sin is truly sin, though it never gets out beyond the womb which
did conceive and enliven it." — Sedgwick.

■•' Ps. cxvi. 10.

* Ps. xxxii. 5.

* Job ix. 3.

_ 6 Ps. xxvi. 12, ra/^. " The danger of ignorance is not less than
Its guilt. For of all evils a secret evil is most to be deprecated, of all
enemies a concealed enemy is the worst. Better the precipice than
the pitfall ; better the tortures of curable disease than the painless-
ness of mortification : and so, whatever your soul's guilt and danger,
better to be aware of it. However alarming, however distressing self-
knowledge may be, better thai than the tremendous evils of self-ig-
norance."— Caird.

^ Ps. cxxx. 3.

' Gen. xviii. 27.

' Jer. xii. 15,

* Prov. xxi. 31,


blessings both within me and without me which
Thou hast bestowed upon me. For at that time
I knew how to suck, to be satisfied when com-
fortable, and to cry when in pain — nothing be-
yond.

8. Afterwards I began to laugh, — at first in
sleep, then when waking. For this I have heard
mentioned of myself, and I believe it (though I
cannot remember it), for we see the same in
other infants. And now little by little I real-
ized where I was, and wished to tell my wishes
to those who might satisfy them, but I could
not ; for my wants were within me, while they
were without, and could not by any faculty of
theirs enter into my soul. So I cast about limbs
and voice, making the few and feeble signs I
could, like, though indeed not much like, unto
what I wished ; and when I was, not satisfied —
either not being understood, or because it would
have been injurious to me — I grew indignant
that my elders were not subject unto me, and
that those on whom I had no claim did not wait
on me, and avenged myself on them by tears.
That infants are such I have been able to learn
by watching them ; and they, though unknow-
ing, have better shown me that I was such an
one than my nurses who knew it.

9. And, behold, my infancy died long ago,
and I live. But Thou, O Lord, who ever livest,
and in whom nothing dies (since before the
world was, and indeed before all that can be
called " before," Thou existest, and art the God
and Lord of all Thy creatures ; and with Thee
fixedly abide the causes of all unstable things,
the unchanging sources of all things changeable,
and the eternal reasons of all things unreasoning
and temporal), tell me. Thy suppliant, O God ;
tell,0 merciful One, Thy miserable servant^" — tell
me whether my infancy succeeded another age of
mine which had at that time perished. Was it
that which I passed in my mother's womb? For
of that something has been made known to me,
and I have myself seen women with child.
And what, O God, my joy, preceded that life ?
Was I, indeed, anywhere, or anybody? For
no one can tell me these things, neither father
nor mother, nor the experience of others, nor
my own memory. Dost Thou laugh at me for
asking such things, and command me to praise
and confess Thee for what I know ?

10. I give thanks to Thee, Lord of heaven
and earth, giving praise to Thee for that my
first being and infancy, of which I have no
memory; for Thou hast granted to man that
from others he should come to conclusions as to
himself, and that he should believe many things
concerning himself on the authority of feeble
women. Even then I had life and being ; and


10 "Mercy," says Binning, "hath but its name from misery, and
is no other thing than to lay another's misery to heart."


48


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book I.


as my infancy closed I was already seeking for
signs by which my feelings might be made
known to others. Whence could such a crea-
ture come but from Thee, O Lord ? Or shall
any man be skilful enough to fashion himself?
Or is there any other vein by which being and
life runs into us save this, that " Thou, O Lord,
hast made us,"^ with whom being and life
are one, because Thou Thyself art being and
life in the highest? Thou art the highest,
"Thou changest not," ^ neither in Thee doth
this present day come to an end, though it doth
end in Thee, since in Thee all such things are ;
for they would have no way of passing away
unless Thou sustainedst them. And since " Thy
years shall have no end," ^ Thy years are an
ever present day. And how many of ours and
our fathers' days have passed through this Thy
day, and received from it their measure and
fashion of being, and others yet to come shall
so receive and pass away ! " But Thou art the
same ; " * and all the things of to-morrow and
the days yet to come, and all of yesterday and
the days that are past, Thou wilt do to-day,
Thou hast done to-day. What is it to me if
any understand not ? Let him still rejoice and
say, " What /j- this?"* Let him rejoice even
so, and rather love to discover in failing to dis-
cover, than in discovering not to discover Thee.

CHAP. VII. HE SHOWS BY EXAMPLE THAT EVEN

INFANCY IS PRONE TO SIN.

II. Hearken, O God ! Alas for the sins of
men ! Man saith this, and Thou dost compas-
sionate him ; for Thou didst create him, but
didst not create the sin that is in him. Who
bringeth to my remembrance the sin of my in-
fancy? For before Thee none is free from sin,
not even the infant which has lived but a day
upon the earth. Who bringeth this to my re-
membrance ? Doth not each little one, in
whom I behold that which I do not remember
of myself? In what, then, did I sin ? Is it
that I cried for the breast ? If I should now so
cry, — not indeed for the breast, but for the food
suitable to my years, — I should be most justly
laughed at and rebuked. What I then did de-


1 Ps. c. 3.

2 Mai. iii. 6.
8 Ps. cii. 27.
* Ibid.

B Ex. xvi. 15. This is one of the alternative translations put
against " it is manna" in the margin of the authorized version. It
is the literal significance of the Hebrew, and is so translated in most
of the old English versions. Augustin indicates thereby the atti-
tude of faith. Many things we are called on to believe (to use the
illustration of Locke) which are above reason, but none that are
contrary to reason. We are but as children in relation to God, and
may therelore only expect to know " parts of His ways." Even in
the difficulties of Scripture he sees the goodness of God. " God,"
he says, " has in Scripture clothed His mysteries with clouds, that
man's love of truth might be inflamed by the difficulty of finding
them out. For if they were only such as were readily understood,
truth would not be eagerly sought, nor would it give pleasure when
found." — De Ver. Relig. c. 17.


served rebuke ; but as I could not understand
those who rebuked me, neither custom nor rea-
son suffered me to be rebuked. For as we grow
we root out and cast from us such habits. I
have not seen any one who is wise, when " purg-
anything cast away the good. Or was it


mg


" 6


good, even for a time, to strive to get by cry-
ing that which, if given, would be hurtful — to
be bitterly indignant that those who were free
and its elders, and those to whom it owed its
being, besides many others wiser than it, who
would not give way to the nod of its good
pleasure, were not subject unto it — to endeavour
to harm, by struggling as much as it could, be-
cause those commands were not obeyed which
only could have been obeyed to its hurt? Then,
in the weakness of the infant's limbs, and not
in its will, lies its innocency. I myself have
seen and known an infant to be jealous though
it could not speak. It became pale, and cast
bitter looks on its foster-brother. Who is ignor-
ant of this? Mothers and nurses tell us that
they appease these things by I know not what
remedies ; and may this be taken for innocence,
that when the fountain of milk is flowing fresh
and abundant, one who has need should not be
allowed to share it, though needing that nourish-
ment to sustain life? Yet we look leniently on
these things, not because they are not faults,
nor because the faults are small, but because
they will vanish as age increases. For although
you may allow these things now, you could not
bear them with equanimity if found in an older
person.

12. Thou, therefore, O Lord my God, who
gavest life to the infant, and a frame which, as
we see. Thou hast endowed with senses, com-
pacted with limbs, beautified with form, and,
for its general good and safety, hast introduced
all vital energies — Thou commandest me to
praise Thee for these things, "to give thanks
unto the Lord, and to sing praise unto Thy
name, O Most High; " ' for Thou art a God
omnipotent and good, though Thou hadst done
nought but these things, which none other can
do but Thou, who alone madest all things, O
Thou most fair, wlio madest all things fair, and
orderest all according to Thy law. This period,
then, of my life, O Lord, of which I have no
remembrance, which I believe on the word of
others, and which I guess from other infants, it
chagrins me — true though the guess be — to
reckon in this life of mine which I lead in this
world ; inasmuch as, in the darkness of my
forgetfulness, it is like to that which I passed in
my mother's womb. But if " I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive


8 John XV. 2.
7 Ps. xcii. I.


Chap. IX.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


49


me,"^ where, I pray thee, O my God, where,
Lord, or when was I, Thy servant, innocent ?
But behold, I pass by that time, for what have
I to do with that, the memories of which I can-
not recall ?

CHAP. VIII. THAT WHEN A BOY HE LEARNED TO

SPEAK, NOT BY ANY SET METHOD, BUT FROM
THE ACTS AND WORDS OF HIS PARENTS.

13. Did I not, then, growing out of the state
of infancy, come to boyhood, or rather did it
not come to me, and succeed to infancy ? Nor
did my infancy depart (for whither went it ?) ;
and yet it did no longer abide, for I was no
longer an infant that could not speak, but a
chattering boy. I remember this, and I after-
wards observed how I first learned to speak, for
my elders did not teach me words in any set
method, as they did letters afterwards; but I
myself, when I was unable to say all I wished
and to whomsoever I desired, by means of the
whimperings and broken utterances and various
motions of my limbs, which I used to enforce
my wishes, repeated the sounds in my memory
by the mind, O my God, which Thou gavest
me. When they called anything by name, and
moved the body towards it while they spoke, I
saw and gathered that the thing they Avished to
point out was called by the name they then
uttered ; and that they did mean this was made
plain by the motion of the body, even by the
natural language of all nations expressed by the
countenance, glance of the eye, movement of
other members, and by the sound of the voice
indicating the affections of the mind, as it seeks,
possesses, rejects, or avoids. So it was that by
frequently hearing words, in duly placed sen-
tences, I gradually gathered what things they
were the signs of; and having formed my mouth
to the utterance of these signs, I thereby ex-
pressed my will.* Thus I exchanged with those
about me the signs by which we express our
wishes, and advanced deeper into the stormy
fellowship of human life, depending the while
on the authority of parents, and the beck of
elders.

CHAP. IX. — CONCERNING THE HATRED OF LEARN-
ING, THE LOVE OF PLAY, AND THE FEAR OF
BEING WHIPPED NOTICEABLE IN BOYS : AND
OF THE FOLLY OF OUR ELDERS AND MASTERS.

14. O my God ! what miseries and mockeries
did I then experience, wheii obedience to my
teachers was set before me as proper to my boy-
hood, that I might flourish in this world, and
distinguish myself in the science of speech.


> Ps. li. 5.

* See some interesting remarks on this subject in VVhately's Logic,
Int. sec. 5.


which should get me honour amongst men, and
deceitful riches ! After that I was put to school
to get learning, of which I (worthless as I was)
knew not what use there was; and yet, if slow
to learn, I was flogged ! For this was deemed
praiseworthy by our forefathers ; and many be-
fore us, passing the same course, had appointed
beforehand for us these troublesome ways by
which we were compelled to pass, multiplying
labour and sorrow upon the sons of Adam. But
we found, O Lord, men praying to Thee, and
we learned from them to conceive of Thee, ac-
cording to our ability, to be some Great One,
who was able (though not visible to our senses)
to hear and help us. For as a boy I began to
pray to Thee, my ''help" and my "refuge,"*
and in invoking Thee broke the bands of my
tongue, and entreated Thee though little, with
no little earnestness, that I might not be beaten
at school. And when Thou heardedst me not,
giving me not over to folly thereby,* my elders,
yea, and my own parents too, who wished me
no ill, laughed at my stripes, my then great and
grievous ill.

15. Is there any one. Lord, with so high a
spirit, cleaving to Thee with so strong an affec-
tion— for even a kind of obtuseness may do that
much — but is there, I say, any one who, by
cleaving devoutly to Thee, is endowed with so
great a courage that he can esteem lightly those
racks and hooks, and varied tortures of the same
sort, against which, throughout the whole world,
men supplicate Thee with great fear, deriding
those who most bitterly fear them, just as our
parents derided the torments with which our
masters punished us when we were bo)'s ? For
we were no less afraid of our pains, nor did we
pray less to Thee to avoid them ; and yet we
sinned, in writing, or reading, or reflecting upon
our lessons less than was required of us. For
we wanted not, O Lord, memory or capacity, —
of which, by Thy will, we possessed enough for
our age, — but we delighted only in play ; and
we were punished for this by those who were
doing the same things themselves. But the idle-
ness of our elders they call business, whilst boys
who do the like are punished by those same
elders, and yet neither boys nor men find any
pity. For will any one of good sense approve
of my being whipped because, as a boy, I played
ball, and so was hindered from learning quickly
those lessons by means of which, as a man, I
should play more unbecomingly ? And did he
by whom I was beaten do other than this, who,
when he was overcome in any little controversy
with a co-tutor, was more tormented by anger
and envy than I when beaten by a playfellow in
a match at ball?


3 Ps. ix. p, and .xlvi. i, and xlviii. 3.
■* Ps. xxii. 2, Vulg.


50


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book I.


CHAP. X. THROUGH A LOVE OF BALL-PLAYING

AND SHOWS, HE NEGLECTS HIS STUDIES AND
THE INJUNCTIONS OF HIS PARENTS.

1 6. And yet I erred, O Lord God, the Crea-
tor and Disposer of all things in Nature, — but
of sin the Disposer only, — I erred, O Lord my
God, in doing contrary to the wishes of my
parents and of those masters ; for this learning
which they (no matter for what motive) wished
me to acquire, I might have put to good account
afterwards. For I disobeyed them not because
I had chosen a better way, but from a fondness
for play, loving the honour of victory in the
matches, and to have my ears tickled with lying
fables, in order that they might itch the more
furiously — the same curiosity beaming more and
more in my eyes for the shows and sports of my
elders. Yet those who give these entertainments
are held in such high repute, that almost all de-
sire the same for their children, whom they are
still willing should be beaten, if so be these
same games keep them from the studies by which
they desire them to arrive at being the givers of
them. Look down upon these things, O Lord,
with compassion, and deliver us who now call
upon Thee; deliver those also who do not call
upon Thee, that they may call upon Thee, and
that Thou mayest deliver them.

CHAP. XI. SEIZED BY DISEASE, HIS MOTHER

BEING TROUBLED, HE EARNESTLY DEMANDS
BAPTISM, WHICH ON RECOVERY IS POSTPONED

HIS FATHER NOT AS YET BELIEVING IN

CHRIST.

17. Even as a boy I had heard of eternal life
promised to us through the humility of the Lord
our God condescending to our pride, and I was
signed with the sign of the cross, and was sea-
soned with His salt^ even from the womb of my
mother, who greatly trusted in Thee. Thou
sawest, O Lord, how at one time, while yet a
boy, being suddenly seized with pains in the
stomach, and being at the point of death — Thou
sawest, O my God, for even then Thou wast my
keeper, with what emotion of mind and with
what faith I solicited from the piety of my
mother, and of Thy Church, the mother of us
all, the baptism of Thy Christ, my Lord and
my God. On which, the mother of my flesh
being much troubled, — since she, with a heart
pure in Thy faith, travailed in birth ^ more lov-
ingly for my eternal salvation, — would, had I
not quickly recovered, have without delay pro-
vided for my initiation and washing by Thy


1 " A rite in the Western churches, on admission as a catechumen,
previous to baptism, denoting the purity and uncorruptedness and
discretion required of Christians. See S. Aug. De Catechiz. rudib.
c. 26: Concil. Carth. 3, can. 5 ; and Liturgies in Assem. Cod.
Liturg. t. i." — E. B. P. See also vi. i, note, below.

* Gal. iv. iQ.


life-giving sacraments, confessing Thee, O Lord
Jesus, for the remission of sins. So my cleans-
ing was deferred, as if I must needs, should I
live, be further polluted ; because, indeed, the
guilt contracted by sin would, after baptism, be
greater and more perilous.^ Thus I at that time
believed with my mother and the whole house,
except my father ; yet he did not overcome the
influence of my mother's piety in me so as to
prevent my believing in Christ, as he had not
yet believed in Him. For she was desirous that
Thou, O my God, shouldst be my Father rather
than he ; and in this Thou didst aid her to over-
come her husband, to whom, though the better
of the two, she yielded obedience, because in
this she yielded obedience to Thee, who dost so
command.

18. I beseech Thee, my God, I would gladly
know, if it be Thy will, to what end my bap-
tism was then deferred ? Was it for my good
that the reins were slackened, as it were, upon
me for me to sin ? Or were they not slackened ?
If not, whence comes it that it is still dinned
into our ears on all sides, "Let him alone, let
him act as he likes, for he is not yet baptized " ?
But as regards bodily health, no one exclaims,
" Let him be more seriously wounded, for he is
not yet cured ! " How much better, then, had
it been for me to have been cured at once ; and
then, by my own and my friends' diligence, my
soul's restored health had been kept safe in Thy
keeping, who gavest it ! Better, in truth. But
how numerous and great waves of temptation
appeared to hang over me after my childhood !
These were foreseen by my mother ; and she pre-
ferred that the unformed clay should be exposed
to them rather than the image itself.

CHAP. XII. BEING COMPELLED, HE GAVE HIS

ATTENTION TO LEARNING ; BUT FULLY AC-
KNOWLEDGES THAT THIS WAS THE WORK OF
GOD.

19. But in this my childhood (which was far
less dreaded for me than youth) I had no love
of learning, and hated to be forced to it, yet
was I forced to it notwithstanding ; and this
was well done towards me, but I did not well,
for I would not have learned had I not been
compelled. For no man doth well against his
will, even if that which he doth be well.
Neither did they who forced me do well, but

3 Baptism was in those days frequently (and for similar reasons to
the above) postponed till the hour of death approached. The doc-
tors of the Church endeavoured to discourage this, and persons bap-
tized on a sick-bed (" clinically") were, if they recovered, looked
on with suspicion. The Emperor Constantine was not baptized till
the close of his life, and he is censured by Dr. Newman (Arians,
iii. sec. i) for presuming to speak of questions which divided the
Arians and the Orthodo.x as " unimportant," while he himself was
both unbaptized and uninstructed. On the postponing of baptism
with a view to unrestrained enjoyment of the world, and on the
severity of the early Church towards sins committed after baptism,
see Kaye's TertuUian, pp. 234-241.


Chap. XIV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


51 i


'


the good that was done to me came from Thee,
my God. For they considered not in what
way I should employ what they forced me to
learn, unless to satisfy the inordinate desires of
a rich beggary and a shameful glory. But
Thou, by whom the very hairs of our heads are
numbered,^ didst use for my good the error of
all who pressed me to learn ; and my own error
in willing not to learn, didst Thou make use of
for my punishment — of which I, being so small
a boy and so great a sinner, was not unworthy.
Thus by the instrumentality of those who did
not well didst Thou well for me ; and by my
own sin didst Thou justly punish me. For it is
even as Thou hast appointed, that every inordi-
nate affection should bring its own punish-
ment.''

CHAP. XIII. — HE DELIGHTED IN LATIN STUDIES
AND THE EiMPTY FABLES OF THE POETS, BUT
HATED THE ELEMENTS OF LITERATURE AND
THE GREEK LANGUAGE.

20. But what was the cause of my dislike of
Greek literature, which I studied from my boy-
hood, I cannot even now understand. For the
Latin I loved exceedingly — not what our first
masters, but what the grammarians teach ; for those
primary lessons of reading, writing, and cipher-
ing, I considered no less of a burden and a pun-
ishment than Greek. Yet whence was this
unless from the sin and vanity of this life ? for I
was " but flesh, a wind that passeth away and
Cometh not again. ' ' ^ For those primary lessons
were better, assuredly, because more certain ;
seeing that by their agency I acquired, and still
retain, the power of reading what I find writ-
ten, and writing myself what I will ; whilst in
the others I was compelled to learn about the
wanderings of a certain ^neas, oblivious of my
own, and to weep for Dido dead, because she
slew herself for love ; while at the same time I
brooked with dry eyes my wretched self dying
far from Thee, in the midst of those things, O
God, my life.

21. For what can be more wretched than the
wretch who pities not himself shedding tears
over the death of Dido for love of ^neas, but
shedding no tears over his own death in not
loving Thee, O God, light of my heart, and
bread of the inner mouth of my soul, and the
power that weddest my mind with my inner-
most thoughts? I did not love Thee, and
committed fornication against Thee ; and those
around me thus sinning cried, "Well done!
Well done ! " For the friendship of this world
is fornication against Thee ; * and "Well done !


Well done! " is cried until one feels ashamed
not to be such a man. And for this I shed no
tears, though I wept for Dido, who sought death
at the sword's point,* myself the while seeking
the lowest of Thy creatures — having forsaken
Thee — earth tending to the earth ; and if for-
bidden to read these things, how grieved would
I feel that I was not permitted to read what
grieved me. This sort of madness is considered
a more honourable and more fruitful learning
than that by which I learned to read and write.
22. But now, O my God, cry unto my soul j
and let Thy Truth say unto me, "It is not so ;
it is not so ; better much was that first teach-
ing." For behold, I would rather forget the
wanderings of ^neas, and all such things, than
how to write and read. But it is true that over
the entrance of the grammar school there hangs
a vail ; ® but this is not so much a sign of the
majesty of the mystery, as of a covering for
error. Let not them exclaim against me of
whom I am no longer in fear, whilst I confess
to Thee, my God, that which my soul desires,
and acquiesce in reprehending my evil ways, that
I may love Thy good ways. Neither let those
cry out against me Avho buy or sell grammar-
learning. For if I ask them whether it be true,
as the poet says, that ^neas once came to
Carthage, the unlearned will reply that they do
not know, the learned will deny it to be true.
But if I ask with what letters the name ^neas
is written, all who have learnt this will answer
truly, in accordance with the conventional un-
derstanding men have arrived at as to these
signs. Again, if I should ask which, if forgot-
ten, would cause the greatest inconvenience in
our life, reading and writing, or these poetical
fictions, who does not see what every one would
answer who had not entirely forgotten himself?
I erred, then, when as a boy I preferred those
vain studies to those more profitable ones, or
rather loved the one and hated the other.
" One and one are two, two and two are four,"
this was then in truth a hateful song to me ;
while the wooden horse full of armed men, and
the burning of Troy, and the " spectral image "
of Creusa' were a most pleasant spectacle of
vanity.

CHAP. XIV. — WHY HE DESPISED GREEK LITERA-
TURE, AND EASILY LEARNED LATIN.

23. But why, then, did I dislike Greek learn-


l Matt. X. 30.

* See "note, v. sec. 2, below.

S Ps. Ixxviii. 39, and Jas. iv. 14.

* Jas. iv. 4.


^ ^netd, vi. 457.

6 " The ' vail ' was an emblem of honour, used in places of wor-
ship, and subsequently in courts of law, emperors' palaces, and
even private house. See Du Fresne and Hoffman sub v. That
between the vestibule, or proscholium, and the school itself, besides
being a mark of dignity, may, as St. Augustin perhaps implies,
have been intended to denote the hidden mysteries taught therein,
and that the mass of mankind were not fit hearers of truth." —
E. B. P.

' yEneid, ii. 772.


52


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book I.


ing, which was full of like tales ? ^ For Homer
also was skilled in inventing similar stories, and
is most sweetly vain, yet was he disagreeable to
me as a boy. I believe Virgil, indeed, would
be the same to Grecian children, if compelled
to learn him, as I was Homer. The difft-
culty, in truth, the difficulty of learning a
foreign language mingled as it were with gall
all the ■ sweetness of those fabulous Grecian
stories. For not a single word of it did I un-
derstand, and to make me do so, they vehe-
mently urged me with cruel threatenings and
punishments. There was a time also when (as
an infant) I knew no Latin ; but this I acquired
without any fear or tormenting, by merely
taking notice, amid the blandishments of my
nurses, the jests of those who smiled on me,
and the sportiveness of those who toyed with me.
I learnt all this, indeed, without being urged
by any pressure of punishment, for my own
heart urged me to bring forth its own concep-
tions, which I could not do unless by learning
words, not of those who taught me, but of those
who talked to me ; into whose ears, also, I
brought forth whatever I discerned. From this
it is sufficiently clear that a free curiosity hath
more influence in our learning these things than
a necessity full of fear. But this last restrains
the overflowings of that freedom, through Thy
laws, O God, — Thy laws, from the ferule of the
schoolmaster to the trials of the martyr, being
effective to mingle for us a salutary bitter, call-
ing us back to Thyself from the pernicious
delights which allure us from Thee.

CHAP. XV. HE ENTREATS GOD, THAT WHATEVER

USEFUL THINGS HE LEARNED AS A BOY MAY BE
DEDICATED TO HIM.

24. Hear my prayer, O Lord ; let not my
soul faint under Thy discipline, nor let me faint
in confessing unto Thee Thy mercies, whereby
Thou hast saved me from all my most mischiev-
ous ways, that Thou mightest become sweet
to me beyond all the seductions which I used
to follow ; and that I may love Thee entirely,
and grasp Thy hand with my whole heart, and
that Thou mayest deliver me from every tempta-
tion, even unto the end. For lo, O Lord, my
King and my God, for Thy service be whatever
useful thing I learnt as a boy — for Thy service

1 Exaggerated statements have been made as to Avigustin's de-
ficiency in the knowledge of Greek. In this place it is clear that he
simply alludes to a repugnance to learn a foreign language that has
often been seen in boys since his day. It would seem equally clear
from Bk. vii. sec. 13 (see also De Trin. iii. sec, 1), that when 'he
could get a translation of a Greek book, he preferred it to one in the
original language. Perhaps in this, again, he is not altogether sin-
gular. It is difficult to decide the exact extent of his knowledge,
but those familiar with his writings can scarcely fail to be satisfied
that he had a sufficient acquaintance with the language to correct
his Italic version by the Greek Testament and the LXX., and that
he was quite alive to the importance of such knowledge in an inter-
preter of Scripture, See also Con. Faust, xi. 2-4 ; and De Doctr.
Christ, ii. 11-15.


what I speak, and write, and count. For when
I learned vain things, Thou didst grant me Thy
discipline ; and my sin in taking delight in
those vanities. Thou hast forgiven me. I
learned, indeed, in them many useful words ;
but these may be learned in things not vain,
and that is the safe way for youths to walk in.

CHAP. XVI. HE DISAPPROVES OF THE l^IODE OF J

EDUCATING YOUTH, AND HE POINTS OUT WHY 1
WICKEDNESS IS ATTRIBUTED TO THE GODS BY
THE POETS.

25. But woe unto thee, thou stream of human
custom ! Who shall stay thy course ? How
long shall it be before thou art dried up ? How
long wilt thou carry down the sons of Eve into
that huge and formidable ocean, which even
they who are embarked on the cross {Jig7nim^
can scarce pass over ? '^ Do I not read in thee
of Jove the thunderer and adulterer ? And the ,
two verily he could not be ; but it was that,
while the fictitious thunder served as a cloak,
he might have warrant to imitate real adultery.
Yet which of our gowned masters can lend a
temperate ear to a man of his school who cries
out and says : "These were Homer's fictions;
he transfers things human to the gods. I could
have wished him to transfer divine things to us. " '
But it would have been more true had he said :
"These are, indeed, his fictions, but he attri-
buted divine attributes to sinful men, that
crimes might not be accounted crimes, and that
whosoever committed any might appear to imi-
tate the celestial gods and not abandoned men."

26. And yet, thou stream of hell, into thee
are cast the sons of men, with rewards for learn-
ing these things ; and much is made of it when
this is going on in the forum in the sight of
laws which grant a salary over and above the
rewards. And thou beatest against thy rocks
and roarest, saying, " Hence words are learnt ;
hence eloquence is to be attained, most neces-
sary to persuade people to your way of thinking,
and to unfold your opinions." So, in truth,
we should never have understood these words,
"golden shower," "bosom," "intrigue,"
" highest heavens," and other words written in
the same place, unless Terence had introduced
a good-for-nothing youth upon the stage, set-
ting up Jove as his example of lewdness : —

" Viewing a picture, where the tale was drawn.
Of Jove's descending in a golden shower
To Danae's bosom . . . with a woman to intrigue."

And see how he excites himself to lust, as if by
celestial authority, when he says : —


2 So in Tract. II. on John, he has : " The sea has to be crossed,
and dost thou despise the itiood ?" explaining it to mean the cross
of Christ. And again : " Thou art not at all able to walk in the
sea, be carried by a ship — be carried by the wood — believe on the
Crucified," etc.

3 Cic. Tusc. i. 26.


Chap. XVIIL]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


53


" Great Jove,
Who shakes the highest heavens with his thunder.
And I, poor mortal man, not do the same !
I did it, and with all my heart I did it." l

Not one whit more easily are the words learnt
for this vileness, but by their means is the vile-
ness perpetrated with more confidence. I do
not blame the words, they being, as it were,
choice and precious vessels, but the wine of
error which was drunk in them to us by inebri-
ated teachers ; and unless we drank, we were
beaten, without liberty of appeal to any sober
judge. And yet, O my God, — in whose pres-
ence I can now with security recall this, — did I,
unhappy one, learn these things willingly, and
with delight, and for this was I called a boy of
good promise.^

CHAP. XVII. HE CONTINUES ON THE UNHAPPV

METHOD OF TRAINING YOUTH IN LITERARY
SUBJECTS.

27. Bear with me, my God, while I speak a
little of those talents Thou hast bestowed upon
me, and on what follies I wasted them. For a
lesson sufficiently disquieting to my soul was
given me, in hope of praise, and fear of shame
or stripes, to speak the words of Juno, as she
raged and sorrowed that she could not

" Latium bar
From all approaches of the Dardan king," 3

which I had heard Juno never uttered. Yet
were we compelled to stray in the footsteps of
these poetic fictions, and to turn that into prose
which the poet had said in verse. And his
speaking was most applauded in whom, accord-
ing to the reputation of the persons delineated,
the passions of anger and sorrow were most
strikingly reproduced, and clothed in the most
suitable language. But what is it to me, O my
true Life, my God, that my declaiming was ap-
plauded above that of many who w^ere my con-
temporaries and fellow-students ? Behold, is not
all this smoke and wind ? Was there nothing
else, too, on which I could exercise my wit and
tongue? Thy praise. Lord, Thy praises might
have supported the tendrils of my heart by Thy
Scriptures ; so had it not been dragged away
by these empty trifles, a shameful prey of* the
fowls of the air. For there is more than one
way in which men sacrifice to the fallen angels.

CHAP. XVIII. MEN DESIRE TO OBSERVE THE

RULES OF LEARNING, BUT NEGLECT THE ETER-
NAL RULES OF EVERLASTING SAFETY.

28. But what matter of surprise is it that I


was thus carried towards vanity, and went forth
from Thee, O my God, when men were pro-
posed to me to imitate, who, should they in re-
lating any acts of theirs — not in themselves evil
— be guilty of a barbarism or solecism, when
censured for it became confounded ; but when
they made a full and ornate oration, in well-
chosen words, concerning their own licentious-
ness, and were applauded for it, they boasted ?
Thou seest this, O Lord, and keepest silence,
"long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and
truth," ^ as Thou art. Wilt Thou keep silence
for ever ? And even now Thou drawest out of
this vast deep the soul that seeketh Thee and
thirsteth after Thy delights, whose "heart said
unto Thee," I have sought Thy face, "Thy
face. Lord, will I seek. ' ' ® For I was far from
Thy face, through my darkened ' affections.
For it is not by our feet, nor by change of place,
that we either turn from Thee or return to Thee.
Or, indeed, did that younger son look out for
horses, or chariots, or ships, or fly away with
visible wings, or journey by the motion of his
limbs, that he might, in a far country, prodi-
gally waste all that Thou gavest him when he set
out ? A kind Father when Thou gavest, and
kinder still when he returned destitute ! ® So,
then, in wanton, that is to say, in darkened af-
fections, lies distance from Thy face.

29. Behold, O Lord God, and behold
patiently, as Thou art wont to do, how dili-
gently the sons of men observe the conventional
rules of letters and syllables, received from those
who spoke prior to them, and yet neglect the
eternal rules of everlasting salvation received
from Thee, insomuch that he who practises or
teaches the hereditary rules of pronunciation,
if, contrary to grammatical usage, he should say,
without aspirating the first letter, a uman being,
will offend men more than if, in opposition to
Thy commandments, he, a human being, were
to hate a human being. As if, indeed, any
man should feel that an enemy could be more
destructive to him than that hatred with which
he is excited against him, or that he could de-
stroy more utterly him whom he persecutes than
he destroys his own soul by his enmity. And
of a truth, there is no science of letters more
innate than the writing of conscience — that he
is doing unto another what he himself would
not suffer. How mysterious art Thou, who in
silence " dwellest on high," 'Thou God, the
only great, who by an unwearied law dealest
out the punishment of blindness to illicit de-
sires ! When a man seeking for the reputation
of eloquence stands before a human judge while


1 Terence, Eunuch. Act 3, sceup 6 (Colman).

2 LTntil very recently, the Eunuchus was recited at " the play"
of at least one of our public schools. See De Civ. Dei, ii. sees. 7,
8, where Augustin again alludes to this matter.

' jEneid, i. 36-75 (Kennedy).
* See note on v. 4, below.


5 Ps. Ixxxvi. 15.

6 Ps. xxvii. 8.
' Rom. i. 21.

8 Luke .XV. 11-32.

9 Isa. xxxiii. 5.


54


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book I.


a thronging multitude surrounds him, inveighs
against his enemy with the most fierce hatred,
he takes most vigilant heed that his tongue slips
not into grammatical error, but takes no heed
lest through the fury of his spirit he cut off a
man from his fellow-men.^

30. These were the customs in the midst of
which I, unhappy boy, was cast, and on that
arena it was that I was more fearful of perpetra-
ting a barbarism than, having done so, of envy-
ing those who had not. These things I declare
and confess unto Thee, my God, for which I
was applauded by them whom I then thought it
my whole duty to please, for I did not perceive
the gulf of infamy wherein I was cast away
from Thine eyes.^ For in Thine eyes what was
more infamous than I was already, displeasing
even those like myself, deceiving with innumer-
able lies both tutor, and masters, and parents,
from love of play, a desire to see frivolous spec-
tacles, and a stage-stuck restlessness, to imitate
them? Pilferings I committed from my
parents' cellar and table, either enslaved by
gluttony, or that I might have something to
give to boys who sold me their play, who,
though they sold it, liked it as well as I. In
this play, likewise, I often sought dishonest
victories, I myself being conquered by the vain
desire of pre-eminence. And what could I so
little endure, or, if I detected it, censured I so
violently, as the very things I did to others,
and, when myself detected I was censured, pre-
ferred rather to quarrel than to yield ? Is this
the innocence of childhood ? Nay, Lord, nay.
Lord ; I entreat Thy mercy, O my God. For
these same sins, as we grow older, are transferred
from governors and masters, from nuts, and
balls, and sparrows, to magistrates and kings, to
gold, and lands, and slaves, just as the rod is
succeeded by more severe chastisements. It


1 Literally, " takes care not by a slip of the tongue to say inter
hominihus , but takes no care lest kominem au/erat ex hoininibus."
* Ps. xxxi. 22.


was, then, the stature of childhood that Thou,

0 our King, didst approve of as an emblem of
humility when Thou saidst : "Of such is the
kingdom of heaven. ' ' *

31. But yet, O Lord, to Thee, most excel-
lent and most good. Thou Architect and Gov-
ernor of the universe, thanks had been due unto
Thee, our God, even hadst Thou willed that I
should not survive my boyhood. For I existed
even then ; I lived, and felt, and was solicitous
about my own well-being, — a trace of that most
mysterious unity * from whence I had my being;

1 kept watch by my inner sense over the whole-
ness of my senses, and in these insignificant
pursuits, and also in my thoughts on things in-
significant, I learnt to take pleasure in truth.
I was averse to being deceived, I had a vigorous
memory, was provided with the power of
speech, was softened by friendship, shunned
sorrow, meanness, ignorance. In such a being
what was not wonderful and praiseworthy? But
all these are gifts of my God ; I did not give
them to myself; and they are good, and all
these constitute myself. Good, then, is He
that made me, and He is my God ; and before
Him will I rejoice exceedingly for every good
gift which, as a boy, I had. For in this lay my
sin, that not in Him, but in His creatures — my-
self and the rest — I sought for pleasures, hon-
ours, and truths, falling thereby into sorrows,
troubles, and errors. Thanks be to Thee, my
joy, my pride, my confidence, my God — thanks
be to Thee for Thy gifts; but preserve Thou
them to me. For thus wilt Thou preserve me ;
and those things which Thou hast given me
shall be developed and perfected, and I myself
shall be with Thee, for from Thee is my being.

3 INIatt. xix. 14. See i. sec. 11, note 3, above.

* " To be is no other than to be one. In as far, therefore, as any-
thing attains unity, in so far it ' is.' For unity worketh congruity
and harmony, whereby things composite are in so far as they are;
for things uncompounded are in themselves, because they are one ;
but things compounded imitate unity by the harmony of their parts,
and, so far as they attain to unity, they are. Wherefore order and
rule secure being, disorder tends to not being." — AuG. De Morib.
Alanich. c. 6.


BOOK II.


HE ADVANCES TO PUBERTY, AND INDEED TO THE EARLY PART OF THE SIXTEENTH YEAR OF HIS
AGE, IN WHICH, HAVING ABANDONED HIS STUDIES, HE INDULGED IN LUSTFUL PLEASURES, AND,
WITH HIS COMPANIONS, COMMITTED THEFT.


CHAP. I. — HE DEPLORES THE WICKEDNESS OF HIS
YOUTH.

1 . I WILL now call to mind my past foulness,
and the carnal corruptions of my soul, not be-
cause I love them, but that I may love Thee, O
my God. For love of Thy love do I it, recall-
ing, in the very bitterness of my remembrance,
my most vicious ways, that Thou mayest grow
sweet to me, — Thou sweetness without decep-
tion ! Thou sweetness happy and assured ! —
and re-collecting myself out of that my dissipa-
tion, in which I was torn to pieces, while,
turned away from Thee the One, I lost myself
among many vanities. For I even longed in
my youth formerly to be satisfied with worldly
things, and I dared to grow wild again with
various and shadowy loves ; my form consumed
away,^ and I became corrupt in Thine eyes,
pleasing myself, and eager to please in the eyes
of men.

CHAP. II. — STRICKEN WITH EXCEEDING GRIEF,
HE REMEMBERS THE DISSOLUTE PASSIONS IN
WHICH, IN HIS SIXTEENTH YEAR, HE USED
TO INDULGE.

2. But what was it that I delighted in save to
love and to be beloved ? But I held it not in
moderation, mind to mind, the bright path of
friendship, but out of the dark concupiscence
of the flesh and the effervescence of youth ex-
halations came forth which obscured and over-
cast my heart, so that I was unable to discern
pure affection from unholy desire. Both boiled
confusedly within me, and dragged away my
unstable youth into the rough places of unchaste
desires, and plunged me into a gulf of infamy.
Thy anger had overshadowed me, and I knew
it not. I was become deaf by the rattling of the
chains of my mortality, the punishment for my
soul's pride ; and I wandered farther from Thee,
and Thou didst "suffer"^ me; and I was
tossed to and fro, and wasted, and poured out,
and boiled over in my fornications, and Thou


1 Ps. xxxix. II.
S Matt. xvii. 17.


didst hold Thy peace, O Thou my tardy joy !
Thou then didst hold Thy peace, and I wan-
dered still farther from Thee, into more and
more barren seed-plots of sorrows, with proud
dejection and restless lassitude.

3. Oh for one to have regulated my disorder,
and turned to my profit the fleeting beauties of
the things around me, and fixed a bound to
their sweetness, so that the tides of my youth
might have spent themselves upon the conjugal
shore, if so be they could not be tranquillized
and satisfied within the object of a family, as
Thy law appoints, O Lord, — who thus formest
the offspring of our death, being able also with
a tender hand to blunt the thorns which were
excluded from Thy paradise ! For Thy om-
nipotency is not far from us even when we are
far from Thee, else in truth ought I more vigil-
antly to have given heed to the voice from the
clouds: " Nevertheless, such shall have trouble
in the flesh, but I spare you ; " ^ and, "It is
good for a man not to touch a woman ; " * and,
" He that is unmarried careth for the things
that belong to the Lord, how he may please the
Lord ; but he that is married careth for the
things that are of the world, how he may please
his wife."^ I should, therefore, have listened
more attentively to these words, and, being
severed " for the kingdom of heaven's sake," *
I would with greater happiness have expected
Thy embraces.

4. But I, poor fool, seethed as does the sea,
and, forsaking Thee, followed the violent course
of my own stream, and exceeded all Thy limi-
tations ; nor did I escape Thy scourges.'' For
what mortal can do so ? But Thou wert always
by me, mercifully angry, and dashing with the
bitterest vexations all my illicit pleasures, in
order that I might seek pleasures free from vex-
ation. But where I could meet with such ex-
cept in Thee, O Lord, I could not find, —
except in Thee, who teachest by sorrow,® and

3 I Cor. vii. 28.

* I Cor. vii. I.

5 I Cor. vii. 32, 33.

' Matt. xix. 12.

' Isa. X. 26.

8 Deut. xxxii. 39.

55


56


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book II.


woundest us to heal us, and killest us that we
may not die from Thee.^ Where was I, and
how far was I exiled from the delights of Thy
house, in that sixteenth year of the age of my
flesh, when the madness of lust — to the which
human shamelessness granteth full freedom,
although forbidden by Thy laws — held complete
sway over me, and I resigned myself entirely
to it ? Those about me meanwhile took no
care to save me from ruin by marriage, their
sole care being that I should learn to make
a powerful speech, and become a persuasive
orator.

CHAP. III. — CONCERNING HIS FATHER, A FREEMAN
OF THAGASTE, THE AS3ISTER OF HIS SOn's
STUDIES, AND ON THE ADMONITIONS OF HIS
MOTHER ON THE PRESERVATION OF CHASTITY.

5. And for that year my studies were inter-
mitted, while after my return from Madaura^
(a neighbouring city, whither I had begun to
go in order to learn grammar and rhetoric), the
expenses for a further residence at Carthage
were provided for me ; and that was rather by
the determination than the means of my father,
who was but a poor freeman of Thagaste. To
whom do I narrate this ? Not unto Thee, my
God ; but before Thee unto my own kind, even
to that small part of the human race who may
chance to light upon these my writings. And
to what end? That I and all who read the
same may reflect out of what depths we are
to cry unto Thee.* For what cometh nearer to
Thine ears than a confessing heart and a life of
faith ? For who did not extol and praise my
father, in that he went even beyond his means
to supply his son with all the necessaries for a
far journey for the sake of his studies? For
many far richer citizens did not the like for
their children. But yet this same father did
not trouble himself how I grew towards Thee,
nor how chaste I was, so long as I was skilful
in speaking — however barren I was to Thy
tilling, O God, who art the sole true and
good Lord of my heart, which is Thy field.

6. But while, in that sixteenth year of my
age, I resided with my parents, having holi-
day from school for a time (this idleness
being imposed upon me by my parents' neces-
sitous circumstances), the thorns of lust grew
rank over my head, and there was no hand
to pluck them out. Moreover when my father,

1 Ps. xciii. 20, Vulg. " Lit. ' Formest trouble in or as a precept.'
Thou makest to us a precept out of trouble, so that trouble itself
shall be a precept to us, i. e. hast willed so to discipline and instruct
those Thy sons, that they should not be without fear, lest they
should love something else, and forget Thee, their true good."
— S. Aug. ad /ac.—E. B. P.

2 " Formerly an episcopal city ; now a small village. At this
time the inhabitants were heathen. St. Augustin calls them ' his
fathers,' in a letter persuading them to embrace the gospel. — £^.
232."— E. B. P.

" Ps. CXXX. I.


seeing me at the baths, perceived that I was
becoming a man, and was stirred with a
restless youthfulness, he, as if from this an-
ticipating future descendants, joyfully told it
to my mother ; rejoicing in that intoxication
wherein the world so often forgets Thee,
its Creator, and falls in love with Thy creature
instead of Thee, from the invisible wine of its
own perversity turning and bowing down to the
most infamous things. But in my mother's
breast Thou hadst even now begun Thy temple,
and the commencement of Thy holy habi-
tation, whereas my father was only a catechumen
as yet, and that but recently. She then started
up with a pious fear and trembling ; and, al-
though I had not yet been baptized,* she feared
those crooked ways in which they walk who
turn their back to Thee, and not their face.^

7. Woe is me ! and dare I affirm that
Thou heldest Thy peace, O my God, while
I strayed farther from Thee ? Didst Thou
then hold Thy peace to me? And whose
words were they but Thine which by my
mother. Thy faithful handmaid, Thou pouredst
into my ears, none of which sank into my
heart to make me do it ? For she desired,
and I remember privately warned me, with great
solicitude, " not to commit fornication ; but
above all things never to defile another
man's wife." These appeared to me but
womanish counsels, which I should blush to
obey. But they were Thine, and I knew it not,
and I thought that Thou heldest Thy peace, and
that it was she who spoke, through whom Thou
heldest not Thy peace to me, and in her person
wast despised by me, her son, " the son of Thy
handmaid. Thy servant. ' ' ® But this I knew not ;
and rushed on headlong with such blindness,
that amongst my equals I was ashamed to be
less shameless, when I heard them pluming
themselves upon their disgraceful acts, yea, and
glorying all the more in proportion to the
greatness of their baseness ; and I took pleasure
in doing it, not for the pleasure's sake only,
but for the praise. What is worthy of dis-
praise but vice ? But I made myself out worse
than I was, in order that I might not be dis-
praised ; and when in anything I had not
sinned as the abandoned ones, I would affirm
that I had done what I had not, that I might not
appear abject for being more innocent, or of
less esteem for being more chast*.

8. Behold with what companions I walked
the streets of Babylon, in whose filth I was
rolled, as if in cinnamon and precious oint-
ments. And that I might cleave the more tena-


* Nondum fideli, not having rehearsed the articles of the Chris-
tian faith at baptism. See i. sec 17, note, above ; and below, sec.
I, note.

ojer. ii. 27.

6 Ps. cxvi. 16.


Chap. V.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


57


ciously to its very centre, my invisible enemy
trod me down, and seduced me, I being easily
seduced. Nor did the mother of my flesh, al-
though she herself had ere this fled "out of
the midst of Babylon," ^ — progressing, however,
but slowly in the skirts of it, — in counselling me
to chastity, so bear in mind what she had been
told about me by her husband as to restrain in the
limits of conjugal affection (if it could not be
cut away to the quick) what she knew to be de-
structive in the present and dangerous in the
future. But she took no heed of this, for she
was afraid lest a wife should prove a hindrance
and a clog to my hopes. Not th^e hopes of
the future world, which my mother had in Thee ;
but the hope of learning, which both my par-
ents were too anxious that I should acquire, —
he, because he had little or no thought of Thee,
and but vain thoughts for me — she, because she
calculated that those usual courses of learning
would not only be no drawback, but rather a
furtherance towards my attaining Thee. For
thus I conjecture, recalling as well as I can the
dispositions of my parents. The reins, mean-
time, were slackened towards me beyond the
restraint of due severity, that I might play,
yea, even to dissoluteness, in whatsoever I fan-
cied. And in all there was a mist, shutting out
from my sight the brightness of Thy truth, O
my God ; and my iniquity displayed itself as
from very " fatness." ^

CHAP. IV. HE COMMITS THEFT WITH HIS COM-
PANIONS, NOT URGED ON BY POVERTY, BUT
FROM A CERTAIN DISTASTE OF WELL-DOING.

9. Theft is punished by Thy law, O Lord,
and by the law written in men's hearts, which
iniquity itself cannot blot out. For what thief
will suffer a thief? Even a rich thief will not
suffer him who is driven to it by want. Yet
had I a desire to commit robbery, and did so,
compelled neither by hunger, nor poverty, but
through a distaste for well-doing, and a lustiness
of iniquity. For I pilfered that of which I had
already sufficient, and much better. Nor did I
desire to enjoy what I pilfered, but the theft and
sin itself. There was a pear-tree close to our
vineyard, heavily laden with fruit, which was
tempting neither for its colour nor its flavour.
To shake and rob this some of us wanton young
fellows went, late one night (having, according
to our disgraceful habit, prolonged our games
in the streets until then), and carried away great
loads, not to eat ourselves, but to fling to the very
swine, having only eaten some of them ; and
to do this pleased us all the more because it
was not permitted. Behold my heart, O my


1 Jer. li. 6.
" Ps. Ixxiii. 7.


God ; behold my heart, which Thou hadst pity
upon when in the bottomless pit. Behold,
now, let my heart tell Thee what it was seeking
there, that I should be gratuitously wanton, hav-
ing no inducement to evil but the evil itself. It
was foul, and I loved it. I loved to perish. I
loved my own error — not that for which I
erred, but the error itself. Base soul, falling
from Thy firmament to utter destruction — not
seeking aught through the shame but the shame
itself !

CHAP. V. CONCERNING THE MOTIVES TO SIN,

WHICH ARE NOT IN THE LOVE OF EVIL, BUT
IN THE DESIRE OF OBTAINING THE PROPERTY
OF OTHERS.

10. There is a desirableness in all beautiful
bodies, and in gold, and silver, and all things ;
and in bodily contact sympathy is powerful,
and each other sense hath his proper adapta-
tion of body. Worldly honour hath also its
glory, and the power of command, and of over-
coming ; whence proceeds also the desire for
revenge. And yet to acquire all these, we
must not depart from Thee, O Lord, nor deviate
from Thy law. The life which we live here
hath also its peculiar attractiveness, through
a certain measure of comeliness of its own,
and harmony with all things here below. The
friendships of men also are endeared by a sweet
bond, in the oneness of many souls. On ac-
count of all these, and such as these, is sin
committed; while through an inordinate pref-
erence for these goods of a lower kind, the bet-
ter and higher are neglected, — even Thou, our
Lord God, Thy truth, and Thy law. For these
meaner things have their delights, but not like
unto my God, who hath created all things ; for
in Him doth the righteous delight, and He is
the sweetness of the upright in heart.*

11. When, therefore, we inquire why a crime
was committed, we do not believe it, unless it
appear that there might have been the wish to
obtain some of those which we designated
meaner things, or else a fear of losing them.
For truly they are beautiful and comely, al-
though in comparison with those higher and
celestial goods they be abject and contemptible.
A man hath murdered another ; what was his
motive ? He desired his wife or his estate ; or
would steal to support himself; or he was afraid
of losing something of the kind by him; or,
being injured, he was burning to be revenged.
Would he commit murder without a motive,
taking delight simply in the act of murder?
Who would credit it ? For as for that savage
and brutal man, of whom it is declared that he
was gratuitously wicked and cruel, there is yet

8 Ps. Ixiv. 10.


58


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book II.


a motive assigned. "Lest through idleness,"
he says, " hand or heart should grow inac-
tive. ' ' ^ And to what purpose ? Why, even
that, having once got possession of the city
through that practice of wickedness, he might
attain unto honours, empire, and wealth, and
be exempt from the fear of the laws, and his
difficult circumstances from the needs of his
family, and the consciousness of his own wick-
edness. So it seems that even Catiline himself
loved not his own villanies, but something else,
which gave him the motive for committing
them.

CHAP. VI. — WHY HE DELIGHTED IN THAT THEFT,
WHEN ALL THINGS WHICH UNDER THE APPEAR-
ANCE OF GOOD INVITE TO VICE ARE TRUE AND
PERFECT IN GOD ALONE.

12. What was it, then, that I, miserable one,
so doted on in thee, thou theft of mine, thou
deed of darkness, in that sixteenth year of my
age ? Beautiful thou wert not, since thou wert
theft. But art thou anything, that so I may
argue the case with thee ? Those pears that we
stole were fair to the sight, because they were
Thy creation. Thou fairest^ of all. Creator of
all. Thou good God — God, the highest good,
and my true good. Those pears truly were
pleasant to the sight ; but it was not for them
that my miserable soul lusted, for I had abund-
ance of better, but those I plucked simply that
I might steal. For, having plucked them, I
threw them away, my sole gratification in them
being my own sin, which I was pleased to
enjoy. For if any of these pears entered my
mouth, the sweetener of it was my sin in eating
it. And now, O Lord my God, I ask what it
was in that theft of mine that caused me such
delight ; and behold it hath no beauty in it —
not such, I mean, as exists in justice and wis-
dom ; nor such as is in the mind, memory,
senses, and animal life of man ; nor yet such as
is the glory and beauty of the stars in their
courses ; or the earth, or the sea, teeming with
incipient life, to replace, as it is born, that
which decayeth ; nor, indeed, that false and
shadowy beauty which pertaineth to deceptive
vices.

13. For thus doth pride imitate high estate,
whereas Thou alone art God, high above all.
And what does ambition seek but honours and
renown, whereas Thou alone art to be honoured
above all, and renowned for evermore? The
cruelty of the powerful wishes to be feared ;
but who is to be feared but God only,' out of
whose power what can be forced away or with-
drawn— when, or where, or whither, or by


> Sallust, De Bella Catil. c. 9.
» Ps. xlv. 2.
• Ps. Ixxvi. 7.


whom ? The enticements of the wanton would
fain be deemed love ; and yet is naught more
enticing than Thy charity, nor is aught loved
more healthfully than that, Thy truth, bright
and beautiful above all. Curiosity affects a
desire for knowledge, whereas it is Thou who
supremely knowest all things. Yea, ignorance
and foolishness themselves are concealed under
the names of ingenuousness and harmlessness,
because nothing can be found more ingenuous
than Thou ; and what is more harmless, since it
is a sinner's own works by which he is harmed?*
And sloth seems to long for rest \ but what sure
rest is ther^ besides the Lord ? Luxury would
fain be called plenty and abundance ; but Thou
art the fulness and unfailing plenteousness of
unfading joys. Prodigality presents a shadow
of liberality ; but Thou art the most lavish
giver of all good. Covetousness desires to
possess much ; and Thou art the Possessor of
all things. Envy contends for excellence ; but
what so excellent as Thou ? Anger seeks re-
venge ; who avenges more justly than Thou ?
Fear starts at unwonted and sudden chances
which threaten things beloved, and is wary for
their security ; but what can happen that is un-
wonted or sudden to Thee ? or who can deprive
Thee of what Thou lovest ? or where is there
unshaken security save with Thee ? Grief lan-
guishes for things lost in which desire had
delighted itself, even because it would have
nothing taken from it, as nothing can be from
Thee.

14. Thus doth the soul commit fornication
when she turns away from Thee, and seeks
without Thee what she cannot find pure and
untainted until she returns to Thee. Thus all
pervertedly imitate Thee who separate them-
selves far from Thee* and raise themselves up
against Thee. But even by thus imitating Thee
they acknowledge Thee to be the Creator of all
nature, and so that there is no place whither
they can altogether retire from Thee.^ What,
then, was it that I loved in that theft ? And
wherein did I, even corruptedly and pervertedly,
imitate my Lord ? Did I wish, if only by arti-
fice, to act contrary to Thy law, because by
power I could not, so that, being a captive, I
might imitate an imperfect liberty by doing with
impunity things which I was not allov/ed to do,
in obscured likeness of Thy omnipotency ?®
Behold this servant of Thine, fleeing from his
Lord, and following a shadow ! ' O rottenness !
O monstrosity of life and profundity of death !


< Ps. vii. 15.

6 Ps. cxxxix. 7, 8.

6 " For even souls, in their very sins, strive after nothing else but
some kind of likeness of God, in a proud and preposterous, and, so
to say, slavish liberty. So neither could our first parents have been
persuaded to sin unless it had been said, ' Ye shall be as gods.' "
— Aug. De Trin. xi. 5.

' Jonah i. and iv.


Chap. X.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


59


I


Could I like that which was unlawful only
because it was unlawful ?

CHAP. VII. — HE GIVES THANKS TO GOD FOR THE
REMISSION OF HIS SINS, AND REMINDS EVERY
ONE THAT THE SUPREME GOD MAY HAVE PRE-
SERVED US FROM GREATER SINS.

15. "What shall I render unto the Lord,"^
that whilst my memory recalls these things my
soul is not appalled at them ? I will love Thee,
O Lord, and thank Thee, and confess unto Thy
name,' because Thou hast put away from me
these so wicked and nefarious acts of mine.
To Thy grace I attribute it, and to Thy mercy,
that Thou hast melted away my sin as it were
ice. To Thy grace also I attribute whatsoever
of evil I have not committed ; for what might
I not have committed, loving as I did the sin
for the sin's sake? Yea, all I confess to have
been pardoned me, both those which I com-
mitted by my own perverseness, and those which,
by Thy guidance, I committed not. Where is
he who, reflecting upon his own infirmity, dares
to ascribe his chastity and innocency to his own
strength, so that he should love Thee the less,
as if he had been in less need of Thy mercy'
whereby Thou dost forgive the transgressions of
those that turn to Thee ? For whosoever, called
by Thee, obeyed Thy voice, and shunned those
things which he reads me recalling and confess-
ing of myself, let him not despise me, who, beino-
sick, was healed by that same Physician^ by
whose aid it was that he was not sick, or rather
was less sick. And for this let him love Thee
as much, yea, all the more, since by whom he
sees me to have been restored from so great a
feebleness of sin, by Him he sees himself from
a like feebleness to have been preserved.


CHAP. VIII. — IN HIS THEFT HE LOVED THE COM-
PANY OF HIS FELLOW-SINNERS.

16. "What fruit had I then,"* wretched
I one, in those things which, when I remember
jthem, cause me shame— above all in that theft,
which I loved only for the theft's sake ? And
as the theft itself was nothing, all the more
wretched was I who loved it. Yet by myself
alone I would not have done it— I recall what
my heart was — alone I could not have done it.
■^ loved, then, in it the companionship of my
accomplices with whom I did it. I did not
therefore, love the theft alone— yea, rather, it
was that alone that I loved, for the companion-
ship was nothing. What is the fact ? Who is
It that can teach me, but He who illuminateth
mine heart and searcheth out the dark corners


^ Ps. cxvi. 12.

* Rev. iii. 5.

* Luke iv. 23.

* Rom. vi. 21.


thereof? Wiiat is it that hath come into my
mind to inquire about, to discuss, and to reflect
upon ? For had I at that time loved the pears
I stole, and wished to enjoy them, I might have
done so alone, if I could have been satisfied
with the mere commission of the theft by which
my pleasure was secured; nor needed I have
provoked that itching of my own passions, by
the encouragement of accomplices. But as my
enjoyment was not in those pears, it was in the
crime itself, which the company of my fellow-
sinners produced.

CHAP. IX.— IT WAS A PLEASURE TO HIM ALSO TO
LAUGH WHEN SERIOUSLY DECEIVING OTHERS.

17- By what feelings, then, was I animated?
For It was in truth too shameful ; and woe was
me who had it. But still what was it ? '' Who
can understand his errors? "» We laughed,
because our hearts were tickled at the thought
of deceiving those who little imagined what we
were doing, and would have vehemently disap-
proved of it. Yet, again, why did I so rejoice
in this, that I did it not alone ? Is it that no
one readily laughs alone? No one does so
readily; but yet sometimes, when men are
alone by themselves, nobody being by, a fit of
laughter overcomes them when anything very
droll presents itself to their senses or mind.
Yet alone I would not have done it — alone I
could not at all have done it. Behold, my God,
the lively recollection of my soul is laid bare
before Thee— alone I had not committed that
theft, wherein what I stole pleased me not, but
rather the act of stealing ; nor to have done it
alone would I have liked so well, neither would I
have done it. O Friendship too unfriendly !
thou mysterious seducer of the soul, thou greedi-
ness to do mischief out of mirth and wanton-
ness, thou craving for others' loss, without desire
for my own profit or revenge ; but when they
say, " Let us go, let us do it," we are ashamed
not to be shameless.

CHAP. X. WITH GOD THERE IS TRUE REST AND

LIFE UNCHANGING.

18. Who can unravel that twisted and tangled
knottiness ? It is foul. I hate to reflect on it.
I hate to look on it. But thee do I long for, O
righteousness and innocency, fair and comely to
all virtuous eyes, and of a satisfaction that never
palls ! With thee is perfect rest, and life un-
changing. He who enters into thee enters into
the joy of his Lord,* and shall have no fear, and
shall do excellently in the most Excellent. I
sank away from Thee, O my God, and I wan-
dered too far from Thee, my stay, in my youth,
and became to myself an unfruitful land.


* Ps. xix. 12.
6 Matt. XXV. 21.


BOOK III.

OF THE SEVENTEENTH, EIGHTEENTH, AND NINETEENTH YEARS OF HIS AGE, PASSED AT CARTHAGE,
WHEN, HAVING COMPLETED HIS COURSE OF STUDIES, HE IS CAUGHT IN THE SNARES OF A LICEN-
TIOUS PASSION, AND FALLS INTO THE ERRORS OF THE MANICH^ANS.


CHAP. I. — DELUDED BY AN INSANE LOVE, HE,
THOUGH FOUL AND DISHONOURABLE, DESIRES
TO BE THOUGHT ELEGANT AND URBANE.

I. To Carthage I came, where a cauldron of
unholy loves bubbled up all around me. I
loved not as yet, yet I loved to love ; and, with
a hidden want, I abhorred myself that I wanted
not. I searched about for something to love,
in love with loving, and hating security, and a
way not beset with snares. For within me I
had a dearth of that inward food. Thyself, my
God, though that dearth caused me no hunger ;
but I remained without all desire for incorrupti-
ble food, not because I was already filled thereby,
but the more empty I was the more I loathed
it. For this reason my soul was far from well,
and, full of ulcers, it miserably cast itself forth,
craving to be excited by contact with objects
of sense. Yet, had these no soul, they would
not surely inspire love. To love and to be
loved was sweet to me, and all the more when
I succeeded in enjoying the person I loved. I
befouled, therefore, the spring of friendship
with the filth of concupiscence, and I dimmed
its lustre with the hell of lustfulness ; and yet,
foul and dishonourable as I was, I craved, through
an excess of vanity, to be thought elegant and
urbane. I fell precipitately, then, into the love
in which I longed to be ensnared. My God,
my mercy, with how much bitterness didst
Thou, out of Thy infinite goodness, besprinkle
for me that sweetness ! For I was both beloved,
and secretly arrived at the bond of enjoying ;
and was joyfully bound with troublesome ties,
that I might be scourged with the burning iron
rods of jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and strife.

CHAP. 11. IN PUBLIC SPECTACLES HE IS MOVED

BY AN EMPTY COMPASSION. HE IS ATTACKED
BY A TROUBLESOME SPIRITUAL DISEASE.

2. Stage-plays also drew me away, full of
representations of my miseries and of fuel to
my fire. ^ Why does man like to be made sad


when viewing doleful and tragical scenes, which
yet he himself would by no means suffer ? And
yet he wishes, as a spectator, to experience from
them a sense of grief, and in this very grief his
pleasure consists. What is this but wretched
insanity? For a man is more affected with
these actions, the less free he is from such
affections. Howsoever, when he suffers in his
own person, it is the custom to style it "mis-
ery;" but when he compassionates others, then
it is styled ' ' mercy. ' ' ^ But what kind of mercy
is it that arises from fictitious and scenic pas-
sions ? The hearer is not expected to relieve,
but merely invited to grieve ; and the more he
grieves, the more he applauds the actor of these
fictions. And if the misfortunes of the charac-
ters (whether of olden times or merely imagi-
nary) be so represented as not to touch the
feelings of the spectator, he goes aAvay dis-
gusted and censorious ; but if his feelings be
touched, he sits it out attentively, and sheds

tears of joy.

3. Are sorrows, then, also loved? Surely all

men desire to rejoice? Or, as man wishes to
be miserable, is he, nevertheless, glad to be
merciful, which, because it cannot exist without
passion, for this cause alone are passions loved?
This also is from that vein of friendship. But
whither does it go? Whither does it flow?
Wherefore runs it into that torrent of pitch,'
seething forth those huge tides of loathsome
lusts into which it is changed and transformed,
being of its own will cast away and corrupted
from^its celestial clearness? Shall, then, mercy
be repudiated ? By no means. Let us, there-
fore, love sorrows sometimes. But beware of
uncleanness, O my soul, under the protection ^
of my God, the God of our fathers, who is toi
be praised and exalted above all for ever,*
beware of uncleanness. For I have not now
ceased to have ■compassion ; but then in the
theatres I sympathized with lovers when they
sinfully enjoyed one another, although this was


1 The early Fathers strongly reprobated stage-plays, and those
■who went to them were excluded from baptism. This is not to be
■wondered at, when we learn that " even the laws of Rome prohib-
ited actors from being enrolled as citizens " (De Civ. Dei, ii. 14), and
that they were accounted infamous (TertuUian, De Spectac. sec.
xxii.). See also TertuUian, De Pudicitip., c vii.

60


2 See i. 9, note, above. _ ,

3 An allusion, probably, as Watts suggests, to the sea of Sodom
which, according to Tacitus {Hist, book v.), thro%vs tip bitumen at
stated seasons of the year." Tacitus likewise alludes to its pestif-
erous odour, and to its being deadly to birds and fish, bee also Gen.
xiv. 3, 10.

4 Song of the Three Holy Children, verse 3.


Chap. IV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


6i


J


'


done fictitiously in the play. And when they
lost one another, I grieved with them, as if
pitying them, and yet had delight in both.
But no\v-a-days I feel much more pity for him
that delighteth in his wickedness, than for him
who is counted as enduring hardships by failing
to obtain some pernicious pleasure, and the loss
of some miserable felicity. This, surely, is the
truer mercy, but grief hath no delight in it.
For though he that condoles with the unhappy
be approved for his office of charity, yet would
he who had real compassion rather there were
nothing for him to grieve about. For if good-
will be ill-willed (which it cannot), then can he
who is truly and sincerely commiserating wish
that there should be some unhappy ones, that
he might commiserate them. Some grief may
then be justified, none loved. For thus dost
Thou, O Lord God, who lovest souls far more
purely than do we, and art more incorruptibly
compassionate, although Thou art wounded by
no sorrow. " And who is sufficient for these
things ? " ^

4. But I, wretched one, then loved to grieve,
and sought out what to grieve at, as when,
in another man's misery, though feigned and
counterfeited, that delivery of the actor best
pleased me, and attracted me the most power-
fully, which moved me to tears. What mar-
vel was it that an unhappy sheep, straying from
Thy flock, and impatient of Thy care, I be-
came infected with a foul disease ? And hence
came my love of griefs — not such as should
probe me too deeply, for I loved not to
suffer such things as I loved to look upon, but
such as, when hearing their fictions, should
lightly affect the surface ; upon which, like as
with empoisoned nails, followed burning, swell-
ing, putrefaction, and horrible corruption. Such
was my life ! But was it life, O my God ?

CHAP. III. NOT EVEN WHEN AT CHURCH DOES

HE SUPPRESS HIS DESIRES. IN THE SCHOOL OF
RHETORIC HE ABHORS THE ACTS OF THE SUB-
VERTERS.

5. And Thy faithful mercy hovered over me
afar. Upon what unseemly iniquities did I
wear myself out, following a sacrilegious curi-
osity, that, having deserted Thee, it might
drag me into the treacherous abyss, and to the
beguiling obedience of devils, unto whom I im-
molated my wicked deeds, and in all which
Thou didst scourge me ! I dared, even while
Thy solemn rites were being celebrated within
the walls of Thy church, to desire, and to plan
a business sufficient to procure me the fruits of
death; for which Thou chastisedst me with
grievous punishments, but nothing in compari-

1 2 Cor. ii. 16.


son with my fault, O Thou my greatest mercy,
my God, my refuge from those terrible hurts,
among which I wandered with presumptuous
neck, receding farther from Thee, loving my
own ways, and not Thine — loving a vagrant
liberty.

6. Those studies, also, which were accounted
honourable, were directed towards the courts
of law ; to excel in which, the more crafty
I was, the more I should be praised. Such
is the blindness of men, that they even glory
in their blindness. And now I was head in
the School of Rhetoric, whereat I rejoiced
proudly, and became inflated with arrogance,
though more sedate, O Lord, as Thou knowest,
and altogether removed from the subvertings of
those ' ' subverters ' ' ^ (for this stupid and dia-
bolical name was held to be the very brand of
gallantry) amongst whom I lived, with an impu-
dent shamefacedness that I was not even as they
were. And with them I was, and at times I
was delighted with their friendship whose acts
I ever abhorred, that is, their "subverting,"
wherewith they insolently attacked the modesty
of strangers, which they disturbed by uncalled
for jeers, gratifying thereby their mischievous
mirth. Nothing can more nearly resemble the
actions of devils than these. By what name,
therefore, could they be more truly called than
' ' subverters ' ' ? — being themselves subverted
first, and altogether perverted — being secretly
mocked at and seduced by the deceiving spirits,
in what they themselves delight to jeer at and
deceive others.

CHAP. IV. IN THE NINETEENTH YEAR OF HIS

AGE (his FATHER HAVING DIED TWO YEARS
before) HE IS LED BY THE " HORTENSIUS " OF
CICERO TO "PHILOSOPHY," TO GOD, AND A
BETTER MODE OF THINKING.

7. Among such as these, at that unstable
period of my life, I studied books of eloquence,
wherein I was eager to be eminent from a dam-
nable and inflated purpose, even a delight in
human vanity. Li the ordinary course of study,
I lighted upon a certain book of Cicero, whose
language, though not his heart, almost all ad-
mire. This book of his contains an exhorta-
tion to philosophy, and is called Hortensius.
This book, in truth, changed my affections, and
turned my prayers to Thyself, O Lord, and
made me have other hopes and desires. Worth-
less suddenly became every vain hope to me ;
and, with an incredible warmth of heart, I

2 Eversores. " These for their boldness were like our ' Roarers,'
and for their jeering like the worser sort of those that would be called
' The Wits.' " — W. W. " This appears to have been a name
which a pestilent and savage set of persons gave themselves, licen-
tious alike in speech and action. Augustin names them again, De
Vera Relig. c. 40 ; Ep. 185 ad Boni/ac. c. 4 ; and below, v. c. 12 ;
whence they seemed to have consisted mainly of Carthaginian stu-
dents, whose savage life is mentioned again, ib. c. 8." — E. B. P.


62


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book III.


yearned for an immortality of wisdom, ^ and
began now to arise ^ that I might return to Thee.
Not, then, to improve my language — which I ap-
peared to be purchasing with my mother's means,
in that my nineteenth year, my father having
died two years before — not to improve my lan-
guage did I have recourse to that book; nor
did it persuade me by its style, but its matter.

8. How ardent was I then, my God, how
ardent to fly from earthly things to Thee ! Nor
did I know how Thou wouldst deal with me.
For with Thee is wisdom. In Greek the love
of wisdom is called " philosophy," * with which
that book inflamed me. There be some who
seduce through philosophy, under a great, and
alluring, and honourable name colouring and
adorning their own errors. And almost all
who in that and former times were such, are in
that book censured and pointed out. There
is also disclosed that most salutary admonition
of Thy Spirit, by Thy good and pious servant :
"Beware lest any man spoil you through phil-
osophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of
men, after the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ : for in Him dwelleth all the ful-
ness of the Godhead bodily." * And since at
that time (as Thou, O Light of my heart, know-
est) the words of the apostle were unknown to
me, I was delighted with that exhortation, in so
far only as I was thereby stimulated, and enkin-
dled, and inflamed to love, seek, obtain, hold,
and embrace, not this or that sect, but wis-
dom itself, whatever it were ; and this alone
checked me thus ardent, that the name of
Christ was not in it. For this name, according
to Thy mercy, O Lord, this name of my Sav-
iour Thy Son, had my tender heart piously
drunk in, deeply treasured even with my moth-
er's milk ; and whatsoever was without that
name, though never so erudite, polished, and
truthful, took not complete hold of me.

CHAP. V. HE REJECTS THE SACRED SCRIPTURES

AS TOO ShMPLE, AND AS NOT TO BE COMPARED
WITH THE DIGNITY OF TULLY.

9. I resolved, therefore, to direct my mind
to the Holy Scriptures, that I might see what
they were. And behold, I perceive something
not comprehended by the proud, not disclosed to
children, but lowly as you approach, sublime as
you advance, and veiled in mysteries ; and I
was not of the number of those who could enter


lUp to the time of Cicero the Romans employed the term
sapientia for ^i.Ko<joi>ia. (Monboddo's Ancient Metaphys. i. 5). It
is interesting to watch the effect of the philosophy in which they
had been trained on the writings of some of the Fathers. Even
Justin Martyr, the first after the "Apostolic," has traces of
this influence. See the account of his search for " wisdom," and
conversion, in his Dialogue -with Trypho, ii. and iii.

3 Luke XV. 18.

* See above, note i.

«Col. ii. 8,9.


into it, or bend my neck to follow its steps.
For not as when now I speak did I feel when
I turned towards those Scriptures, ^ but they
appeared to me to be unworthy to be compared
with the dignity of Tully ; for my inflated
pride shunned their style, nor could the .sharp-
ness of my wit pierce their inner meaning. ®
Yet, truly, were they such as would develope in
little ones; but I scorned to be a little one,
and, swollen with pride, I looked upon myself
as a great one.

CHAP. VI. DECEIVED BY HIS OWN FAULT, HE

FALLS INTO THE ERRORS OF THE MANICH^EANS,
WHO GLORIED IN THE TRUE KNOWLEDGE OF
GOD AND IN A THOROUGH EXAMINATION OF
THINGS.

10. Therefore I fell among men proudly
raving, very carnal, and voluble, in whose
mouths were the snares of the devil — the bird-
lime being composed of a mixture of the sylla-
bles of Thy name, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of the Paraclete, the Holy Ghost,
the Comforter.' These names departed not out
of their mouths, but so far forth as the sound
only and the clatter of the tongue, for the heart
was empty of truth. Still they cried, "Truth,
Truth," and spoke much about it to me, "yet
was it not in them;"^ but they spake falsely
not of Thee only — who, verily, art the Truth
— but also of these elements of this world. Thy


6 In connection with the opinion Augustin formed of the Scrip-
tures before and after his conversion, it is interesting to recall
Fenelon's glowing description of the literary merit of the Bible.
The whole passage might well be quoted did space permit : —
" L'Ecriture surpasse en naivete, en vivacite, en grandeur, tous les
ecrivains de Rome et de la Grece. Jamais Homere meme n'a ap-
proche de la sublimite de Moi'se dans ses cantiques. . . . Ja-
mais nulle ode Grecque ou Latine n 'a pu atteindre ^ la hauteur des
Psaumes. . . . Jamais Homere ni aucun autre poete n'a egale
IsaVe peignant la majeste de Dieu. . . . Tantot ce prophetc 4
toute la douceur et toute la tendresse d'une eglogue, dans les riantes
peintures qu'il fait de la paix ; tantot il s'eleve jusqu' i laisser tout
au-dessous de lui. Mais qu'y a-t-il, dans I'antiquite profane, de
comparable au tendre Jeremie, deplorant les maux de son peuple;
ou A Nahum, voyant de loin, en esprit, tomber la superbe Ninive
sous les efforts d'une armee innombrable? On croit voir cette
armee, ou croit entendre le bruit des armes et des chariots ; tout est
depeint d'une maniere vive qui saisit 1' imagination ; il laisse Homere
loin derriere lui. . . . Enfin, il y a autant de difference entre les
poetes profanes et les prophetes, qu'il y en a entre le veritable
enthousiasme et le faux." — Sur I' Eloq. de la Chaire, Dial. iii.

6 That is probably the " spiritual " meaning on which Ambrose
(vi. 6, below) laid so much emphasis. How different is the attitude
of mind indicated in xi. 3 from the spiritual pride which beset him
at this period of his life ! When converted he became as a little
child, and ever looked to God as a Father, from whom he must re-
ceive both light and strength. He speaks, on Ps. cxlvi., of the
Scriptures, which were plain to " the little ones," being obscured to
the mocking spirit of the Manicha;ans. See also below, iii. 14, note.

' So, in Book xxii. sec. 13 of his reply to Faustus, he charges
them with " professing to believe the New Testament in order to
entrap the unwary ; " and again, in sec. 15, he says : " They claim
the impious liberty of holding and teaching, that whatever they
deem favourable to their heresy was said by Christ and the apostles ;
while they have the profane boldness to say, that whatever in the
same writings is unfavourable to them is a spurious interpolation."
They professed to believe in the doctrine of the Trinity, but affirmed
{ibid. XX. 6) " that the Father dwells in a secret light, the power of
the Son in the sun, and His wisdom in the moon, and the Holy
Spirit in the air." It was this employment of the phraseology of
Scripture to convey doctrines utterly unscriptural that rendered
their teaching such a snare to the unwary. See also below, v. 12,
note.

8 I John ii. 4.


Chap. VII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


63


creatures. And I, in truth, should have passed
by philosophers, even when speaking truth con-
cerning them, for love of Thee, riiy Father,
supremely good, beauty of all things beautiful !
O Truth, Truth ! how inwardly even then did
the marrow of my soul pant after Thee, when
they frequently, and in a multiplicity of ways,
and in numerous and huge books, sounded out
Thy name to me, though it was but a voice ! ^
And these were the dishes in which to me, hun-
gering for Thee, they, instead of Thee, served
up the sun and moon. Thy beauteous works —
but yet Thy works, not Thyself, nay, nor Thy
first works. For before these corporeal works
are Thy spiritual ones, celestial and shining
though they be. But I hungered and thirsted
not even after those first works of Thine, but
after Thee Thyself, the Truth, ''with whom is
no variableness, neither shadow of turning;"'
yet they still served up to me in those dishes
glowing phantasies, than which better were it to
love this very sun (which, at least, is true to our
sight), than those illusions which deceive the
mind through the eye. And yet, because I
supposed them to be Thee, I fed upon them ;
not with avidity, for Thou didst not taste to
my mouth as Thou art, for Thou wast not these
empty fictions ; neither was I nourished by
them, but the rather exhausted. Food in our
sleep appears like our food awake ; yet the
sleepers are not nourished by it, for they are
asleep. But those things were not in any way
like unto Thee as Thou hast now spoken unto
me, in that those were corporeal phantasies,
false bodies, than which these true bodies,
whether celestial or terrestrial, which we per-
jceive with our fleshly sight, are much more
certain. These things the very beasts and birds
perceive as well as we, and they are more cer-
jtain than when we imagine them. And again,

4 ■we do with more certainty imagine them, than
'by them conceive of other greater and infinite
bodies which have no existence. With such
I empty husks was I then fed, and was not fed.
!But Thou, my Love, in looking for whom I
faiP that I may be strong, art neither those
[bodies that we see, although in heaven, nor art
Thou those which we see not there ; for Thou

1^. hast created them, nor dost Thou reckon them

[lie


1 There was something peculiarly enthralling to an ardent mind
ike Augustin's in the Manichaean system. That system was kin-
Ired in many ways to modern Rationalism. Reason was e.valted at
:he expense of faith. Nothing was received on mere authority, and
;he disciple's inner consciousness was the touchstone of truth. The
esultof this is well pointed out by Augustin {Con. Faust, .xx.xii. sec.
19) : " Your design, clearly, is to deprive Scripture of all authority,
ind to make every man's mind the judge what passage of Scripture
le is to approve of, and what to disapprove of. This is not to be
lUbject to Scripture in matters of faith, but to make Scripture sub-
ject to you. Instead of making the high authority of Scripture the
«ason of approval, every man makes his approval the reason for
hinking a passage correct." Compare also Con. Faust, xi. sec. 2,
,nd xxxii. sec. 16.

' Ja,s. i. 17.

* Ps. Ixix. 3.


amongst Thy greatest works. How far, then,
art Thou from those phantasies of mine, phan-
tasies of bodies which are not at all, than which
the images of those bodies which are, are more
certain, and still more certain the bodies them-
selves, which yet Thou art not ; nay, nor yet
the soul, which is the life of the bodies. Better,
then, and more certain is the life of bodies than
the bodies themselves. But Thou art the life
of souls, the life of lives, having life in Thy-
self; and Thou changest not, O Life of my soul.

11. Where, then, wert Thou then to me, and
how far from me ? Far, indeed, was I wander-
ing away from Thee, being even shut out from
the very husks of the swine, whom with husks
I fed.* For how much better, then, are the
fables of the grammarians and poets than these
snares ! For verses, and poems, and Medea
flying, are more profitable truly than these men's
five elements, variously painted, to answer to
the five caves of darkness,^ none of which exist,
and which slay the believer. For verses and
poems I can turn into® true food, but the
" Medea flying," though I sang, I maintained
it not ; though I heard it sung, I believed it
not ; but those things I did believe. Woe,
woe, by what steps was I dragged down "to
the depths of hell ! " ' — toiling and turmoiling
through want of Truth, when I sought after
Thee, my God, — to Thee I confess it, who
hadst mercy on me when I had not yet con-
fessed,— sought after Thee not according to the
understanding of the mind, in which Thou
desiredst that I should excel the beasts, but
according to the sense of the flesh ! Thou
wert more inward to me than my most inward
part ; and higher than my highest. I came
upon that bold woman, who "is simple, and
knoweth nothing,"^ the enigma of Solomon,
sitting "at the door of the house on a seat,"
and saying, "Stolen waters are sweet, and
bread eaten in secret is pleasant."^ This
woman seduced me, because she found my
soul beyond its portals, dwelling in the eye of
my flesh, and thinking on such food as through
it I had devoured.

CHAP. VII. HE ATTACKS THE DOCTRINE OF THE

MANICH.«ANS CONCERNING EVIL, GOD, AND THE
RIGHTEOUSNESS OF THE PATRIARCHS.

12. For I was ignorant as to that which really
is, and was, as it were, violently moved to give


♦ Luke XV. 16 ; and see below, vi. sec. 3, note.

6 See below, xii. sec. 6, note.

6 " Of this passage St. Augustin is probably speaking when he
says, ' Praises bestowed on bread in simplicity of heart, let him
(Petilian) defame, if he will, by the ludicrous title of poisoning and
corrupting frenzy.' Augustin meant in mockerj', that by verses he
could get his bread ; his calumniator seems to have twisted the word
to signify a love-potion. — Con. Lit. Petiliani, iii. i5." — E. B. P.

' Pxov. ix. 18.

8 Pfov. ix. 13.

" Prov. ix. 14, 17.


64


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book III,


my support to foolish deceivers, when they
asked me, "Whence is evil?"^ — and, ''Is
God limited by a bodily shape, and has He
hairs and nails?" — and, "Are they to be es-
teemed righteous who had many wives at once,
and did kill men, and sacrificed living crea-
tures? "^ At which things I, in my ignorance,
was much disturbed, and, retreating from the
truth, I appeared to myself to be going towards
it ; because as yet I knew not that evil was
naught but a privation of good, until in the
end it ceases altogether to be ; which how
should I see, the sight of whose eyes saw no
further than bodies, and of my mind no further
than a phantasm ? And I knew not God to be
a Spirit,^ not one who hath parts extended in
length and breadth, nor whose being was bulk ;
for every bulk is less in a part than in the whole,
and, if it be infinite, it must be less in such
part as is limited by a certain space than in its
infinity ; and cannot be wholly everywhere, as
Spirit, as God is. And what that should be in
us, by which we were like unto God, and might
rightly in Scripture be said to be after " the
image of God,"* I was entirely ignorant.

13. Nor had I knowledge of that true inner
righteousness, which doth not judge according
to custom, but out of the most perfect law of
God Almighty, by which the manners of places
and times were adapted to those places and
times — being itself the while the same always
and everywhere, not one thing in one place,
and another in another ; according to which
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Moses,
and David, and all those commended by the
mouth of God were righteous,^ but were judged
unrighteous by foolish men, judging out of
man's judgment,® and gauging by the petty
standard of their own manners the manners of
the whole human race. Like as if in an ar-
moury, one knowing not what were adapted to
the several members should put greaves on his
head, or boot himself with a helmet, and then
complain because they would not fit. Or as if,
on some day when in the afternoon business
was forbidden, one were to fume at not being
allowed to sell as it was lawful to him in the
forenoon. Or when in some house he sees a


I The strange mixture of the pensive philosophy of Persia with
Gnosticism and Christianity, propounded by Manichseus, attempted
to solve this question, which was " the great object of heretical
inquiry" (Mansel's Gnostics, lee, i.). It was Augustin's desire for
knowledge concerning it that united him to this sect, and which also
led him to forsake it, when he found therein nothing but empty
fables (De Lib. Arb. i. sec. 4). Manichaeus taught that evil and
good were primeval, and had independent existences. Augustin,
on the other hand, maintains that it was not possible for evil so tp
exist {De Civ. Dei, xi. sec. 22), but, as he here states, evil is "a
privation of good." The evil will has a causa deficiens, but not a
causa efficiens {ibid. xii. 6), as is exemplified in the fall of the
angels.

s I Kings xviii. 40.

* John iv. 24.

* Gen. i. 27 : see vi. sec. 4, note.

6 Heb. xi. 8-40. 9

* I Cor. iv. 3.


servant take something in his hand which the
butler is not permitted to touch, or something
done behind a stable which would be prohibited
in the dining-room, and should be indignant
that in one house, and one family, the same
thing is not distributed everywhere to all. Such
are they who cannot endure to hear something
to have been lawful for righteous men in former
times which is not so now ; or that God, for
certain temporal reasons, commanded them one
thing, and these another, but both obeying the
same righteousness ; though they see, in one
man, one day, and one house, different things
to be fit for different members, and a thing
which was formerly lawful after a time unlawful
— that permitted or commanded in one corner,
which done in another is justly prohibited and
punished. Is justice, then, various and change-
able ? Nay, but the times over which she pre-
sides are not all alike, because they are times.''
But men, whose days upon the earth are few,®
because by their own perception they cannot
harmonize the causes of former ages and other
nations, of which they had no experience, with
these of which they have experience, though in
one and the same body, day, or family, they can
readily see what is suitable for each member,
season, part, and person — to the one they take
exception, to the other they submit.

14. These things I then knew not, nor ob-
served. They met my eyes on every side, and
I saw them not. I composed poems, in which
it was not permitted me to place every foot
everywhere, but in one metre one way, and in
another another, nor even in any one verse the
same foot in all places. Yet the art itself by
which I composed had not different principles
for these different cases, but comprised all in
one. Still I saw not how that righteousness,
which good and holy men submitted to, far
more excellently and sublimely comprehended
in one all those things which God commanded.


7 The law of the development of revelation implied in the above
passage is one to which Augustin frequently resorts in confutation
of objections such as those to which he refers in the previous and
following sections. It may likewise be effectively used when similar
objections are raised by modern sceptics. In the Rabbinical books
there is a tradition of the wanderings of the children of Israel, that
not only did their clothes not wax old (Deut. xxix. 5) during those
forty years, but that they grew with their growth. The written
word is as it were the swaddling-clothes of the holy child Jesus ;
and as the revelation concerning Him — the Word Incarnate — grew,
did the written word grow. God spoke in sundry parts [iroAveVpt"!]
and in divers manners unto the fathers by the prophets (Heb. i. i);
but when the " fulness of the time was come " (Gal. iv. 4), He com-
pleted the revelation in His Son. Our Lord indicates this principle .
when He speaks of divorce in Matt. xix. 8. "Moses," he says, \
" because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away {
your wives; but from the beginning it was not so." (See Con.
Faust, xix. 26, 29.) When objections, then, as to obsolete ritual I
usages, or the sins committed by Old Testament worthies are urged, [
the answer is plain : the ritual has become obsolete, because only j
intended for the infancy of revelation, and the sins, while recorded 1
in, are not approved by Scripture, and those who committed them J
will be judged according to the measure of revelation they received. !
See also De Ver. Relig. xvii. ; in Ps. Ixxiii. i, liv. 22 ; Con. Faust. I
xxii. 25; Trench, Hulsean Lees, iv., v. (1845); and Candlish's j
Reason and Revelation, pp. 58-75.

" Job xiv. I.


Chap. VIIL]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


65


and in no part varied, though in varying times
it did not prescribe all things at once, but dis-
tributed and enjoined what was proper for each.
And I, being blind, blamed those pious fathers,
not only for making use of present things as
God commanded and inspired them to do, but
also for foreshowing things to come as God was
revealing them.^

CHAP. VIII. — HE ARGUES AGAINST THE SAME AS
TO THE REASON OF OFFENCES.

15. Can it at any time or place be an unright-
eous thing for a man to love God with all his
heart, Avith all his soul, and with all his mind,
and his neighbour as himself?^ Therefore those
offences which be contrary to nature are every-
where and at all times to be held in detestation
and punished ; such were those of the Sodom-
ites, which should all nations commit, they
should all be held guilty of the same crime by
the divine law, which hath not so made men that
they should in that way abuse one another. For
even that fellowship which should be between
God and us is violated, when that same nature
of which He is author is polluted by the per-
versity of lust. But those offences which are
contrary to the customs of men are to be
avoided according to the customs severally pre-
vailing; so that an agreement made, and confirmed
by custom or law of any city or nation, may not
be violated at the lawless pleasure of any, whether
citizen or stranger. For any part which is not
consistent with its whole is unseemly. But when
God commands anything contrary to the cus-
toms or compacts of any nation to be done,
though it were never done by them before, it is
to be done ; and if intermitted it is to be re-
stored, and, if never established, to be estab-
lished. For if it be lawful for a king, in the
state over which he reigns, to command that
which neither he himself nor any one before
him had commanded, and to obey him cannot
be held to be inimical to the public interest, —
nay, it were so if he were not obeyed (for obe-
dience to princes is a general compact of human
society), — how much more, then, ought we un-
hesitatingly to obey God, the Governor of all
His creatures ! For as among the authorities of
human society the greater authority is obeyed
before the lesser, so must God above all.


1 Here, as at the end of sec. 17, he alludes to the t>'pical and alle-
gorical character of Old Testament histories. Though he does not
with Origen go so far as to disparage the letter of Scripture (see De
Civ. Dei, xiii. 21), but upholds it, he constantly employs the alle-
gorical principle. He (alluding to the patriarchs) goes so far, in-
deed, as to say {Con. Faust. x.xii. 24), that " not only the speech
but the life of these men was prophetic ; and the whole kingdom of
the Hebrews was like a great prophet ;" and again : " We may dis-
cover a prophecy of the coming of Christ and of the Church both
inwhat they said and what they did." This method of interpreta-
tion he first learned from Ambrose. See note on " the letter kill-
eth," etc. (below, vi. sec. 6), for the danger attending it. On the
general subject, reference may also be made to his in Ps. cxxxvi.

; Serin. 2 ; De Tentat. Air. sec. 7; and De Civ. Dei, xvii. 3.

* Deut. vi. 5, and Matt. xxii. 37-39.


16. So also in deeds of violence, where there
is a desire to harm, whether by contumely or
injury ; and both of these either by reason of
revenge, as one enemy against another; or to
obtain some advantage over another, as the high-
wayman to the traveller ; or for the avoiding of
some evil, as with him who is in fear of another;
or through envy, as the unfortunate man to one
who is happy ; or as he that is prosperous in
anything to him who he fears will become equal
to himself, or whose equality he grieves at ; or
for the mere pleasure in another's pains, as the
spectators of gladiators, or the deriders and
mockers of others. These be the chief iniqui-
ties which spring forth from the lust of the flesh,
of the eye, and of power, whether singly, or
two together, or all at once. And so do men
live in opposition to the three and seven, that
psaltery " of ten strings,"^ Thy ten command-
ments, O God most high and most sweet. But
what foul offences can there be against Thee
who canst not be defiled ? Or what deeds of
violence against thee who canst not be harmed ?
But Thou avengest that which men perpetrate
against themselves, seeing also that when they
sin against Thee, they do wickedly against their
own souls; and iniquity gives itself the lie,*
either by corrupting or perverting their nature,
which Thou hast rftade and ordained, or by an
immoderate use of things permitted, or in
"burning" in things forbidden to that use
which is against nature ; ^ or when convicted,
raging with heart and voice against Thee, kicking
against the pricks ; ^ or when, breaking through
the pale of human society, they audaciously re-
joice in private combinations or divisions, ac-
cording as they have been pleased or offended.
And these things are done whenever Thou art
forsaken, O Fountain of Life, who art the only
and true Creator and Ruler of the universe, and
by a self-willed pride any one false thing is se-
lected therefrom and loved. So, then, by a
humble piety we return to Thee ; and thou pur-
gest us from our evil customs, and art merciful
unto the sins of those who confess unto Thee,
and dost " hear the groaning of the prisoner," ^
and dost loosen us from those fetters which we
have forged for ourselves, if we lift not up
against Thee the horns of a false liberty, —


» Ps. cxliv. 9. "St. Augustin {Quipst. in Exod. ii. qu. 71)
mentions the two modes of dividing the ten commandments into
three and seven, or four and si.x, and gives what appear to have
been his own private reasons tor preferring the first. Both common-
ly existed in his day, but the Anglican mode appears to have
been the most usual. It occurs in Origen, Greg. Naz. , Jerome, Am-
brose, Chrys. St. Augustin alludes to his division again, Serm. 8,
9, de X. Chordis, and sec. 33 on this psalm : ' To the first command-
ment there belong three strings, because God is trine. To the other,
i. e., the love of our neighbour, seven strings. I'hese lei us join to
those three, which belong to the love of God, if we would on the
psaltery of ten strings sing a new song.' " — E. B. P.

■* Ps. x.xvii. 12, I'u/g:

^ Rom. i. 24-29.

6 Acts ix. 5.

1 Ps. cii. 20.


66


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book III.


losing all through craving more, by loving more
our own private good than Thee, the good of
all.

CHAP. IX. THAT THE JUDGMENT OF GOD AND

MEN, AS TO HUMAN ACTS OF VIOLENCE, IS DIF-
FERENT.

1 7. But amidst these offences of infamy and
violence, and so many iniquities, are the sins of
men who are, on the whole, making progress ;
which, by those who judge rightly, and after the
rule of perfection, are censured, yet commended
withal, upon the hope of bearing fruit, like as
in the green blade of the growing corn. And
there are some which resemble offences of in-
famy or violence, and yei"" are not sins, because
they neither offend Thee, our Lord God, nor
social custom : when, for example, things suit-
able for the times are provided for the use of
life, and we are uncertain whether it be out of a
lust of having ; or when acts are punished by
constituted authority for the sake of correction,
and we are uncertain whether it be out of a
lust of hurting. Many a deed, then, which in
the sight of men is disapproved, is approved
by Thy testimony ; and many a one who is
praised by men is, Thou being witness, con-
demned ; because frequently the view of the
deed, and the mind of the doer, and the hid-
den exigency of the period, severally vary.
But when Thou unexpectedly commandest an
unusual and unthought-of thing — yea, even if
Thou hast formerly forbidden it, and still for
the time keepest secret the reason of Thy com-
mand, and it even be contrary to the ordinance
of some society of men, who doubts but it is to
be done, inasmuch as that society is righteous
which serves Thee ? ^ But blessed are they who
know Thy commands ! For all things were
done by them who served Thee either to ex-
hibit something necessary at the time, or to
foreshow things to come. *

CHAP. X. HE REPROVES THE TRIFLINGS OF THE

MANICH^ANS AS TO THE FRUITS OF THE
EARTH.

18. These things being ignorant of, I de-

1 The Manichaeans, like the deistical writers of the last century,
attacked the spoiUngof the Egj'ptians, the slaughter of the Canaan-
ites, and such episodes. Referring to the former, Augustin says
(Con. Fatist. xxii. 71), " Then, as for Faustus' objection to the
spoiling of the Egj'ptians, he knows not what he says. In this
Moses not only did not sin, but it would have been sin not to do it. It
was by the command of God, who, from His knowledge both of
the actions and of the hearts of men, can decide upon what every
one should be made to suffer, and through whose agency. The
people at that time were still carnal, and engrossed with earthly
affection ; while the Egyptians were in open rebellion against God,
for they used the gold, Cjod's creature, in the service of idols, to
the dishonour of the Creator, and they had grievously oppressed stran-
gers by makingthem work without pay. Thus the Egyptians deserved
the punishment, and the Israelites were suitably employed in inflict-
ing it." For an exhaustive vindication of the conduct of the chil-
dren of Israel as the agents of God in punishing the Canaanites, see
Gra-tes on the Pentateuch, Part iii. lecture i. See also De Civ.
Dei, i. 26 ; and Qutrst. in Jos. 8, 16, etc.

* See note on sec. 14, above.


rided those holy servants and prophets of
Thine. And what did I gain by deriding them
but to be derided by Thee, being insensibly,
and little by little, led on to those follies, as to
credit that a fig-tree wept when it was plucked,
and that the mother-tree shed milky tears ? Which
fig notwithstanding, plucked not by his own
but another's wickedness, had some "saint"'
eaten and mingled with his entrails, he should
breathe out of it angels ; yea, in his prayers he
shall assuredly groan and sigh forth particles of
God, which particles of the most high and true
God should have remained bound in that fig un-
less they had been set free by the teeth and
belly of some " elect saint " ! * And I, miser-
able one, believed that more mercy was to be
shown to the fruits of the earth than unto men,
for whom they were created ; for if a hungry
man — who was not a Manichsean — should beg
for any, that morsel which should be given him
would appear, as it were, condemned to capital
punishment. *

CHAP. XI. — HE REFERS TO THE TEARS, AND THE


MEMORABLE DREAM CONCERNING
GRANTED BY GOD TO HIS MOTHER.


HER SON,


19. And Thou sendedst Thine hand from
above,® and drewest my soul out of that profound
darkness, when my mother, Thy faithful one,
wept to thee on my behalf more than mothers
are wont to weep the bodily deaths of their
children. For she saw that I was dead by that
faith and spirit which she had from Thee, and
Thou heardest her, O Lord. Thou heardest
her, and despisedst not her tears, when, pouring
down, they watered the earth'' under her eyes
in every place where she prayed ; yea. Thou
heardest her. For whence was that dream
with which Thou consoledst her, so that she per-
mitted me to live with her, and to have my
meals at the same table in the house, which she
had begun to avoid, hating and detesting the
blasphemies of my error ? For she saw herself
standing on a certain wooden rule,* and a bright
youth advancing towards her, joyous and smiling


8 /. e. Manichaean saint.

* According to this extraordinary system, it was the privilege of
the " elect " to set free in eating such parts of the divine substance
as were imprisoned in the vegetable creation {Con. Faust, xxxi.
5). They did not marry or work in the fields, and led an ascetic
life, the "hearers" or catechumens being privileged to provide
them with food. The "elect" passed immediately on dying into
the realm of light, while, as a reward for their service, the souls of
the " hearers " after death transmigrated into plants (fipm which
they might be most readily freed), or into the "elect," so as, in their
turn, to pass away into the realm of light. See Con. Faust, v.
10, XX. 23 ; and in Ps. cxl.

f> Augustin frequently alludes to their conduct to the poor, in re-
fusing to give them bread or the fruits of the earth, lest in eating
they should defile the portion of God contained therein. But to
avoid the odium of their conduct, they would inconsequently give
money whereby food might be bought. See in Ps. cxl. sec. 12 ; and
De Mor. Manich. 36, 37, and 53.

" Ps. cxliv. 7.

' He alludes here to that devout manner of the Eastern ancients,
who used to lie flat on their faces in prayer.- — W. W.

8 Symbolical of the rule of faith. See viii. sec. 30, below.


Chap. XII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


67


upon her, whilst she was grieving and bowed
down with sorrow. But he having inquired of
her the cause of her sorrow and daily weeping
(he wishing to teach, as is their wont, and not
to be taught), and she answering that it was
my perdition she was lamenting, he bade her
rest contented, and told her to behold and
see "that where she was, there was I also."
And when she looked she saw me standing
near her on the same rule. Whence was this,
unless that Thine ears were inclined towards
her heart? O Thou Good Omnipotent, who
so carest for every one of us as if Thou caredst
for him only, and so for all as if they were
but one !

20. Whence was this, also, that when she had
narrated this vision to me, and I tried to put
this construction on it, "That she rather
should not despair of being some day what I
was," she immediately, without hesitation, re-
plied, "No; for it was not told me that 'where
he is, there shalt thou be,' but 'where thou art,
there shall he be'"? I confess to Thee, O
Lord, that, to the best of my remembrance
(and I have oft spoken of this). Thy answer
through my watchful mother — that she was not
disquieted by the speciousness of my false inter-
pretation, and saw in a moment what was to be
seen, and which I myself had not in truth per-
ceived before she spake — even then moved me
more than the dream itself, by which the happi-
ness to that pious woman, to be realized so long
after, was, for the alleviation of her present
anxiety, so long before predicted. For nearly
nine years passed in which I wallowed in the
slime of that deep pit and the darkness of false-
hood, striving often to rise, but being all the more
heavily dashed down. But yet that chaste,
pious, and sober widow (such as Thou lovest),
now more buoyed up with hope, though no whit
less zealous in her weeping and mourning, desisted
not, at all the hours of her supplications, to be-
wail my case unto Thee. And her prayers
entered into Thy presence, ^ and yet Thou didst
still suffer me to be involved and re-involved in
that darkness.


CHAP. XII. THE EXCELLENT ANSWER OF THE

BISHOP WHEN REFERRED TO BY HIS MOTHER
AS TO THE CONVERSION OF HER SON.

21. And meanwhile Thou grantedst her an-
other answer, which I recall ; for much I pass
over, hastening on to those things which the
more strongly impel me to confess unto Thee,
and much I do not remember. Thou didst
grant her then another answer, by a priest of
Thine, a certain bishop, reared in Thy Church
and well versed in Thy books. He, when this
woman had entreated that he would vouchsafe
to have some talk with me, refute my errors,
unteach me evil things, and teach me good (for
this he was in the habit of doing when he
found people fitted to receive it), refused,
very prudently, as I afterwards came to see.
For he answered that I was still unteachable,
being inflated with the novelty of that heresy,
and that I had already perplexed divers inex-
perienced persons with vexatious questions,^ as
she had informed him. "But leave him alone
for a time," saith he, "only pray God for him ;
he will of himself, by reading, discover what that
error is, and how great its impiety." He dis-
closed to her at the same time how he himself,
when a little one, had, by his misguided mother,
been given over to the Manichseans, and had not
only read, but even written out almost all their
books, and had come to see (without argument
or proof from any one) how much that sect was
to be shunned, and had shunned it. Which
when he had said, and she would not be satisfied,
but repeated more earnestly her entreaties, shed-
ding copious tears, that he would see and dis-
course with me, he, a little vexed at her impor-
tunity, exclaimed, " Go thy way, and God bless
thee, for it is not possible that the son of these
tears should perish." Which answer (as she
often mentioned in her conversations with me)
she accepted as though it were a voice from
heaven.


1 Ps. Ixxxviii. I.


2 We can easily understand that Augustin's dialectic skill would
render him a formidable opponent, while, with the zeal of a neo-
phyte he urged those difficulties of Scripture {De Agon. Llirist.
iv ) which the Manichseans knew so well how to employ. In an in-
teresting passage {DcDuab. Anim.con. Mamch.xx.) he tells us that
his victories over " inexperienced persons" stimulated him to fresh
conquests, and thus kept him bound longer than he would otherwise
have been in the chains of this heresy.


BOOK IV.


THEN FOLLOWS A PERIOD OF NINE YEARS FROM THE NINETEENTH YEAR OF HIS AGE, DURING WHICH
HAVING LOST A FRIEND, HE FOLLOWED THE MANICH^ANS — AND WROTE BOOKS ON THE FAIR
AND FIT, AND PUBLISHED A WORK ON THE LIBERAL ARTS, AND THE CATEGORIES OF ARISTOTLE.


CHAP. I. — CONCERNING THAT MOST UNHAPPY
TliME IN WHICH HE, BEING DECEIVED, DE-
CEIVED OTHERS; AND CONCERNING THE
MOCKERS OF HIS CONFESSION.

I. During this space of nine years, then,
from my nineteenth to my eight and twen-
tieth year, we went on seduced and seducing,
deceived and deceiving, in divers lusts ; pub-
licly, by sciences which they style "liberal"
— secretly, with a falsity called religion. Here
proud, there superstitious, everywhere vain !
Here, striving after the emptiness of popular
fame, even to theatrical applauses, and poetic
contests, and strifes for grassy garlands, and the
follies of shows and the intemperance of desire.
There, seeking to be purged from these our
corruptions by carrying food to those who were
called "elect" and "holy," out of which, in
the laboratory of their stomachs, they should
make for us angels and gods, by whom we
might be delivered.^ These things did I fol-
low eagerly, and practise with my friends — by
me and with me deceived. Let the arrogant,
and such as have not been yet savingly cast
down and stricken by Thee, O my God, laugh
at me ; but notwithstanding I would confess to
Thee mine own shame in Thy praise. Bear with
me, I beseech Thee, and give me grace to re-
trace in my present remembrance the circlings
of my past errors, and to "offer to Thee the
sacrifice of thanksgiving."^ For what am I to
myself without Thee, but a guide to mine own
downfall ? Or what am I even at the best, but
one sucking Thy milk,* and feeding upon Thee,
the meat that perisheth not?* But what kind
of man is any man, seeing that he is but a


1 Augustin tells us that he went not beyond the rank of a
" hearer," because he found the Manichasan teachers readier in
refuting others than in establishing their own views, and seems only
to have looked for some esoteric doctrine to have been disclosed to
him under their materialistic teaching as to God — viz. that He was
an unmeasured Light that extended all ways but one, infinitely
(Ser)n, iv. sec. 5.1 — rather than to have really accepted it. — De
Util. Cred. Prcef. See also iii. sec. 18, notes i and 2, above.

2 Ps. cxvi. 17.

3 I Pet. ii. 2.
* John vi. 27.

68


man? Let, then, the strong and the mighty
laugh at us, but let us who are "poor and
needy ' ' * confess unto Thee.

CHAP. II. HE TEACHES RHETORIC, THE ONLY

THING HE LOVED, AND SCORNS THE SOOTH-
SAYER, WHO PROMISED HIM VICTORY.

2. In those years I taught the art of rhetoric,
and, overcome by cupidity, put to sale a loqua-
city by which to overcome. Yet I preferred —
Lord, Thou knowest — to have honest scholars
(as they are esteemed); and these I, without
artifice, taught artifices, not to be put in prac-
tise against the life of the guiltless, though
sometimes for the life of the guilty. And Thou,
O God, from afar sawest me stumbling in that
slippery path, and amid much smoke* sending
out some flashes of fidelity, which I exhibited in
that my guidance of such as loved vanity and
sought after leasing,'' I being their companion.
In those years I had one (whom I knew not in
what is called lawful wedlock, but whom my
wayward passion, void of understanding, had
discovered), yet one only, remaining faithful
even to her ; in whom I found out truly by my
own experience what difference there is between
the restraints of the marriage bonds, contracted
for the sake of issue, and the compact of a lust-
ful love, where children are born against the
parents' will, although, being born, they com-
pel love.

3. I remember, too, that when I decided to
compete for a theatrical prize, a soothsayer
demanded of me what I would give him to win ;
but I, detesting and abominating such foul mys-
teries, answered, " That if the garland were of
imperi-shable gold, I would not suffer a fly to be
destroyed to secure it for me." For he was to
slay certain living creatures in his sacrifices, and
by those honours to invite the devils to give me
their support. But this ill thing I also refused,


" Ps. Ixxiv. 21.

6 Isa. xlii. 3, and Matt. xii. 20.

7 Ps. iv. 2.


Chap. III.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


69


not out of a pure love ^ for Thee, O God of my
heart ; for I knew not how to love Thee, know-
ing not how to conceive aught beyond corpo-
real brightness.^ And doth not a soul, sighing
after such-like fictions, commit fornication
against Thee, trust in false things,' and nourish
the wind?* But I would not, forsooth, have
sacrifices offered to devils on my behalf, though
I myself was offering sacrifices to them by that
superstition. For what else is nourishing the
wind but nourishing them, that is, by our wan-
derings to become their enjoyment and deri-
sion?

CHAP. III. — NOT EVEN THE MOST EXPERIENCED
MEN COULD PERSUADE HIM OF THE VANITY OF
ASTROLOGY, TO WHICH HE WAS DEVOTED.

4. Those impostors, then, whom they desig-
nate Mathematicians, I consulted without hesi-
tation, because they used no sacrifices, and
invoked the aid of no spirit for their divinations,
which art Christian and true piety fitly rejects
and condemns.^ For good it is to confess unto


1 " He alone is truly pure who waiteth on God, and keepeth him-
self to Him alone" (Aug. De I'ita Beata, sec. 18). " Whoso seek-
eth God is pure, because the soul hath in God her legitimate hus-
band. Whosoever seeketh of God anything besides God, doth not
love God purely. If a wife loved her husband because he is rich,
she is not pure, for she loveth not her husband but the gold of her
husband" (Aug. Serin. 137). "Whoso seeks from God any other
reward but God, and for it would serve God, esteems what he wishes
to receive more than Him from whom he would receive it. What,
then? hath God no reward ? None, save Himself. The reward of
God is God Himself. This it loveth ; if it love aught beside, it is no
pure love. You depart from the immortal flame, you will be chilled,
corrupted. Do not depart; it will be thy corruption, will be forni-
cation in thee" (Aug. in Ps. l.xxii. sec. 32). " The pure fear of the
Lord (Ps. .xix. 9) is that wherewith the Church, the more ardently
she loveth her Husband, the more diligently she avoids offending
Him, and therefore love, when perfected, casteth not out this fear,
but it remaineth for ever and ever" (Aug. in loc). " Under the
name of pure fear is signified that will wliereby we must needs be
averse from sin, and avoid sin, not through the constant anxiety of
infirmity, but through the tranquillity of affection" (^De Civ. Dei,
xiv. sec. 65). — E. B. P.

2 See note on sec. g, below.

3 " Indisputably we must take care, lest the mind, believing that
which it does not see, feign to itself something which is not, and hope
for and love that which is false. For in that case it will not be charity
out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned,
which is the end of the commandment" {De Trin. viii. sec. 6).
Kxi^ st-zsim. {Confessions, \. t): "For who can call on Thee, not
knowing Thee ? For he that knoweth Thee not may call on Thee
as other than Thou art."

* Hosea .xii. i.

5 Augustin classes the votaries of both wizards and astrologers
{De Doctr. Christ. \\. ■2->,; and De Civ. Dei,-x..g; compare also
Justin Martyr, AJ>oL ii. c. 5) as alike " deluded and imposed on by the
false angels, to whom the lowest part of the world has been put in
subjection by the law of God's providence ;" and he says, "All arts
of this sort are either nullities, or are part of a guilty superstition
springing out of a baleful fellowship between men and devils, and
are to be utterly repudiated and avoided by the Christian, as the
covenants of a false and treacherous friendship." It is remarkable
that though these arts were strongly denounced in the Pentateuch,
the Jews — acquiring them from the surrounding Gentile nations —
have embedded them deeply in their oral law, said also to be given
by Moses (^.^.Jn Moed Katon 28, and ^/jaMaM 156, prosperity
comes from the influence of the stars ; in Shahhath 61 it is a ques-
tion whether the influence of the stars or a charm has been effective ;
and in Sanhedrin 17 magic is one of the qualifications for the San-
hedrim). It might have been expected that the Christians, if only
from that reaction against Judaism which shows itself in Origen's
disparagement of the letter of the Old Testament Scriptures (see
De Princip. iv. 15, 16), would have shrunk from such strange arts.
But the influxof pagans, who had practised them, into the Christian
Church appears gradually to have leavened it in no slight degree.
This is not only true of the Valentinians (see Kaye's Clement 0/
Alex, vi.) and other heretics, but the influence of these contacts is
seen even in the writings of the " orthodox." Those who can read


Thee, and to say, " Be merciful unto me, heal
my soul, for I have sinned against Thee ;" * and
not to abuse Thy goodness for a license to sin,
but to remember the words of the Lord, "Be-
hold, thou art made whole ; sin no more, lest a
worse thing come unto thee."' All of which
salutary advice they endeavour to destroy when
they say, " The cau.se of thy sin is inevitably
determined in heaven;" and, "This did Venus,
or Saturn, or Mars;" in order that man, for-
sooth, flesh and blood, and proud corruption,
may be blameless, while the Creator and Or-
dainer of heaven and stars is to bear the blame.
And who is this but Thee, our God, the sweet-
ness and well-spring of righteousness, who ren-
derest " to every man according to his deeds," *
and despisest not "a broken and a contrite
heart! "»

5. There was in those days a wise man, very
skilful in medicine, and much renowned therein,
who had with his own proconsular hand put the
Agonistic garland upon my distempered head,
not, though, as a physician ; ^° for this disease
Thou alone healest, who resistest the proud, and
givest grace to the humble." But didst Thou
fail me even by that old man, or forbear from
healing my soul? For when I had become
more familiar with him, and hung assiduously
and fixedly on his conversation (for though
couched in simple language, it was replete with
vivacity, life, and earnestness), when he had
perceived from my discourse that I was given to
books of the horoscope-casters, he, in a kind
and fatherly manner, advised me to throw them
away, and not vainly bestow the care and labour
necessary for useful things upon these vanities ;
saying that he himself in his earlier years had
studied that art with a view to gaining his living


between the lines will find no slight trace of this (after separating
what they would conceive to be true from what is manifestly false) in
the story told by Zonaras, in his Annals, of the controversy between
the Rabbis and Sylvester, Bishop of Rome, before Constantine.
The Jews were worsted in argument, and evidently thought an
appeal to miracles might, from the Emperor's education, bring him
over to their side. An o.x is brought forth. The Jewish wonder-
worker whispers a mystic name into its ear, and it tails dead ; but
Sylvester, according to the story, is quite equal to the occasion, and
restores the animal to life again by uttering the name of the Re-
deemer. It may have been that the cessation of miracles may have
gradually led unstable professors of Christianity to invent miracles;
and, as Bishop Kaye observes {Tertullian, p. 95), " the success of
the first attempts naturally encouraged others to practise similar
impositions on the credulity of mankind." As to the time of the
cessation of miracles, comparison may be profitably made of the
views of Kaye, in the early part of c. ii. of his Tertullian, and of
Blunt, in his Right Use 0/ the Early Fathers, series ii. lecture 6.

6 Ps. xli. 4.

' John V. 14.

8 Rom. ii. 6, and ,Matt. xvi. 27.

9 Ps. H. 17.

10 This physician was Vindicianus, the "acute old man" men-
tioned in vii. sec. 8, below, and again in Ep. 138, as "the most
eminent physician of his day." Augustin's disease, however, could
not be reached by his remedies. We are irresistibly reminded of the
words of our great poet : —

" Canst thou minister to a mind diseased ;
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow ;
Raze out the written troubles of the brain ;
And, with some sweet oblivious antidote,
Cleanse the stuff 'd bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart ! " — Macbeth, act. v. scene 3.

11 I Pet. v. 5, and Jas. iv. 6.


JO


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IV,


by following it as a profession, and that, as he
had understood Hippocrates, he would soon
have understood this, and yet he had given it
up, and followed medicine, for no other reason
than that he discovered it to be utterly false,
and he, being a man of character, would not
gain his living by beguiling people. " But
thou," saith he, "who hast rhetoric to support
thyself by, so that thou followest this of free
will, not of necessity — all the more, then,
oughtest thou to give me credit herein, who
laboured to attain it so perfectly, as I wished to
gain my living by it alone." When I asked
him to account for so many true things being
foretold by it, he answered me (as he could)
" that the force of chance, diffused throughout
the whole order of nature, brought this about.
For if when a man by accident opens the leaves
of some poet, who sang and intended something
far different, a verse oftentimes fell out won-
drously apposite to the present business, it were
not to be wondered at," he continued, " if out
of the soul of man, by some higher instinct, not
knowing what goes on within itself, an answer
should be given by chance, not art, which
should coincide with the business and actions of
the questioner."

6. And thus truly, either by or through him.
Thou didst look after me. And Thou didst
delineate in my memory what I might after-
wards search out for myself But at that time
neither he, nor my most dear Nebridius, a youth
most good and most circumspect, who scoffed
at that whole stock of divination, could per-
suade me to forsake it, the authority of the
authors influencing me still more ; and as yet I
had lighted upon no certain proof — such as I
sought — whereby it might without doubt appear
that what had been truly foretold by those con-
sulted was by accident or chance, not by the
art of the star-gazers.

CHAP. IV. SORELY DISTRESSED BY WEEPING AT

THE DEATH OF HIS FRIEND, HE PROVIDES CON-
SOLATION FOR HIMSELF.

7. In those years, when I first began to teach
rhetoric in my native town, I had acquired a
very dear friend, from association in our studies,
of mine own age, and, like myself, just rising
up into the flower of youth. He had grown up
with me from childhood, and we had been both
school-fellows and play-fellows. But he was
not then my friend, nor, indeed, afterwards, as
true friendship is; for true it is not but in such as
Thou bindest together, cleaving unto Thee by
that love which is shed abroad in our hearts by
the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us.^ But
yet it was too sweet, being ripened by the

1 Rom. V. S.


fervour of similar studies. For, from the true
faith (which he, as a youth, had not soundly and
thoroughly become master of), I had turned
him aside towards those superstitious and per-
nicious fables which my mother mourned in me.
With me this man's mind now erred, nor could
my soul exist without him. But behold, Thou
wert close behind Thy fugitives — at once God
of vengeance^ and Fountain of mercies, who
turnest us to Thyself by wondrous means.
Thou removedst that man from this life when
he had scarce completed one whole year of my
friendship, sweet to me above all the sweetness
of that my life.

8. "Who can show forth all Thy praise"^
which he hath experienced in himself alone?
What was it that I'hou didst then, O my God,
and how unsearchable are the depths of Thy
judgments!* For when, sore sick of a fever,
he long lay unconscious in a death-sweat, and
all despaired of his recovery, he was baptized
without his knowledge ; ^ myself meanwhile
little caring, presuming that his soul would
retain rather what it had imbibed from me, than
what was done to his unconscious body. Far
different, however, was it, for he was revived
and restored. Straightway, as soon as I could
talk to him (which I could as soon as he was
able, for I never left him, and we hung too
much upon each other), I attempted to jest with
him, as if he also would jest with me at that bap-
tism which he had received when mind and senses
were in abeyance, but had now learnt that he
had received. But he shuddered at me, as if I
were his enemy ; and, with a remarkable and
unexpected freedom, admonished me, if I de-
sired to continue his friend, to desist from
speaking to him in such a way. I, confounded
and confused, concealed all my emotions, till
he should get well, and his health be strong
enough to allow me to deal with him as I
wished. But he was withdrawn from my frenzy,
that with Thee he might be preserved for my
comfort. A itvf days after, during my absence,
he had a return of the fever, and died.

9. At this sorrow my heart was utterly dark-
ened, and whatever I looked upon was death.
My native country was a torture to me, and my
father's house a wondrous unhappiness ; and
whatsoever I had participated in with him,
wanting him, turned into a frightful torture.
Mine eyes sought him everywhere, but he was
not granted them; and I hated all places
because he was not in them; nor could they
now say to me, "Behold, he is coming," as
they did when he was alive and absent. I


- Ps. xciv. I.

3 Ps. cvi. 2.

* Ps. xxxvi. 6, and Rom. xi. 33.

6 See i. sec. 17, note 3, above.


Chap. VII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


71


became a great puzzle to myself, and asked my
soul why she was so sad, and why she so exceed-
ingly disquieted me ; ^ but she knew not what
to answer me. And if I said, " Hope thou in
God,"^ she very properly obeyed me not;
because that most dear friend whom she had
lost was, being man, both truer and better than
that phantasm^ she was bid to hope in. Naught
but tears were sweet to me, and they succeeded
my friend in the dearest of my affections.

CHAP. V. WHY WEEPING IS PLEASANT TO THE

WRETCHED.

10. And now, O Lord, these things are
passed away, and time hath healed my wound.
May I learn from Thee, who art Truth, and
apply the ear of my heart unto Thy mouth,
that Thou mayest tell me why weeping should
be so sweet to the unhappy.* Hast Thou —
although present everywhere — cast away far
from Thee our misery? And Thou abidest in
Thyself, but we are disquieted with divers trials;
and yet, unless we wept in Thine ears, there
would be no hope for us remaining. Whence,
then, is it that such sweet fruit is plucked from
the bitterness of life, from groans, tears, sighs,
and lamentations ? Is it the hope that Thou
hearest us that sweetens it ? This is true of
prayer, for therein is a desire to approach unto
Thee. But is it also in grief for a thing lost,
and the sorrow with which I was then over-
whelmed ? For I had neither hope of his com-
ing to life again, nor did I seek this with my
tears ; but I grieved and wept only, for I was
miserable, and had lost my joy. Or is weeping
a bitter thing, and for distaste of the things
which aforetime we enjoyed before, and even
then, when we are loathing them, does it cause
us pleasure ?

CHAP. VI. HIS FRIEND BEING SNATCHED AWAY

BY DEATH, HE IMAGINES THAT HE REMAINS
ONLY AS HALF.

11. But why do I speak of these things?

1 Ps. xlii. 5.

s Ibid.

3 The mind may rest in theories and abstractions, but the heart
craves a being that it can love ; and Archbishop Whately has shown
in one of his essays that the idol worship of every age had doubtless
its origin in the craving of mind and heart for an embodiment of the
object of worship, " Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us," says
Philip (John xiv. 8), and he expresses the longing of the soul ; and
when the Lord replies, " He that hath seen ^Nle hath seen the
Father," He reveals to us God's satisfaction of human wants in the
incarnation of His Son. Augustin's heart was now thrown in upon
itself, and his view of God gave him no consolation. It satisfied his
mind, perhaps, in a measure, to think of God as a " corporeal
brightness" (see iii. iz; iv. 3, 12, 31; v. 19, etc) when free from
trouble, but it could not satisfy him now. He had yet to learn of
Him who is the very image of God — who by His divine power raised
the dead to life again, while, with perfect human sympathy, He
could " weep with those that wept," — the " Son of Man " (not of a
man. He being miraculously bom, but of the race of men [ai'flpwTrou]),
i. e. the Son of Mankind. See also viii. sec. 27, note, below.

* For so it has ever been found to be : —

" Est quaedam flere voluptas ;
Expletur lacrymis egeriturque dolor."

— Ovid, Trist. iv. 3, 38.


For this is not the time to question, but rather
to confess unto Thee. Miserable I was, and
miserable is every soul fettered by the friendship
of perishable things — he is torn to pieces when
he loses them, and then is sensible of the misery
which he had before ever he lost them. Thus
was it at that time with me ; I wept most bitter-
ly, and found rest in bitterness. Thus was I
miserable, and that life of misery I accounted
dearer than my friend. For though I would
willingly have changed it, yet I was even more
unwilling to lose it than him ; yea, I knew not
whether I was willing to lose it even for him, as
is handed down to us (if not an invention) of
Pylades and Orestes, that they would gladly
have died one for another, or both together, it
being worse than death to them not to live
together. But there had sprung up in me some
kind of feeling, too, contrary to this, for both
exceedingly wearisome was it to me to live, and
dreadful to die. I suppose, the more I loved
him, so much the more did I hate and fear, as
a most cruel enemy, that death which had robbed
me of him ; and I imagined it would suddenly
annihilate all men, as it had power over him.
Thus, I remember, it was with me. Behold
my heart, O my God ! Behold and look into-
me, for I remember it well, O my Hope ! wha
cleansest me from the uncleanness of such affec-
tions, directing mine eyes towards Thee, and
plucking my feet out of the net.^ For I was
astonished that other mortals lived, since he
whom I loved, as if he would never die, was
dead ; and I wondered still more that I, who
was to him a second self, could live when he
was dead. Well did one say of his friend,
"Thou half of my soul,"^ for I felt tliat my
soul and his soul were but one soul in two
bodies;' and, consequently, my life was. a
horror to me, because I would not live in half.
And therefore, perchance, was I afraid to die,
lest he should die wholly* whom I had so
greatly loved.

CHAP. VII. — TROUBLED BY RESTLESSNESS AND
GRIEF, HE LEAVES HIS COUNTRY A SECOND
TIME FOR CARTHAGE.

12. O madness, which knowest not how to
love men as men should be loved ! O foolish man
that I then was, enduring with so much impa-
tience the lot of man ! So I fretted, sighed,
wept, tormented myself, and took neither rest
nor advice. For I bore about with me a rent
and polluted soul, impatient of being borne by
me, and where to repose it I found not. Not

6 Ps. XXV. 15.

6 Horace, Carrn. i. ode 3.

' Ovid, Trist. iv. eleg. iv. 72.

8 Augustin's reference to this passage in his Retracfaficms is quoted
at the beginning of the book. He might have gone further than to
describe his words here as declamatio levis, since the conclusion is
not logical.


72


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IV.


in pleasant groves, not in sport or song, not in
fragrant spots, nor in magnificent banquetings,
nor in the pleasures of the bed and the couch,
nor, finally, in books and songs did it find re-
pose. All things looked terrible, even the very
light itself; and whatsoever was not what he was,
was repulsive and hateful, except groans and
tears, for in those alone found I a little repose.
But when my soul was withdrawn from them,
a heavy burden of misery weighed me down.
To Thee, O Lord, should it have been raised,
for Thee to lighten and avert it.^ This I knew,
but was neither willing nor able ; all the more
since, in my thoughts of Thee, Thou wert not
any solid or substantial thing to me. For Thou
wert not Thyself, but an empty phantasm,^
and my error was my god. If I attempted to
discharge my burden thereon, that it might find
rest, it sank into emptiness, and came rushing
down again upon me, and I remained to myself
an unhappy spot, where I could neither stay nor
depart from. For whither could my heart fly
from my heart ? Whither could I fly from mine
own self? Whither not follow myself? And
yet fled I from my country ; for so should my
eyes look less for him where they were not ac-
customed to see him. And thus I left the town
of Thagaste, and came to Carthage.

CHAP. VIII. THAT HIS GRIEF CEASED BY TIME,

AND THE CONSOLATION OF FRIENDS.

13. Times lose no time, nor do they idly roll
through our senses. They work strange opera-
tions on the mind.^ Behold, they came and
Avent from day to day, and by coming and go-
ing they disseminated in my mind other ideas
and other remembrances, and by little and little
patched me up again with the former kind of
delights, unto which that sorrow of mine
yielded. But yet there succeeded, not certainly
other sorrows, yet the causes of other sorrows.*
For whence had that former sorrow so easily
penetrated to the quick, but that I had poured
out my soul upon the dust, in loving one
who must die as if he were never to die ?
But what revived and refreshed me especially
was the consolations of other friends,* with

1 " The great and merciful Architect of His Church, whom not
only the philosophers have stj'led, but the Scripture itself calls
TexFiTij; (an artist or artificer), employs not on us the hammer and
chisel with an intent to wound or mangle us, but only to square and
fashion our hard and stubborn hearts into such lively stones as
may both grace and strengthen His heavenly structure."— BovLE.

2 See iii. 9 ; iv. 3, 12, 31 ; v. 19.

3 As Seneca has it : " Quod ratio non quit, saepe sanabit mora "
(Agam. 130).

* See iv. cc. i, 10, 12, and vi. c. 16.

6 "Friendship," says Lord Bacon, in his essay thereon, — the sen-
timent being perhaps suggested by Cicero's " Secundas res
splendidiores facit amicitia at adversas partiens communicansque
leviores" (De Amicit. 6), — " redoubleth joys, and cutteth griefs in
halves." Augustin appears to have been eminently open to
influences of this kind. In his De Duab. Anhn. con. Manich. (c.
i.x.) he tells us that friendship was one of the bonds that kept him
in the ranks of the Manichaeans ; and here we find that, aided by
time and weeping, it restored him in his great grief. See also v.
sec. 19, and vi. sec 26, below.


whom I did love what instead of Thee I loved.
And this was a monstrous fable and protracted
lie, by whose adulterous contact our soul,
which lay itching in our ears, was being pol-
luted. But that fable would not die to me so
oft as any of my friends died. There were
other things in them which did more lay hold
of my mind, — to discourse and jest with them ;
to indulge in an interchange of kindnesses ; to
read together pleasant books ; together to trifle,
and together to be earnest ; to differ at times
without ill-humour, as a man would do with his
own self; and even by the infrequency of these
differences to give zest to our more frequent
consentings ; sometimes teaching, sometimes
being taught ; longing for the absent with im-
patience, and welcoming the coming with joy.
These and similar expressions, emanating from
the hearts of those who loved and were beloved
in return, by the countenance, the tongue, the
eyes, and a thousand pleasing movements, were
so much fuel to melt our souls together, and out
of many to make but one.

CHAP. IX. — THAT THE LOVE OF A HUMAN BE-
ING, HOWEVER CONSTANT IN LOVING AND
RETURNING LOVE, PERISHES; WHILE HE WHO
LOVES GOD NEVER LOSES A FRIEND.

14. This is it that is loved in friends ; and so
loved that a man's conscience accuses itself if
he love not him by whom he is beloved, or love
not again him that loves him, expecting nothing
from him but indications of his love. Hence
that mourning if one die, and gloom of sorrow,
that steeping of the heart in tears, all sweet-
ness turned into bitterness, and upon the loss
of the life of the dying, the death of the living.
Blessed be he who loveth Thee, and his friend
in Thee, and his enemy for Thy sake. For he
alone loses none dear to him to whom all are
dear in Him who cannot be lost. And who is
this but our God, the God that created heaven
and earth,** and fiUeth them,' because by filling
them He created them ? ^ None loseth Thee but
he who leaveth Thee. And he who leaveth
Thee, whither goeth he, or whither fleeth he,
but from Thee well pleased to Thee angry?
For where doth not he find Thy law in his own
punishment? "And Thy law is the truth,"®
and truth Thou.^°

CHAP. X. THAT ALL THINGS EXIST THAT THEY

MAY PERISH, AND THAT WE ARE NOT SAFE
UNLESS GOD WATCHES OVER US.

15. " Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts,


6 Gen. i. I.

7 Jer. x.xiii. 24.

8 See i. 2, 3, above.

9 Ps. cxix. 142, and John xvii. 17.
10 John xiv. 6,


I


Chap. XII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


7Z


cause Thy face to shine ; and we shall be saved. ' ' ^
For whithersoever the soul of man turns itself,
unless towards Thee, it is affixed to sorrows,^
yea, though it is affixed to beauteous things
without Thee and without itself. And yet they
were not unless they were from Thee. They rise
and set ; and by rising, they begin as it were
to be ; and they grow, that they may become
perfect ; and when perfect, they wax old
and perish ; and all wax not old, but all perish.
Therefore when they rise and tend to be, the
.. more rapidly they grow that they may be, so
I much the more they hasten not to be. This is
the way of them. ^ Thus much hast Thou given
them, because they are parts of things, which
exist not all at the same time, but by departing
and succeeding they together make up the
universe, of which they are parts. And even
thus is our speech accomplished by signs emit-
ting a sound ; but this, again, is not perfected
unless one word pass away when it has sounded
its part, in order that another may succeed it.
Let my soul praise Thee out of all these things,
O God, the Creator of all ; but let not my soul
be affixed to these things by the glue of love,
through the senses of the body. For they go
whither they were to go, that they might no
longer be ; and they rend her with pestilent de-
sires, because she longs to be, and yet loves to
rest in what she loves. But in these things no
place is to be found ; they stay not — they flee ;
and who is he that is able to follow them with the
senses of the flesh ? Or who can grasp them, even
when they are near ? For tardy is the sense of the
flesh, because it is the sense of the flesh, and
jits boundary is itself. It sufficeth for that for
which it was made, but it is not sufficient to
stay things running their course from their ap-
pointed starting-place to the end appointed,
or in Thy word, by which they were created,
Ithey hear the fiat, "Hence and hitherto."


1 Ps. Ixxx. 19.

2 See iv. cc. i, 12, and vi. c. 16, below.

* It is interesting in connection with the above passages to note
hat Augustin says elsewhere as to the ori^n of the law of death in

|he sin of our first parents. In his De Gen. ad Lit. (vi. 25) he
peaks thus of their condition in the garden, and the provision
nade for the maintenance of their life : " Aliud est non posse iiiori,
icut quasdam naturas immortales creavit Deus ; aliud est autem
osse non titori, secundum quern modum primus creatus est homo
mortalis." Adam, he goes on to say, was able to avert death,
ly partaking of the tree of life. He enlarges on this doctrine in
look xiii. De Civ. Dei. He says (sec. 20) : " Our first parents
ecayed not with years, nor drew nearer to death — a condition
ecured to them in God's marvellous grace by the tree of life, which
rew along with the forbidden tree in the midst of Paradise."
.gain (sec. 19) he says : " Why do the philosophers find that
bsurd which the Christian faith preaches, namely, that our first
arents were so created, that, if they had not sinned, they would
ot have been dismissed from their bodies by any death, but would
ave been endowed with immortalit>' as the reward of their obedi-
ice, and would have lived eternally with their bodies? " That this
as the doctrine of the early Church has been fully shown by
ishop Bull in his State of Man before the Fall, vol. ii. Theo-
lilus of Antioch was of opinion {Ad Autolyc. c. 24) that Adam
ight have gone on from strength to strength, until at last he
(I would have been taken up into heaven." See also on this subject
'ean Buckland's Sermon on Death; and Delitzsch, Bibl.
sychol. vi. sees, i and 2.


CHAP. XI. THAT PORTIONS OF THE WORLD ARE

NOT TO BE LOVED ; BUT THAT GOD, THEIR
AUTHOR, IS IMMUTABLE, AND HIS WORD ETER-
NAL.

16. Be not foolish, O my soul, and deaden
not the ear of thine heart with the tumult of
thy folly. Hearken thou also. The word itself
invokes thee to return ; and there is the place
of rest imperturbable, where love is not aban-
doned if itself abandoneth not. Behold, these
things pass away, that others may succeed them,
and so this lower universe be made complete in
all its parts. But do I depart anywhere, saith
the word of God ? There fix thy habitation.
There commit whatsoever thou hast thence, O
my soul ; at all events now thou art tired out
with deceits. Commit to truth whatsoever thou
hast from the truth, and nothing shalt thou lose ;
and thy decay shall flourish again, and all thy
diseases be healed,* and thy perishable parts
shall be re-formed and renovated, and drawn
together to thee ; nor shall they put thee down
where themselves descend, but they shall abide
with thee, and continue for ever before God,
who abideth and continueth for ever.^

17. Why, then, be perverse and follow thy
flesh ? Rather let it be converted and follow
thee. Whatever by her thou feelest, is but in
part ; and the whole, of which these are por-
tions, thou art ignorant of, and yet they delight
thee. But had the sense of thy flesh been capa-
ble of comprehending the whole, and not itself
also, for thy punishment, been justly limited to
a portion of the whole, thou wouldest that what-
soever existeth at the present time should pass
away, that so the whole might please thee more. ^
For what we speak, also by the same sense of
the flesh thou hearest ; and yet wouldest not
thou that the syllables should stay, but fly away,
that others may come, and the whole '' be heard.
Thus it is always, when any single thing is
composed of many, all of which exist not to-
gether, all together would delight more than
they do simply could all be perceived at once.
But far better than these is He who made all ;
and He is our God, and He passeth not away,
for there is nothing to succeed Him. If bodies
please thee, praise God for them, and turn back
thy love upon their Creator, lest in those things
which please thee thou displease.

CHAP. XIT. — LOVE IS NOT CONDEMNED, BUT LOVE
IN GOD, IN WHOM THERE IS REST THROUGH
JESUS CHRIST, IS TO BE PREFERRED.

18. If souls please thee, let them be loved in
God ; for they also are mutable, but in Him

* Ps. ciii. 3.

6 I Pet. i. 23.

6 See xiii. sec. 22, below.

' A similar illustration occurs in sec. 15, above.


1


74


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IV,


are they firmly established, else would they pass,
and pass away. In Him, then, let them be
beloved ; and draw unto Him along with thee
as many souls as thou canst, and say to them,
" Him let us love. Him let us love ; He created
these, nor is He far off. For He did not create
them, and then depart ; but they are of Him,
and in Him. Behold, there is He wherever
truth is known. He is within the very heart,
but yet hath the heart wandered from Him.
Return to your heart,^ O ye transgressors,^ and
cleave fast unto Him that made you. Stand
with Him, and you shall stand fast. Rest in
Him, and you shall be at rest. Whither go ye
in rugged paths ? Whither go ye ? The good
that you love is from Him ; and as it has respect
unto Him it is both good and pleasant, and
justly shall it be embittered,* because whatso-
ever Cometh from Him is unjustly loved if He
be forsaken for it. Why, then, will ye wander
farther and farther in these difficult and toil-
some ways? There is no rest where ye seek it.
Seek what ye seek ; but it is not there where ye
seek. Ye seek a blessed life in the land of
death ; it is not there. For could a blessed
life be where life itself is not ? "

19. But our very Life descended hither, and
bore our death, and slew it, out of the abund-
ance of His own life ; and thundering He
called loudly to us to return hence to Him into
that secret place whence He came forth to us —
first into the Virgin's womb, where the human
creature was married to Him, — our mortal flesh,
that it might not be for ever mortal, — and
thence '*as a bridegroom coming out of his
chamber, rejoicing as a strong man to run a
race."* For He tarried not, but ran crying
out by words, deeds, death, life, descent,
ascension, crying aloud to us to return to Him.
And He departed from our sight, that we might
return to our heart, and there find Him. For
He departed, and behold. He is here. He
would not be long with us, yet left us not ; for
He departed thither, whence He never de-
parted, because " the world was made by Him." ^

1 Augustin is never weary of pointing out that there is a lex occul-
ta (in Ps. Ivii. sec. i), a law written on the heart, which cries to
those who have forsaken the written law, " Return to your hearts,
ye transgressors." In like manner he interprets (De Serm. Dotn.
inlMon. ii. sec. 11) "Enter into thy closet," of the heartof man. The
door is the gate of the senses through which carnal thoughts enter
into the mind. We are to shut the door, because the devil (in Ps.
cxli. 3) si ciansinn invener it transit. In sec. 16, above, the figure
is changed, and we are to fear lest these objects of sense render us
"deaf in theear of our heart" with the tumult of our folly. Men will
not, he says, go back into their hearts, because the heart is full of
sin, and they fear the reproaches of conscience, just [in Ps. x.xxiii.
5) " as those are unwilling to enter their houses who have trouble-
some wives." These outer things, which too often draw us away
from Him, God intend."; should lift us up to Him who is better than
they, though they could all be ours at once, since He made them
all; and "woe," he says (De Lib. Arb. ii. 16), "to them who
love the indications of Thee rather than Thee, and remember not
what these indicated."

2 Isa. Ivi. 8.

3 See iv. cc. i, 10, above, and vi, c. 16, below.
* Ps. xix. 5.

6 John i. 10.


And in this world He was, and into this world
He came to save sinners,® unto whom my soul
doth confess, that He may heal it, for it hath
sinned against Him.' O ye sons of men, how
long so slow of heart ? * Even now, after the
Life is descended to you, will ye not ascend and
live?^ But whither ascend ye, when ye are on
high, and set your mouth against the heavens?'"
Descend that ye may ascend," and ascend to
God. For ye have fallen by "ascending against
Him." Tell them this, that they may weep in
the valley of tears, ^'^ and so draw them with thee
to God, because it is by His Spirit that thou
speakest thus unto them, if thou speakest burn-
ing with the fire of love.

CHAP. XIII. — LOVE ORIGINATES FROM GRACE AND
BEAUTY ENTICING US.

20. These things I knew not at that time,
and I loved these lower beauties, and I was
sinking to the very depths ; and I said to my
friends, " Do Ave love anything but the beauti-
ful ? What, then, is the beautiful? And what
is beauty ? What is it that allures and unites us
to the things we love ; for unless there were a
grace and beauty in them, they could by no
means attract us to them ? ' ' And I marked
and perceived that in bodies themselves there
was a beauty from their forming a kind of
whole, and another from mutual fitness, as one
part of the body with its whole, or a shoe with
a foot, and so on. And this consideration
sprang up in my mind out of the recesses of my
heart, and I wrote books (two or three, I think)
" on the fair and fit." Thou knowest, O Lord,
for it has escaped me ; for I have them not, but
they have strayed from me, I know not how.


BOOKS WHICH HE
FIT," DEDICATED


CHAP. XIV. CONCERNING THE

WROTE " ON THE FAIR AND
TO HIERIUS.

21. But what was it that prompted me, O .|
Lord my God, to dedicate these books to Hie-
rius, an orator of Rome, whom I knew not by

6 I Tim. i. 15.

7 Ps. xli. 4.

8 Luke xxiv. 25.

9 " The Son of God," says Augustin in another place, " became a
son of man, that the sons of men might be made sons of God." He
put off the/d;r;« of God — that by which He manifested His divine
glorj' in heaven — and put on the " form of a servant " (Phil. ii. 6, 7),
that as the outshining [aTrau'vao-jia] of the Father's glorj' (Heb. i. 3)
He might draw us to Himself He descended and emptied Himself
of His dignity that we might ascend, giving an example for all
time {in Ps. xxxiii. sec. 4) ; for, " lest man should disdain to imitate
a humble man, God humbled Himself, so that the pride of the
human race might not disdain to walk in the footsteps 0/ God."
See also v. sec. 5, note, below.

'•* Ps. Ixxiii. 9.

11 " There is something in humility which, strangely enough, ex-
alts the heart, and something in pride which debases it. This
seems, indeed, to be contradictory, that loftiness should debase and
lowliness exalt. But pious humility enables us to submit to what is
above us; and nothing is more exalted above us than God; and
therefore humility, by making us subject to God, exalts us." — Dt .
Civ. Dei, xiv. sec. 13.

12 Ps. Ixxxiv. 6.


Chap. XV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


75


sight, but loved the man for the fame of his
learning, for which he was renowned, and some
words of his which I had heard, and which had
pleased me ? But the more did he please me in
that he pleased others, who highly extolled him,
astonished that a native of Syria, instructed first
in Greek eloquence, should afterwards become
a wonderful Latin orator, and one so well versed
in studies pertaining unto wisdom. Thus a man
is commended and loved when absent. Doth
this love enter into the heart of the hearer from
the mouth of the commender ? Not so. But
through one who loveth is another inflamed.
For hence he is loved who is commended when
the commender is believed to praise him with
an unfeigned heart ; that is, when he that loves
him praises him.

2 2. Thus, then, loved I men upon the judg-
ment of men, not upon Thine, O my God, in
which no man is deceived. But yet why not as
the renowned charioteer, as the huntsman,^
known far and wide by a vulgar popularity —
but far otherwise, and seriously, and so as I
would desire to be myself commended ? For
I would not that they should commend and love
me as actors are, — although I myself did com-
mend and love them, — but I would prefer being
unknown than so known, and even being hated
than so loved. Where now are these influences
of such various and divers kinds of loves dis-
tributed in one soul ? What is it that I am in
love with in another, which, if I did not hate,
I should not detest and repel from myself, see-
ing we are equally men ? For it does not follow
that because a good horse is loved by him who
would not, though he might, be that horse, the
same should therefore be affirmed by an actor,
[who partakes of our nature. Do I then love in
|a man that which I, who am a man, hate to be ?

an himself is a great deep, whose very hairs

hou numberest, O Lord, and they fall not to

he ground without Thee.^ And yet are the

airs of his head more readily numbered than

ire his affections and the movements of his

rieart.

23. But that orator was of the kind that I so

oved as I wished myself to be such a one ; and

[[ erred through an inflated pride, and was " car-

•ied about with every wind," ^ but yet was piloted

)y Thee, though very secretly. And Avhence

now I, and whence confidently confess I unto

Thee that I loved him more because of the love

)f those who praised him, than for the very

hings for which they praised him? Because

lad he been upraised, and these self-same men

ad dispraised him, and with dispraise and scorn

old the same things of him, I should never have


1 See vi. sec. 13, below.
' Matt. X. 29, 30.
* Eph. iv. 14.


been so inflamed and provoked to love him.
And yet the things had not been different, nor
he himself different, but only the affections of
the narrators. See where lieth the impotent
soul that is not yet sustained by the solidity of
truth ! Just as the blasts of tongues blow from
the breasts of conjecturers, so is it tossed this
way and that, driven forward and backward,
and the light is obscured to it and the truth not
perceived. And behold it is before us. And
to me it was a great matter that my style and
studies should be known to that man ; the which
if he approved, I were the more stimulated, but
if he disapproved, this vain heart of mine, void
of Thy solidity, had been offended. And yet
that " fair and fit," about which I wrote to him,
I reflected on with pleasure, and contemplated
it, and admired it, though none joined me in
doing so.

CHAP. XV. ^WHILE WRITING, BEING BLINDED BY

CORPOREAL IMAGES, HE FAILED TO RECOGNISE
THE SPIRITUAL NATURE OF GOD.

24. But not yet did I perceive the hinge on
which this impotent matter tu~ned in Thy wis-
dom, O Thou Omnipotent, "who alone doest
great wonders ;" * and my mind ranged through
corporeal forms, and I defined and distinguished
as " fair," that which is so in itself, and "fit,"
that which is beautiful as it corresponds to some
other thing ; and this I supported by corporeal
examples. And I ^rned my attention to the
nature of the mind, but the false opinions which
I entertained of spiritual things prevented me
from seeing the truth. Yet the very power of
truth forced itself on my gaze, and I turned
away my throbbing soul from incorporeal sub-
stance, to lineaments, and colours, and bulky
magnitudes. And not being able to perceive
these in the mind, I thought I could not per-
ceive my mind. And whereas in virtue I loved
peace, and in viciousness I hated discord, in
the former I distinguished unity, but in the lat-
ter a kind of division. And in that unity I
conceived the rational soul and the nature of
truth and of the chief good ^ to consist. But

* Ps. cxxxvi, 4.

6 Augustin telLs us {De Civ. Dei, xix. i) that Varro, in his lost
book De Pliilosophia, gives two hundred and eightj'-eight different
opinions as regards the chief good, and shows us how readily they
may be reduced in number. Now, as then, philosophers ask the
same questions. We have our hedonists, whose "good" is their
own pleasure and happmess : our materialists, who would seek the
common good of all ; and our intuitionists, who aim at following the
dictates of conscience. When the pretensions of these various
schools are examined without prejudice, the conclusion is forced
upon us that we must have recourse to Revelation for a reconcile-
ment of the difficulties of the various systems ; and that the philoso-
phers, to employ Davidson's happy illustration {Prophecies, In-
trod.), forgetting that their faded taper has been insensibly kindled
by gospel light, are attempting now, as in Augustin's time (ibid. sec.
4'), " to fabricate for themselves a happiness in this life based upon
a virtue as deceitful as it is proud." Christianity gives the golden
key to the attainment of happiness, when it declares that " godliness
is profitable for all things, having the promise of the life which now
is, and of that which is to come" (i Tim. iv. 8). It was a saying


1^


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IV.


in this division I, unfortunate one, imagined
there was I know not wliat substance of irra-
tional life, and the nature of the chief evil,
which should not be a substance only, but real
life also, and yet not emanating from Thee, O
my God, from whom are all things. And yet
the first I called a Monad, as if it had been a
soul without sex,^ but the other a Duad, — anger
in deeds of violence, in deeds of passion, lust,
— not knowing of what I talked. For I had
not known or learned that neither was evil a
substance, nor our soul that chief and unchange-
able good.

25. For even as it is in the case of deeds of
violence, if that emotion of the soul from
whence the stimulus comes be depraved, and
carry itself insolently and mutinously ; and in
acts of passion, if that affection of the soul
whereby carnal pleasures are imbibed is unre-
strained,— so do errors and false opinions con-
taminate the life, if the reasonable soul itself be
depraved, as it was at that time in me, who was
ignorant that it must be enlightened by another
light that it may be partaker of truth, seeing
that itself is not that nature of truth. "For
Thou wilt light my candle ; the Lord my God
will enlighten my darkness ;'^ and " of His ful-
ness have all we received," ^ for " that was the
true Light which lighted every man that cometh
into the world;"* for in Thee there is "no
variableness, neither shadow of turning. ' ' *

26. But I pressed towartis Thee, and was
repelled by Thee that I might taste of death,
for Thou " resistest the proud."® But what

of Bacon {Essay on Adversity), that while " prosperity is the
blessing of the Old Testament, adversity is the blessing of the
New." He would have been nearer the truth had he said that
while temporal rewards were the special promise of the Old Testa-
ment, spiritual rewards are the special promise of the New. For
though Christ's immediate followers had to suffer " adversity " in
the planting of our faith, adversity cannot properly be said to be the
result of following Christ. It has yet to be shown that, on the
whole, the greatest amount of real happiness does not result, even in
this life, from a Christian life, for virtue is, even here, its own
reward. The fulness of the reward, however, will only be received
in the life to come. Augustin's remark, therefore, still holds good
that " life eternal is the supreme good, and death eternal the supreme
evil, and that to obtain the one and escape the other we must live
rightly" {ibid. sec. 4); and again, that even in the midst of the
troubles of life, " as we are saved, so we are made happy, by hope.
And as we do not as yet possess a present, but look for a future sal-
vation, so it is with our happiness, . . . we ought patiently to
endure till we come to the ineffable enjoyment of unmixed good."
See Abbe Anselme, Sur le Soitverciin Bien, vol. v. serm. i ; and
the last chapter of Professor Sidgwick's Methods of Ethics, for the
conclusions at which a mind at once lucid and dispassionate has
arrived on this question.

1 " Or 'an unintelligent soul;' very good MSS. reading ' sensu,'
the majority, it appears, ' se-ru.' If we read ' sexu,' the absolute
unity of the first principle, or Monad, may be insisted upon, and in
the inferior principle, divided into ' violence' and ' lust,' ' violence,"
as implying strength, may be looked on as the male, ' lust' was, in
mythology', represented as female ; if we take ' sensu,' it will cy-
press the living but unintelligent soul of the world in the Manichaean,
as a pantheistic system." — E. B. P.

2 Ps. xviii. 28. Augustin constantly urges our recognition of the
truth that God is the " Father of lights." From Him as our central
sun, all light, whether of wisdom or knowledge, proceedeth, and if,
changing the figure, our candle which He hath lighted be blown out.
He again must light it. Compare Enar. in Ps. xciii. 147; and
Sermons, 67 and 341.

3 John i. 16.
* John 1. 9.
6 Jas. i. 17.

6 Jas. iv. 6, and i Pet. v. 5.


prouder than for me, with a marvellous madness,
to assert myself to be that by nature which Thou
art? For whereas I was mutable, — so much
being clear to me, for my very longing to
become wise arose from the wish from worse to
become better, — yet chose I rather to think
Thee mutable, than myself not to be that which
Thou art. Therefore was I repelled by Thee,
and Thou resistedst my changeable stiffnecked-
ness ; and I imagined corporeal forms, and,
being flesh, I accused flesh, and, being " a wind
that passeth away," ' I returned not to Thee, but
went wandering and wandering on towards those
things that have no being, neither in Thee, nor
in me, nor in the body. Neither were they
created for me by Thy truth, but conceived by
my vain conceit out of corporeal things. And
I used to ask Thy faithful little ones, my fellow-
citizens, — from whom I unconsciously stood
exiled, — I used flippantly and foolishly to ask,
" Why, then, doth the soul which God created
err? " But I would not permit any one to ask
me, " Why, then, doth God err ? " And I con-
tended that Thy immutable substance erred of
constraint, rather than admit that my mutable
substance had gone astray of free will, and erred
as a punishment.*

27. I was about six or seven and twenty years
of age when I wrote those volumes — meditating
upon corporeal fictions, which clamoured in the
ears of my heart. These I directed, O sweet

1 Ps. lx.xviii. 39.

8 It may assist those unacquainted with Augustin's writings to
understand the last three sections, if we set before them a brief view
of the Manichsean speculations as to the good and evil principles, and
the nature of the human soul : — (i) The Manichaeans believed that
there were two principles or substances, one good and the other evil,
and that both were eternal and opposed one to the other. The good
principle they called God, and the evil, matter or Hyle (Con. Faust.
xxi. I, 2). Faustus, in his argument with Augustin, admits that
the}' sometimes called the evil nature " God," but simply as a con-
ventional usage. Augustin says thereon (ibid. sec. 4) ; " Faustus
glibly defends himself by saying, ' We speak not of two gods, but
of God and Hyle ;' but when you ask for the meaning of Hyle, you find
that it is in fact another god. If the Manichaeans gave the name of
Hyle, as the ancients did, to the unformed matter which is suscepti-
ble of bodily forms, we should not accuse them of making two gods.
But it is pure folly and madness to give to matter the power of
forming bodies, or to deny that what has this power is God."
Augustin alludes in the above passage to the Platonic theory of
matter, which, as the late Dean Mansel has shown us (Gnostic
Heresies, Bas Hides, etc.), resulted after his time in Pantheism, and
which was entirely opposed to the dualism of INIanichseus. It is to
this "power of forming bodies" claimed for matter, then, that
Augustin alludes in our text (sec. 24) as " not only a substance but
real life also." (2) The human soul the Manichseans declared to
be of the same nature as God, though not created by Him — it hav-
ing originated in the intermingling of part of His being with the
evil principle, in the conflict between the kingdoms of light and
darkness (in Ps. cxl. sec. 10). Augustin says to Faustus : " You
generally call your soul not a temple, but a part or member of God "
(Con. Faust, xx. 15); and thus, " identifying themselves with the
nature and substance of God" (ibid. xii. 13), they did not refer their
sin to themselves, but to the race of darkness, and so did not " prevail
over their sin." That is, they denied original sin, and asserted that
it necessarily resulted from the soul's contact with the body. To
this Augustin steadily replied, that as the soul was not of the nature
of God, but created by Him and endowed with free will, man was
responsible for his transgressions. Again, referring to the Confes-
sions, we find Augustin speaking consistently with his then belief,
when he says that he had not then learned that the soul was not a
" chief and unchangeable good " (sec. 24), or that "' it was not that
nature of truth" (sec. 251; and that when he transgressed "he
accused flesh" rather than himself; and, as a result of his Mani-
chaean errors (sec. 26), " contended that God's immutable substance
erred of constraint, rather than admit that his mutable substance
had gone astray of free will, and erred as a punishment."


Chap. XVI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


n


Truth, to Thy inward melody, pondering on
the "fair and fit," and longing to stay and lis-
ten to Thee, and to rejoice greatly at the Bride-
groom's voice, ^ and I could not; for by the
voices of my own errors was I driven forth, and
by the weight of my own pride was I sinking
into the lowest pit. For Thou didst not "make
me to hear joy and gladness;" nor did the
bones which were not yet humbled rejoice.'^

CHAP. XVI. HE VERY EASILY UNDERSTOOD THE

LIBERAL ARTS AND THE CATEGORIES OF ARIS-
TOTLE, BUT WITHOUT TRUE FRUIT.

28. And what did it profit me that, when
scarce twenty years old, a book of Aristotle's,
entitled The Ten Predicaments, fell into my
hands, — on whose very name I hung as on
something great and divine, when my rhetoric
master of Carthage, and others who were es-
teemed learned, referred to it with cheeks swell-
ing with pride, — I read it alone and understood
it ? And on my conferring with others, who
said that with the assistance of very able mas-
ters— who not only explained it orally, but
drew many things in the dust^ — they scarcely
understood it, and could tell me no more about
it than I had acquired in reading it by myself
alone ? And the book appeared to me to speak
plainly enough of substances, such as man is,
and of their qualities, — such as the figure of a
man, of what kind it is ; and his stature, how
many feet high ; and his relationship, whose
brother he is ; or where placed, or when born ;
or whether he stands or sits, or is shod or armed,
or does or suffers anything ; and whatever in-
numerable things might be classed under these
nine categories,* — of which I have given some
examples, — or under that chief category of sub-
stance.

29. What did all this profit me, seeing it even
hindered me, when, imagining that whatsoever
existed was comprehended in those ten cate-
gories, I tried so to understand, O my God,
Thy wonderful and unchangeable unity as if
Thou also hadst been subjected to Thine own
greatness or beauty, so that they should exist in
Thee as their subject, like as in bodies, whereas


1 John iii. 29.

2 Ps. li. 8, Vulg.

3 As the mathematicians did their figures, in dust or sand.
* " The categories enumerated by Aristotle are outria, Troo-Of, itolov,

wpotrTi, TToO, TToxe, Keio-Sai, e;^eii', -aoiilv, Tracrx^i" ; which are
usually rendered, as adequately as perhaps they can be in our lan-
guage, substance, quantity, quality, relation, place, time, situation,
possession, action, suffering. The catalogue (which certainly is but
a very crude one) has been by some writers enlarged, as it is evi-
dent may easily be done by subdividing some of the heads ; and by
others curtailed, as it is no less evident that all may ultimately be
referred to the two heads of suista?ice and attfihutt', or, in the lan-
guage of some logicians, 'accident' " (Whately's Logic, iv. 2, sec.
1, note). " These are called in Latin the />rcedicaiiients, because
they can be said or predicated in the same sense of all other terms,
as well as of all the objects denoted by them, whereas no other term
can be correctly said of them, because no other is employed to ex-
ktucf press the full extent of their meaning" (Gillies, Analysis 0/ Aris-
totle, c. 2).


iitvail
■ li


Thou Thyself art Thy greatness and beauty?
But a body is not great or fair because it is a
body, seeing that, though it were less great or
fair, it should nevertheless be a body. But that
which I had conceived of Thee was falsehood,
not truth, — fictions of my misery, not the sup-
ports of Thy blessedness. For Thou hadst
commanded, and it was done in me, that the
earth should bring forth briars and thorns to
me,^ and that with labour I should get my
bread.®

30. And what did it profit me that I, the
base slave of vile affections, read unaided, and
understood, all the books that I could get of
the so-called liberal arts? And I took delight
in them, but knew not Avhence came whatever
in them was true and certain. For my back
then was to the light, and my face towards the
things enlightened ; whence my face, with
which I discerned the things enlightened, was
not itself enlightened. Whatever was written
either on rhetoric or logic, geometry, music,
or arithmetic, did I, without any great difficulty,
and without the teaching of any man, under-
stand, as Thou knowest, O Lord my God, be-
cause both quickness of comprehension and
acuteness of perception are Thy gifts. Yet did
I not thereupon sacrifice to Thee. So, then, it
served not to my u.se, but rather to my destruc-
tion, since I went about to get so good a portion
of my substance' into my own power; and I
kept not my strength for Thee,^ but went away
from Thee into a far country, to waste it upon
harlotries.^ For what did good abilities profit
me, if I did not employ them to good uses ?
For I did not perceive that those arts were
acquired with great difficulty, even by the stu-
dious and those gifted with genius, until I en-
deavoured to explain them to such ; and he was
the most proficient in them who followed my
explanations not too slowly.

31. But what did this profit me, supposing
that Thou, O Lord God, the Truth, wert a
bright and vast body,^" and I a piece of that
body ? Perverseness too great ! But such was
I. Nor do I blush, O my God, to confess to
Thee Thy mercies towards me, and to call upon
Thee — I, who blushed not then to avow before
men my blasphemies, and to bark against Thee.
What profited me then my nimble wit in those
sciences and all those knotty volumes, disen-
tangled by me without help from a human mas-
ter, seeing that I erred so odiously, and with
such sacrilegious baseness, in the doctrine of
piety? Or what impediment was it to Thy


s Isa. xxxii. 13.
S Gen. iii. 19.

7 Luke XV. 12.

8 Ps. lix. 9, Vulg:

9 Luke XV. 13.

10 See iii. 12; iv. 3, 12; v. 19.


78


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IV.


little ones to have a far slower wit, seeing that
they departed not far from Thee, that in the
nest of Thy Church they might safely become
fledged, and nourish the wings of charity by the
food of a sound faith? O Lord our God, under
the shadow of Thy wings let us hope,^ defend
us, and carry us. Thou wilt carry us both when
little, and even to grey hairs wilt Thou carry
us ; "^ for our firmness, when it is Thou, then is


1 Ps. xxxvi. 7.
* Isa. xlvi. 4.


it firmness ; but when it is our own, then it is
infirmity. Our good lives always with Thee,
from which when we are averted we are per-
verted. Let us now, O Lord, return, that we
be not overturned, because with Thee our good
lives without any eclipse, — which good Thou
Thyself art.^ And we need not fear lest we
should find no place unto which to return be-
cause we fell away from it ; for when we were
absent, our home — Thy Eternity — fell not.

' See xi. sec. 5, note, below.


I'


BOOK V.


HE DESCRIBES THE TWENTY-NINTH YEAR OF HIS AGE, IN WHICH, HAVING DISCOVERED THE FALLACIES
OF THE MANICH^ANS, HE PROFESSED RHETORIC AT ROME AND MILAN. HAVING HEARD AMBROSE,
HE BEGINS TO COME TO HIMSELF.


CHAP. I. — THAT IT BECOMES THE SOUL TO PRAISE
GOD, AND TO CONFESS UNTO HIM.

1. Accept the sacrifice of my confessions
by the agency of my tongue, which Thou hast
formed and quickened, that it may confess to
Thy name ; and heal Thou all my bones, and
let them say, " Lord, who is like unto Thee ? " ^
For neither does he who confesses to Thee teach
Thee what may be passing within him, because
a closed heart doth not exclude Thine eye, nor
does man's hardness of heart repulse Thine
hand, but Thou dissolvest it when Thou wiliest,
either in pity or in vengeance, "and there is
no one who can hide himself from Thy heat." ^
But let my soul praise Thee, that it may love
Thee ; and let it confess Thine own mercies to
Thee, that it may praise Thee. Thy whole
creation ceaseth not, nor is it silent in Thy
praises — neither the spirit of man, by the voice
directed unto Thee, nor animal nor corporeal
things, by the voice of those meditating there-
on; * so that our souls may from their weariness
arise towards Thee, leaning on those things
which Thou hast made, and passing on to Thee,
who hast made them wonderfully ; and there is
there refreshment and true strength.

CHAP. II. — ON THE VANITY OF THOSE WHO
WISHED TO ESCAPE THE OMNIPOTENT GOD.

2. Let the restless and the unjust depart and
flee from Thee. Thou both seest them and dis-
tinguishest the shadows. And lo ! all things


1 Ps. XXXV. lO.

2 Ps. XIX. 6.

s St. Paul speaks of a " minding of the flesh " and a " minding of
the spirit" (Rom. viii. 6, margin), and we are prone to be attracted
and held by the carnal surroundings of life ; that is, " quae per car-
nem sentiri querunt id est per oculos, per aures, ceterosque corporis

jsensus" (De Vera Reli^. xxiv.). But God would have us, as we
meditate on the thin.gs tihat enter by the gates of the senses, to arise
towards Him, through these His creatures. Our Father in heaven
might have ordered His creation simply in a utilitarian way, letting,
for example, hunger be satisfied without any of the pleasures of
taste, and so of tbe other senses. But He has not so done. To
every sense He has given its appropriate pleasure as well as its
proper use. And though this presents to us a source of temptation,
still ought we for it to praise His goodness to the full, and that corde
ore opere. — Bradward, ii. c. 23. See also i. sec. i, note 3, and iv.

nsec. iS, above.


with them are fair, yet are they themselves foul.*
And how have they injured Thee ? ^ Or in
what have they disgraced Thy government,
which is just and perfect from heaven even to
the lowest parts of the earth. For whither fled
they when they fled from Thy presence ? ® Or
where dost Thou not find them ? But they
fled that they might not see Thee seeing them,
and blinded might stumble against Thee ;' since
Thou forsakest nothing that Thou hast made® —
that the unjust might stumble against Thee, and
justly be hurt,^ withdrawing themselves from
Thy gentleness, and stumbling against Thine
uprightness, and falling upon their own rough-
ness. Forsooth, they know not that Thou art
everywhere whom no place encompasseth, and
that Thou alone art near even to those that re-
move far from Thee.^° Let them, then, be con-

* Augiistin frequently recurs to the idea, that in God's overruling
Providence, the foulness and sin of man does not disturb the order
and fairness of the universe. He illustrates the idea by reference to
music, painting, and oratory. " P"or as the beauty of a picture is
increased by well-managed shadows, so, to the eye that has skill to
discern it, the universe is beautified even by sinners, though, con-
sidered by themselves, their deformity is a sad blemish" {De Civ.
Dei, xi. 23). So again, he says, God would never have created
angels or men whose future wickedness he foreknew, unless He
could turn them to the use of the good, " thus embellishing the
course of the ages as it were an exquisite poem set off with antith-
eses" (ibid. xi. 18) ; and further on, in the same section, "as the
oppositions of contraries lend beauty to language, so the beauty of
the course of this world is achieved by the opposition of contraries,
arranged, as it were, by an eloquence not of words, but of things."
These reflections affected Augustin's views as to the last things.
They seemed to him to render the idea entertained by Origen (De
Princ. i. 6) and other Fathers as to a general restoration [an-OKa-
Ta<rTa(ris] unnecessary. See Hagenbach's Hist, of Doct. etc. i. 383
(Clark).

^ " In Scripture they are called God's enemies who oppose His
rule not by nature but by vice, having no power to hurt Him, but
only themselves. For they are His enemies not through their
power to hurt, but by their will to oppose Him. For God is un-
changeable, and wholly proof against injury" {De Civ. Det,x\i. 3).

8 Ps. cxxxix. 7.

' Gen. xvi. 13, 14.

* Wisd. ii. 26. Old zier.

9 He also refers to the injury man does himself by sin in ii. sec.
13, above; and elsewhere he suggests the law which underlies it:
" The vice which makes those who are called God's enemies resist
Him, is an evil not to God but to themselves. And to them it is an
evil solely because it corrupts the good of their nature." And
when we suffer for our sins we should thank God that we are not
unpunished (De Civ. Dei, xii. 3). But if, when God punishes us,
we still continue in our sin, we shall be more confirmed in habits of
sin, and then, as Augustin in another place (in Fs. vii. 15) warns
us, " our facility in sinning will be the punishment of God for
our former yieldings to sin." See also Butler's Analogy, Pt. i.
ch. 5, " On a state of probation as intended for moral discipline and
improvement."

w Ps. Ixxiii. 27.

79


8o


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book V.


verted and seek Thee ; because not as they have
forsaken their Creator hast Thou forsaken Thy
creature. Let them be converted and seek
Thee ; and behold, Thou art there in their hearts,
in the hearts of those who confess to Thee, and
cast themselves upon Thee, and weep on Thy
bosom after their obdurate ways, even Thou
gently wiping away their tears. And they weep
the more, and rejoice in weeping, since Thou,

0 Lord, not man, flesh and blood, but Thou,
Lord, who didst make, remakest and comfortest
them. And where was I when I was seeking
Thee ? And Thou wert before me, but I had
gone away even from myself; nor did I find
myself, much less Thee !

CHAP. III. HAVING HEARD FAUSTUS, THE MOST

. LEARNED BISHOP OF THE MANICH^ANS, HE
DISCERNS THAT GOD, THE AUTHOR BOTH OF
THINGS ANIMATE AND INANIMATE, CHIEFLY
HAS CARE FOR THE HUMBLE.

3. Let me lay bare before my God that
twenty-ninth year of my age. There had at
this time come to Carthage a certain bishop of
the Manichgeans, by name Faustus, a great snare
of the devil, and many were entangled by him
through the allurement of his smooth speech ;
the which, although I did commend, yet could

1 separate from the truth of "those things which
I was eager to learn. Nor did I esteem the
small dish of oratory so much as the science,
which this their so praised Faustus placed before
me to feed upon. Fame, indeed, had before
spoken of him to me, as most skilled in all be-
coming learning, and pre-eminently skilled in
the liberal sciences. And as I had read and re-
tained in memory many injunctions of the phil-
osophers, I used to compare some teachings of
theirs with those long fables of the Manichseans ;
and the former things which they declared, who
could only prevail so far as to estimate this
lower world, while its lord they could by no
means find out,^ seemed to me the more proba-
ble. For Thou art great, O Lord, and hast
"respect unto the lowly, but the proud Thou
knowest afar off". ' ' '■* Nor dost Thou draw near
but to the contrite heart,' nor art Thou found
by the proud/ — not even could they number by
cunning skill the stars and the sand, and meas-
ure the starry regions, and trace the courses of
the planets.

4. For with their understanding and the
capacity which Thou hast bestowed upon them
they search out these things ; and much have
they found out, and foretold many years before,
— the eclipses of those luminaries, the sun and


1 Wisd. xiii. 9.

* Ps, cxxxviii. 6.

3 Ps. xxxiv. 18, and cxlv. 18.

* See Book iv. sec. 19, note, above.


moon, on what day, at what hour, and from
how many particular points they were likely to
come. Nor did their calculation fail them ;
and it came to pass even as they foretold.
And they wrote down the rules found out,
which are read at this day; and from these
others foretell in what year, and in what month
of the year, and on what day of the month, and
at what hour of the day, and at what quarter of
its light, either moon or sun is to be eclipsed,
and thus it shall be even as it is foretold. And
men who are ignorant of these things marvel
and are amazed, and they that know them exult
and are exalted ; and by an impious pride, de-
parting from Thee, and forsaking Thy light,
they foretell a failure of the sun's light which is
likely to occur so long before, but see not their
own, which is now present. For they seek not
religiously whence they have the ability where-
with they seek out these things. And finding
that Thou hast made them, they give not them-
selves up to Thee, that Thou mayest preserve
what Thou hast made, nor sacrifice themselves
to Thee, even such as they have made them-
selves to be ; nor do they slay their own pride,
as fowls of the air,^ nor their own curiosities, by
which (like the fishes of the sea) they wander
over the unknown paths of the abyss, nor their
own extravagance, as the " beasts of the field," *
that Thou, Lord, "a consuming fire,"' mayest
burn up their lifeless cares and renew them
immortally.

5. But the way — Thy Word,® by whom Thou
didst make these things which they number,
and themselves who number, and the sense by
which they perceive what they number, and
the judgment out of which they number — they
knew not, and that of Thy wisdom there is no
number.' But the Only-begotten has been
' ' made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification," ^" and has been numbered
amongst us, and paid tribute to Caesar." This
way, by which they might descend to Him from
themselves, they knew not ; nor that through
Him they might ascend unto Him.^^ This way
they knew not, and they think themselves ex-
alted with the stars" and shining, and lo ! they
fell upon the earth," and "their foolish heart


5 He makes use of the same illustrations on Psalms viii. and xi.,
where the birds of the air represent the proud, the fishes of the sea
those who have too great a curiosity, while the beasts of the field
are those given to carnal pleasures. It will be seen that there is a
correspondence between them and the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eye, and the pride of life, in i John li. 16. See also above.
Book iii. sec. 16; and below. Book x. sec. 41, etc.

6 Ps. viii. 7, 8.
1 Deut. iv. 24.

8 John i. 3.

9 Ps. cxlvii. 5, Vulg:

10 I Cor. i. 30.

11 JNIatt. xvii. 27.

12 In Sermon 123, sec. 3, we have : " Christ as God is the country
to which we go — Christ as man is the way by which we go." See
note on Book iv. sec. 19, above.

13 Isa. XIV. 13.
1* Rev. xii. 4.


Chap. V.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


8i


was darkened."^ They say many true things
concerning the creature; but Truth, the Artificer
of the creature, they seek not with devotion,
and hence they find Him not. Or if they find
Him, knowing that He is God, they glorify
Him not as God, neither are tliey thankful,^
but become vain in their imaginations, and say
that they themselves are wise,^ attributing to
themselves what is Thine ; and by this, with
most perverse blindness, they desire to impute
to Thee what is their own, forging lies against
Thee who art the Truth, and changing the glory
of the incorruptible God into an image made
like corruptible man, and to birds, and four-
footed beasts, and creeping things,* — changing
Thy truth into a lie, and worshipping and serv-
ing the creature more than the Creator.^

6. Many truths, however, concerning the
creature did I retain from these men, and the
cause appeared to me from calculations, the
succession of seasons, and the visible manifes-
tations of the stars ; and I compared them with
the sayings of Manichaeus, who in his frenzy
has written most extensively on these subjects,
but discovered not any account either of the
solstices, or the equinoxes, the eclipses of the
luminaries, or anything of the kind I had
learned in the books of secular philosophy.
But therein I was ordered to believe, and yet it
corresponded not with those rules acknowledged
by calculation and my own sight, but was far
different.

CHAP. IV. THAT THE KNOWLEDGE OF TERRES-
TRIAL AND CELESTIAL THINGS DOES NOT GIVE
HAPPINESS, BUT THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD
ONLY.

7. Doth, then, O Lord God of truth, whoso-
ever knoweth those things therefore please
Thee ? For unhappy is the man who knoweth
all those things, but knoweth Thee not ; but
happy is he who knoweth Thee, though these
he may not know.® But he who knoweth
both Thee and them is not the happier on
account of them, but is happy on account of
Thee only, if knowing Thee he glorify Thee as


1 Rom.

» Ibid.

3 Rom.

4 Rom.
6 Rom.


22.

23-

25-


6 What a contrast does his attitude here present to his supreme
regard for secular learning before his conversion ! We have con-
stantly in his writings expressions of the same kind. On Psalm ciii.
he dilates lovingly on the fount of happiness the word of God is, as
compared with the writings of Cicero, Tully, and Plato ; and again
Ion Psalm xxxviii. he shows that the word is the source of all true
jjoy. So likewise in De Trin. iv. i : " That mind is more praise-
J worthy which knows even its own weakness, than that which, with-
lout regard to this, searches out and even comes to l^now the ways
lof the stars, or which holds fast such knowledge already acquired,
Iwhile ignorant of the way by which itself to enter into its own
Iproper health and strength. . . . Such a one has preferred to
Iknow his own weakness, rather than to know the walls of the world,
Ithe foundations of the earth, and the pinnacles of heaven." See iii.
|sec. 9, note, above.


God, and gives thanks, and becomes not vain
in his thoughts.' But as he is happier who
knows how to possess a tree, and for the use
thereof renders thanks to Thee, although he
may not know how many cubits high it is, or
how wide it spreads, than he that measures it
and counts all its branches, and neither owns it
nor knows or loves its Creator ; so a just man,
whose is the entire world of wealth,^ and who,
as having nothing, yet possesseth all things' by
cleaving unto Thee, to whom all things are
subservient, though he know not even the cir-
cles of the Great Bear, yet it is foolish to doubt
but that he may verily be better than he who
can measure the heavens, and number the stars,
and weigh the elements, but is forgetful of
Thee, " who hast set in order all things in num-
ber, weight, and measure. ' ' ^^

CHAP. V. — OF MANICH^US PERTINACIOUSLY TEACH-
ING FALSE DOCTRINES, AND PROUDLY ARROGAT-
ING TO HIMSELF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

8. But yet who was it that ordered Mani-
chKus to write on these things likewise, skill in
which was not necessary to piety ? For Thou
hast told man to behold piety and wisdom," of
which he might be in ignorance although hav-
ing a complete knowledge of these other things ;
but since, knowing not these things, he yet
most impudently dared to teach them, it is clear
that he had no acquaintance with piety. For
even when we have a knowledge of these worldly
matters, it is folly to make a profession of them ;
but confession to Thee is piety. It was there-
fore with this view that this straying one spake
much of these matters, that, standing convicted
by those who had in truth learned them, the
understanding that he really had in those more
difficult things might be made plain. For he
wished not to be lightly esteemed, but went
about trying to persuade men "that the Holy
Ghost, the Comforter and Enricher of Thy
faithful ones, was with full authority personally
resident in him." ^^ When, therefore, it was dis-


7 Rom. i. 21.

8 Prov. xvii, 6, in the LXX.

9 2 Cor. vi. 10.
10 Wisd. xi. 20. _

•1 Job xxviii. 28 in LXX. reads : 'I5ou y\ OeocrePeia etrri (ro<|>i'a.

■2 This claim of Manichseus was supported by referring to the
Lord's promise (John xvi. 12, 13) to send the Holy Ghost, the Com-
forter, to guide the apostles into that truth which they were as yet
" not able to bear." The Manichseans used the words " Para-
clete" and "Comforter," as indeed the names of the other two
persons of the blessed Trinity, in a sense entirely different from that
of the gospel. These terms were little more than the bodily frame,
the soul of which was his own heretical belief. Whenever opposi-
tion appeared between that belief and the teaching of Scripture,
their ready answer was that the Scriptures had been corrupted {De
Mor. Ecc. Cath. xxviii. and xxix.) ; and in such a case, as we find
Faustus contending (Con. Faust, xxxii. 6), the Paraclete taught
them what part to receive and what to reject, according to the pro-
mise of Jesus that He should "guide them into all truth," and
much more to the same effect. Augustin's whole argument in re-
ply is well worthy of attention. Amongst other things, he points
out that the Manichsean pretension to having received the promised
Paraclete was precisely the same as that of the Montanists in the
previous century. It should be observed that Beausobre [Histoire,


82


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book V.


covered that his teaching concerning the hea-
vens and stars, and the motions of sun and
moon, was false, though these things do not re-
late to the doctrine of religion, yet his sacri-
legious arrogance would become sufficiently evi-
dent, seeing that not only did he affirm things
of which he knew nothing, but also perverted
them, and with such egregious vanity of pride
as to seek to attribute them to himself as to a
divine being.

9. For when I hear a Christian brother igno-
rant of these things, or in error concerning
them, I can bear with patience to see that man
hold to his opinions ; nor can I apprehend that
any want of knowledge as to the situation or
nature of this material creation can be injurious
to him, so long as he does not entertain belief
in anything unworthy of Thee, O Lord, the
Creator of all. But if he conceives it to pertain
to the form of the doctrine of piety, and pre-
sumes to affirm with great obstinacy that where-
of he is ignorant, therein lies the injury. And
yet even a weakness such as this in the dawn of
faith is borne by our Mother Charity, till the
new man may grow up "unto a perfect man,"
and not be " carried about with every wind of
doctrine."^ But in him who thus presumed to
beat once the teacher, author, head, and leader of
all whom he could induce to believe this, so that
all who followed him believed that they were
following not a simple man only, but Thy Holy
Spirit, who would not judge that such great
insanity, when once it stood convicted of false
teaching, should be abhorred and utterly cast
off? But I had not yet clearly ascertained
whether the changes of longer and shorter days
and nights, and day and night itself, with the
eclipses of the greater lights, and whatever of
the like kind I had read in other books, could
be expounded consistently with his words.
Should I have found myself able to do so, there
would still have remained a doubt in my mind
whether it were so or no, although I might, on
the strength of his reputed godliness,* rest my
faith on his authority.

CHAP. VI. FAUSTUS WAS INDEED AN ELEGANT

SPEAKER, BUT KNEW NOTHING OF THE LIBER.\L
SCIENCES.

10. And for nearly the whole of those nine
years during which, with unstable mind, I had
been their follower, I had been looking forward
with but too great eagerness for the arrival of
this same Faustus. For the other members of
the sect whom I had chanced to light upon,

i. 254, 264, etc.) vigorously rebuts the charge brought against
Manichseus of claiming to be the Holy Ghost. An interesting ex-
amination of the claims of Montanuswill be found in Kaye's Ter-
tullian,\>^. 13 to 33.

1 Eph. iv. 13, 14.

* See vi. sec. 12, note, below.


when unable to answer the questions I raised,
always bade me look forward to his coming,
when, by discoursing with him, these, and
greater difficulties if I had them, would be most
easily and amply cleared away. When at last
he did come, I found him to be a man of pleas-
ant speech, who spoke of the very same things
as they themselves did, although more fluently,
and in better language. But of what profit to
me was the elegance of my cup-bearer, since he
offered me not the more precious draught for
which I thirsted ? My ears were already sati-
ated with similar things ; neither did they
appear to me more conclusive, because better
expressed ; nor true, because oratorical ; nor the
spirit necessarily wise, because the face was
comely and the language eloquent. But they
who extolled him to me were not competent
judges ; and therefore, as he was possessed of
suavity of speech, he appeared to them to be
prudent and wise. Another sort of persons,
however, was, I was aware, suspicious even of
truth itself, if enunciated in smooth and flowing
language. But me, O my God, Thou hadst
already instructed by wonderful and mysterious
ways, and therefore I believe that Thou in-
structedst me because it is truth ; nor of truth
is there any other teacher — where or whenceso-
ever it may shine upon us^ — but Thee. From
Thee, therefore, I had now learned, that be-
cause a thing is eloquently expressed, it should
not of necessity seem to be true ; nor, because
uttered with stammering lips, should it be false;
nor, again, perforce true, because unskilfully
delivered ; nor consequently untrue, because
the language is fine ; but that wisdom and folly
are as food both wholesome and unwholesome,
and courtly or simple words as town-made or
rustic vessels, — and both kinds of food may be
served in either kind of dish.

That eagerness, therefore, with which


II.


had so long waited for this man was in trut
delighted with his action and feeling when dis-
puting, and the fluent and apt words with which
he clothed his ideas. I was therefore filled with
joy, and joined with others (and even exceeded
them) in exalting and praising him. It was,
however, a source of annoyance to me that I
was not allowed at those meetings of his audi-
tors to introduce and impart* any of those ques-
tions that troubled me in familiar exchange of
arguments with him. When I might speak, and
began, in conjunction with my friends, to engage
his attention at such times as it was not unseem-
ing for him to enter into a discussion with me.


i


* Sec. vii. sec. 15, below.

* " This was the old fashion of the East, where the scholars had
liberty to ask questions of their masters, and to move doubts as the
professors were reading, or so soon as the lecture was done. Thus
did our Saviour with the doctors (Luke ii. 46). So it is still in some
European Universities." — W. W.


Chap. VII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


83


and had mooted such questions as perplexed me,
I discovered him first to know nothing of the
liberal sciences save grammar, and that only in
an ordinary way. Having, however, read some
of Tully's Orations, a very few books of Seneca,
and some of the poets, and such {t\N volumes of
his own sect as were written coherently in Latin,
and being day by day practised in speaking, he so
acquired a sort of eloquence, which proved the
more delightful and enticing in that it was under
the control of ready tact, and a sort of native
grace. Is it not even as I recall, O Lord my
God, Thou judge of my conscience ? My heart
and my memory are laid before Thee, who
didst at that time direct me by the inscru-
table mystery of Thy Providence, and didst
set before my face those vile errors of mine, in
order that I might see and loathe them.

CH.A.P. VII. CLEARLY SEEING THE FALLACIES OK

THE MANICHTEANS, HE RETIRES FROM THEM,
BEING REMARKABLY AIDED BY GOD.

12. For when it became plain to me that he
was ignorant of those arts in which I had
believed him to excel, I began to despair of
his clearing up and explaining all the perplex-
ities which harassed me : though ignorant of
these, however, he might still have held the
truth of piety, had he not been a Manichaean.
For their books are full of lengthy fables^ con-
cerning the heaven and stars, the sun and moon,
and I had ceased to think him able to decide
in a satisfactory manner what I ardently desired,

1 We have referred in the note on iii. sec. 10, above, to the way in
which the Manichaeans parodied Scripture names. In these " fables "
this is remarlvably evidenced. " To these filthy rags of yours,"
says Augustin {Con. Faust, xx. 6), "you would unite the mystery
of the Trinity ; for you say that the Father dwells in a secret light,
the power of the Son in the sun, and His wisdom in the moon, and
the Holy Spirit in the air." The .Manicha;an doctrine as to the
mixture of the divine nature with the substance of evil, and the way
in which that nature was released by the " elect," has already been
pointed out (see note iii. sec. 18, above). The part of sun and moon,
also, in accomplishing this release, is alluded to in his £>e Mor.
Manich. " This part of God," he says (c. xx.xvi,), " is daily being
set free in all parts of the world, and restored to its own domain.
But in its passage upwards as vapour from earth to heaven, it enters
plants, because their roots are fixed in the earth, and so gives fertil-
ity and strength to all herbs and shrubs." These parts of God,
arrested in their rise by the vegetable world, were released, a.s above
stated, by the "elect." AH that escaped from them in the act of
eating, as well as what was set tree by evaporation, passed into the
sun and moon, as into a kind of purgatorial state — they being purer
light than the only recently emancipated good nature. In his letter
to Januarius {£/•. \v. 6),he tells us that the moon's waxing and
■waning were said by the Manichseans to be caused by its receiving
souls from matter as it were into a ship, and transferring them " into
the sun as into another ship." The sun was called Christ, and was
worshipped ; and accordingly we find Augustin, after alluding to
these monstrous doctrines, saying {Can. Faust, v. 11) : " If your
affections were set upon spiritual and intellectual good instead of
material forms, you would not pay homage to the material sun as a
divine substance and as the light of wisdom." Many other interest-
ing quotations might be added, but we m.ust content ourselves with
the following. In his Reply to Faustiis (xx. 6), he says : " You call
the sun a ship, so that you are not only astray worlds off, as the say-
ing is, but adrift. Next, while every one sees that the sun is round,
which is the form corresponding from its perfection to his position
among the heavenly bodies, you maintain that he is triangular [per-
haps in allusion to the early symbol of the Trinity] ; that is, that
his light shines on the earth through a triangular window in heaven.
Hence it is that you bend and bow your heads to the sun, while
you worship not this visible sun, but some imaginary ship, which
you suppose to be shining through a triangular opening."


— whether, on comparing these things with the
calculations I had read elsewhere, the explana-
tions contained in the works of Manichgeus were
preferable, or at any rate equally sound ? But
when I proposed that these subjects should be
deliberated upon and reasoned out, he very
modestly did not dare to endure the burden.
For he was aware that he had no knowledge of
these things, and was not ashamed to confess it.
For he was not one of those loquacious persons,
many of whom I had been troubled with, who
covenanted to teach me these things, and said
nothing ; but this man possessed a heart, which,
though not right towards Thee, yet was not alto-
gether false towards himself. For he was not
altogether ignorant of his own ignorance, nor
would he without due consideration be inveigled
in a controversy, from which he could neither
draw back nor extricate himself fairly. And
for that I was even more pleased with him, for
more beautiful is the modesty of an ingenuous
mind than the acquisition of the knowledge I
desired, — and such I found him to be in all the
more abstruse and subtle questions.

13. My eagerness after the writings of Mani-
chgeus having thus received a check, and des-
pairing even more of their other teachers, —
seeing that in sundry things which puzzled me,
he, so famous amongst them, had thus turned
out, — I began to occupy myself with him in the
study of that literature which he also much
affected, and which I, as Professor of Rhetoric,
was then engaged in teaching the young Car-
thaginian students, and in reading with him
either what he expressed a wish to hear, or I
deemed suited to his bent of mind. But all my
endeavours by which I had concluded to im-
prove in that sect, by acquaintance with that
man, came completely to an end : not that I
separated myself altogether from them, but, as
one who could find nothing better, I determined
in the meantime upon contenting myself with
what I had in any way lighted upon, unless, by
chance, something more desirable should pre-
sent itself. Thus that Faustus, who had en-
trapped so many to their death, — neither willing
nor witting it, — now began to loosen the snare
in which I had been taken. For Thy hands, O
my God, in the hidden design of Thy Provi-
dence, did not desert my soul ; and out of the
blood of my mother's heart, through the tears
that she poured out by day and by night, was a
sacrifice offered unto Thee for me ; and by mar-
vellous ways didst Thou deal with me.^ It was
Thou, O my God, who didst it, for the steps of
a man are ordered by the Lord, and He shall dis-
pose his way.* Or how can we procure salvation
but from Thy hand, remaking what it hath made ?


* Joel ii. 26.

* Ps. xxxvii. 23.


84


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book V,


CHAP. VIII. HE SETS OUT FOR ROME, HIS MOTHER

IN VAIN LAMENTING IT.

14. Thou dealedst with me, therefore, that I
should be persuaded to go to Rome, and teach
there rather what I was then teaching at Car-
thage. And how I was persuaded to do this, I
will not fail to confess unto Thee ; for in this
also the profoundest workings of Thy wisdom,
and Thy ever present mercy to usward, must be
pondered and avowed. It was not my desire to
go to Rome because greater advantages and
dignities were guaranteed me by the friends
who persuaded me into this, — although even at
this period I was influenced by these considera-
tions,— but my principal and almost sole motive
was, that I had been informed that the youths
studied more quietly there, and were kept under
by the control of more rigid discipline, so that
they did not capriciously and impudently rush
into the school of a master not their own, into
whose presence they were forbidden to enter
unless with his consent. At Carthage, on the
contrary, there was amongst the scholars a
shameful and intemperate license. They burst
in rudely, and, with almost furious gesticula-
tions, interrupt the system which any one may
have instituted for the good of his pupils.
Many outrages they perpetrate with astounding
phlegm, which would be punishable by law were
they not sustained by custom ; that custom show-
ing them to be the more worthless, in that they
now do, as according to law, what by Thy un-
changeable law will never be lawful. And they
fancy they do it with impunity, whereas the very
blindness whereby they do it is their punishment,
and they suffer far greater things than they do.
The manners, then, which as a student I would
not adopt, ^ I was compelled as a teacher to sub-
mit to from others ; and so I was too glad to go
where all who knew anything about it assured
me that similar things were not done. But
Thou, " my refuge and my portion in the land
of the living,"^ didst while at Carthage goad
me, so that I might thereby be withdrawn from
it, and exchange my worldly habitation for the
preservation of my soul ; whilst at Rome Thou
didst offer me enticements by which to attract
me there, by men enchanted with this dying
life, — the one doing insane actions, and the
other making assurances of vain things ; and,
in order to correct my footsteps, didst secretly
employ their and my perversity. For both
they who disturbed my tranquillity were blinded
by a shameful madness, and they who allured
me elsewhere smacked of the earth. And I,
who hated real misery here, sought fictitious
happiness there.

15. But the cause of my going thence and

1 See iiii. sec. 6, note, above.

2 Ps. cxlii. 5.


going thither, Thou, O God, knewest, yet re-
vealedst it not, either to me or to my mother,
who grievously lamented my journey, and went
with me as far as the sea. But I deceived her,
when she violently restrained me either that she
might retain me or accompany me, and I pre-
tended that I had a friend whom I could not
quit until he had a favourable wind to set sail.
And I lied to my mother — and such a mother !
— and got away. For this also Thou hast in
mercy pardoned me, saving me, thus replete
with abominable pollutions, from the waters of
the sea, for the water of Thy grace, whereby,
when I was purified, the fountains of my
mother's eyes should be dried, from which for
me she day by day watered the ground under
her face. And yet, refusing to go back without
me, it was with difhculty I persuaded her to re-
main that night in a place quite close to our
ship, where there was an oratory* in memory of
the blessed Cyprian. That night I secretly
left, but she was not backward in prayers and
weeping. And what was it, O Lord, that she,
with such an abundance of tears, was asking of
Thee, but that Thou wouldest not permit me to
sail ? But Thou, mysteriously counselling and
hearing the real purpose of her desire, granted
not what she then asked, in order to make me
what she was ever asking. The wind blew and
filled our sails, and withdrew the shore from
our sight ; and she, wild with grief, was there
on the morrow, and filled Thine ears with com-
plaints and groans, which Thou didst disregard ;
whilst, by the means of my longings. Thou wert
hastening me on to the cessation of all longing,
and the gross part of her love to me was
whipped out by the just lash of sorrow. But,
like all mothers, — though even more than
others, — she loved to have me with her, and
knew not what joy Thou wert preparing for her
by my absence. Being ignorant of this, she
did weep and mourn, and in her agony was seen
the inheritance of Eve, — seeking in sorrow what
in sorrow she had brought forth. And yet,
after accusing my perfidy and cruelty, she again
continued her intercessions for me with Thee,
returned to her accustomed place, and I to
Rome.

CHAP. IX. BEING ATTACKED BY FEVER, HE IS IN

GREAT DANGER.

16. And behold, there was I received by the
scourge of bodily sickness, and I was descend-
ing into hell burdened with all the sins that I
had committed, both against Thee, myself, and
others, many and grievous, over and above that
bond of original sin whereby we all die in
Adam.* For none of these things hadst Thou


3 See vi. sec. 2, note, below.
* I Cor. XV. 22.


Chap. X.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


85


forgiven me in Christ, neither had He "abol-
ished " by His cross " the enmity " ^ which, by
my sins, I had incurred with Thee. For how
could He, by the crucifixion of a phantasm,^
which I supposed Him to be? As true, then,
was the death of my soul, as that of His flesh
appeared to me to be untrue ; and as true the
death of His flesh as the life of my soul, which
believed it not, was false. The fever increas-
ing, I was now passing away and perishing.
For had I then gone hence, whither should I
have gone but into the fiery torments meet for
my misdeeds, in the truth of Thy ordinance ?
She was ignorant of this, yet, while absent,
prayed for me. But Thou, everywhere present,
hearkened to her where she was, and hadst pity
upon me where I was, that I should regain my
bodily health, although still frenzied in my sac-
rilegious heart. For all that peril did not make
me wish to be baptized, and I was better when,
as a lad, I entreated it of my mother's piety, as
I have already related and confessed.* But I
had grown up to my own dishonour, and all the
purposes of Thy medicine I madly derided,*
who wouldst not suffer me, though such a one,
to die a double death. Had my mother's heart
been smitten with this wound, it never could
have been cured. For I cannot sufficiently ex-
press the love she had for me, nor how she now
travailed for me in the spirit with a far keener
anguish than when she bore me in the flesh.

17. I cannot conceive, therefore, how she
could have been healed if such a death of mine
had transfixed the bowels of her love. Where
then would have been her so earnest, frequent,
and unintermitted prayers to Thee alone? But
couldst Thou, most merciful God, despise the
" contrite and humble heart " ^ of that pure and
prudent widow, so constant in alms-deeds, so
gracious and attentive to Thy saints, not per-
mitting one day to pass without oblation at Thy
altar, twice a day, at morning and even-tide,
coming to Thy church without intermission —
not for vain gossiping, nor old wives' "fables,"®

' Eph. ii. 15, and Col. i. 20, etc.

* The Manichaean belief in regard to the unreal nattire of Christ's
body may be gathered from Augustin's Reply to Faustus : "You
ask," argues Faustus (xxvi. i.), "if Jesus was not born, how did
He die? . . . In return I ask you, how did Elias not die, though
he was a man ? Could a mortal encroach upon the limits of immor-
tality, and could not Christ add to His immortality whatever expe-
rience of death was required? . . . Accordingly, if it is a good
argument that Jesus was a man because He died, it is an equally
good argument that Elias was not a man because he did not die.
. . . As, from the outset of His taking the likeness of man. He
underwent in appearance all the experiences of humanity, it was
quite consistent that He should complete the system by appearing
to die." So that with him the whole life of Jesus was a "phan-
tasm." His birth, circumcision, crucifixion, baptism, and tempta-
tion were {ibid, xxxii. 7) the mere result of the interpolation of
crafty men, or sprung from the ignorance of the apostles, when as
yet they had not reached perfection in knowledge. It is noticeable
that Augustin, referring to Eph. ii. 15, substitutes His cross for His
flesh, he, as a Manichaean, not believing in the real humanity of
"He Son of God. See iii. sec. 9, note, above.

* See i. sec. 10, above.

* See also Iv. sec. 8, above, where he derides his friend's baptism.

* Ps. Ii. 19. ^

* I Tim. V. 10.


but in order that she might listen to Thee in
Thy sermons, and Thou to her in her prayers?^
Couldst Thou — Thou by whose gift she was such
— despise and disregard without succouring the
tears of such a one, wherewith she entreated
Thee not for gold or silver, nor for any chang-
ing or fleeting good, but for the salvation of
the soul of her son ? By no means, Lord.
Assuredly Thou wert near, and wert hearing
and doing in that method in which Thou hadst
predetermined that it should be done. Far be
it from Thee that Thou shouldst delude her in
those visions and the answers she had from
Thee, — some of which I have spoken of,* and
others not,* — which she kept^" in her faithful
breast, and, always petitioning, pressed upon
Thee as Thine autograph. For Thou, "because
Thy mercy endureth for ever," " condescendest
to those whose debts Thou hast pardoned, to
become likewise a debtor by Thy promises.

CHAP. X. WHEN HE HAD LEFT THE MANICH^-

ANS, HE RETAINED HIS DEPRAVED OPINIONS
CONCERNING SIN AND THE ORIGIN OF THE
SAVIOUR.

18. Thou restoredst me then from that ill-
ness, and made sound the son of Thy hand-
maid meanwhile in body, that he might live
for Thee, to endow him with a higher and


' Watts gives the following note here : — " Oblations were those
offerings of bread, meal, or wine, for making of the Eucharist, or of
alms besides for the poor, which the primitive Christians every time
they communicated brought to the church, where it was received
by the deacons, who presented them to the priest or bishop. Here
note : (i) They communicated daily ; (2) they had service morning
and evening, and two sermons a day many times," etc. An inter-
esting trace of an old use in this matter of oblations is found in the
Queen's Coronation Service. After other oblations had been
offered, the Queen knelt before the Archbishop and presented to
him " oblations" of bread and wine yc;?" the Holy Communion.
See also Palmer's Origines Littirgicoc , iv. 8, who demonstrates by
reference to patristic writers that the custom was universal in the
primitive Church : — " But though all the churches of the East and
West agreed in this respect, they differed in appointing the time
and place at which the oblations of the people were received." It
would appear from the following account of early Christian wor-
ship, that in the time of Justin Martyr the oblations were collected
after the reception of the Lord's Supper. In his First Apology we
read (c. Ixvii.) : " On the day called Simday [ toO rjAiou Afyo^eVjj
rjiaepa] all who live in cities or in the country gather together to one
place, and the memoirs of the apostles or the writings of the pro-
phets are read, as long as time permits them. When the reader
has ceased, the president [6 Trpoeo-Tuj?] verbally instructs, and ex-
horts to the imitation of these good things. Then we all rise
together and pray ftt'/xas Tre^Trojuei'], and, as we before said, when
our prayer is ended, bread and wine and water are brought, and
the president in like manner offers prayers and thanksgivings
according to his abilitj' fKaye renders (p. 89) ev^as omoioj? koX
€v;^apto"Tia?, offT/ 5ui'a/xt5 avToj, a va 7r€ fx ttc t , "with his
utmost power"], and the people assent, saying Amen; and there
is a distribution to each, and a participation of that over which
thanks had been given, and to those who are absent a portion is
sent by the deacons. And they who are well-to-do, and willing,
give what each thinks fit ; and what is collected [to o-vAAeyo/xefoi']
is deposited with the president, who succours the orphans and wid-
ows, and those who, through sickness or any other cause, are in want,
and those who are in bonds, and the stranger sojourning among us,
and, in a word, takes care of all who are in need." The whole
passage is given, as portions of it will be found to have a bearing
on other parts of the Con/essio7is. Bishop Kaye's Justin Afartyr,
c. iv., may be referred to for his view of the controverted points in
the passage. See also Bingham's Antiquities, ii. 2-9; and notes
to vi. sec. 2, and ix. sees. 6 and 27, below.

8 See above, iii. 11, 12.

9 Ihid. iii. 12.
'0 Luke li. 19.
11 Ps. cxvui. 1,


86


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book V.


more enduring health. And even then at Rome
I joined those deluding and deluded " saints;"
not their "hearers" only, — of the number of
whom was he in whose house I had fallen ill,
and had recovered, — but those also whom they
designate "The Elect."' For it still seemed
to me " that it was not we that sin, but that I
know not what other nature sinned in us."*
And it gratified my pride to be free from blame,
and, after I had committed any fault, not to
acknowledge that I had done any, — " that Thou
mightest heal my soul because it had sinned
against Thee;"^ but I loved to excuse it, and
to accuse something else (I wot not what) which
was with me, but was not I. But assuredly it
was wholly I, and my impiety had divided me
against myself; and that sin was all the more
incurable in that I did not deem myself a sin-
ner. And execrable iniquity it was, O God
omnipotent, that I would rather have Thee to
be overcome in me to my destruction, than
myself of Thee to salvation ! Not yet, there-
fore, hadst Thou set a watch before my mouth,
and kept the door of my lips, that my heart
might not incline to wicked speeches, to make
excuses of sins, with men that work iniquity*
— and, therefore, was I still united with their
"Elect."

19. But now, hopeless of making proficiency
in that false doctrine, even those things with
which I had decided upon contenting myself,
providing that I could find nothing better, I
now held more loosely and negligently. For I
was half inclined to believe that those philoso-
phers whom they call "Academics " ° were more


1 See iv. sec. i, note, above.

2 iv. sec. 26, note 2, above.
' Ps. xli. 4.

* Ps. c.xli. 3, 4, Old Vers. See also Augustin's Commentary on
the Psalms, where, using his Septuagint version, he applies this
passage to the Manicheeans.

6 "Amongst these philosophers," i.e. those who have founded their
systems on denial, "some are satisfied with denying certainty, ad-
mitting at the same time probability, and these are the New Aca-
demics ; the others, who are the Pyrrhonists, have denied even this
probability, and have maintained that all things are equally certain
and uncertain" {Port. Roy. Log. iv, i). There are, according to
the usual divisions, three Academies, the old, the middle, and the
new : and some subdivide the middle and the new each into two
schools, making five schools of thought in all. These begin with
Plato, the founder (387 B.C.), and continue to the fifth school,
founded by Antiochus (83 B.C.), who, by combining his teachings
with that of Aristotle and Zeno, prepared the way for Neo-Platon-
ism and its development of the dogmatic side of Plato's teaching.
In the second Academic school, founded by Arcesilas, — of whom
Aristo, the Stoic, parodying the line in the Iliad (v'l. 181), Ylpoade
Kewv, OTTi^ei' Sk SpaKuii', fxifjayi 6e xifxaipa, said sarcastically he
was " Plato in front, Pyrrho behind, and Diodorus in the middle,"
— the " sceptical" tendency in Plalonism began to develope itself,
which, under Carneades, was expanded into the doctrine of the
third Academic school. Arcesilas had been a pupil of Polemo
when he was head of the old Academy. Zeno also, dissatisfied
with the cynical philosophy of Crates, had learnt Platonic doctrine
from Polemo, and was, as Cicero tells us {De Fin. iv. 16), greatly
influenced by his teaching. Zeno, however, soon founded his own
school of Stoical philosophy, which was violently opposed by Arce-
silas (Cicero, Acad. Post. i. 12). Arcesilas, according to Cicero
(ibid.), taught his pupils that we cannot know anything, not even
that we are unable to know. It is exceedingly probable, however,
that he taught esoterically the doctrines of Plato to those of his
pupils he thought able to receive them, keeping them back from the
multitude because of the prevalence of the new doctrine. This ap-
pears to have been Augustin's view when he had arrived at a fuller


sagacious than the rest, in that they held that
we ought to doubt everything, and ruled that
man had not the power of comprehending any
truth ; for so, not yet realizing their meaning,
I also was fully persuaded that they thought just
as they are commonly held to do. And I did
not fail frankly to restrain in my host that as-
surance which I observed him to have in those
fictions of which the works of Manichaeus are
full. Notwithstanding, I was on terms of more
intimate friendship with them than with others
who were not of this heresy. Nor did I defend
it with my former ardour ; still my familiarity
with that sect (many of them being concealed
in Rome) made me slower® to seek any other
way, — particularly since I was hopeless of find-
ing the truth, from which in Thy Church, O
Lord of heaven and earth. Creator of all things
visible and invisible, they had turned me aside,
— and it seemed to me most unbecoming to
believe Thee to have the form of human flesh,
and to be bounded by the bodily lineaments of
our members. And because, when I desired to
meditate on my God, I knew not what to think
of but a mass of bodies' (for what was not such
did not seem to me to be), this was the greatest
and almost sole cause of my inevitable error.

20. For hence I also believed evil to be a
similar sort of substance, and to be possessed
of its own foul and misshapen mass — whether
dense, which they denominated earth, or thin
and subtle, as is the body of the air, which they
fancy some malignant spirit crawling through
that earth. And because a piety — such as it
was — compelled me to believe that the good
God never created any evil nature, I conceived
two masses, the one opposed to the other, both
infinite, but the evil the more contracted, the
good the more expansive. And from this mis-
chievous commencement the other profanities
followed on. me. For when my mind tried to
revert to the Catholic faith, I was cast back,
since what I had held to be the Catholic faith
was not so. And it appeared to me more de-


knowledge of their doctrines than that he possessed at the time re-
ferred to in his Coti/essions . In his treatises against the Academic-
ians (iii. 17) he maintains the wisdom of Arcesilas in this matter.
He says : "As the multitude are prone to rush into false opinions,
and, from being accustomed to bodies, readily, but to their hurt,
believe eirerj'thing to be corporeal, this most acute and learned man
determined rather to unteach those who had suffered from bad teach-
ing, than to teach those whom he did not think teachable." Again,
in the first of his Letters, alluding to these treatises, he says : " It
seems to me to be suitable enough to the times in which they flour-
ished, that whatever issued pure from the fountain-head of Platonic
philosophy should be rather conducted into dark and thorny thickets
for the refreshment of a verj' few ;«<■«, than left to flow in open
meadow-land, where it would be impossible to keep it clear and pure
from the inroads of the vulgar herd. I use the word ' herd ' advis-
edly, for what is more brutish than the opinion that the soul is mate-
rial? " and more to the same purpose. In his De Cjt. Dei, xix. 18,
he contrasts the uncertainty ascribed to the doctrines of these teachers
with the certainty of the Christian faith. See Burton's Bainpton
Lectures, note 33, and Archer Butler's Ancient Philosophy, ii. 313,
348, etc. See also vii. sec. 13, note, below.

^ See iii. sec. 21, above.

7 See iv. sees. 3, 12, and 31, above.


Chap, XIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


87


vout to look upon Thee, my God, — to whom I
make confession of Thy mercies, — as infinite, at
least, on other sides, although on that side where
the mass of evil was in opposition to Thee^ I
was compelled to confess Thee finite, that if on
every side I should conceive Thee to be confined
by the form of a human body. And better did
it seem to me to believe that no evil had been
created by Thee — which to me in my ignorance
appeared not only some substance, but a bodily
one, because I had no conception of the mind
excepting as a subtle body, and that diffused in
local spaces — than to believe that anything could
emanate from Thee of such a kind as I consid-
ered the nature of evil to be. And our very
Saviour Himself, also, Thine only-begotten,^ I
believed to have been reached forth, as it were,
for our salvation out of the lump of Thy most
effulgent mass, so as to believe nothing of Him
but what I was able to imagine in my vanity.
Such a nature, then, I thought could not be
born of the Virgin Mary without being mingled
with the flesh ; and how that which I had thus
figured to myself could be mingled without
being contaminated, I saw not. I was afraid,
therefore, to believe Him to be born in the flesh,
lest I should be compelled to believe Him con-
taminated by the flesh.* Now will Thy spiritual
ones blandly and lovingly smile at me if they
shall read these my confessions ; yet such was I.

CHAP. XI. HELPIDIUS DISPUTED WELL AGAINST

THE MANICH.t:ANS AS TO THE AUTHENTICITY
OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

21. Furthermore, whatever they had cen-
sured* in Thy Scriptures I thought impossible
to be defended ; and yet sometimes, indeed, I
desired to confer on these several points with
some one well learned in those books, and to
try what he thought of them. For at this time
the words of one Helpidius, speaking and dis-
puting face to face against the said Manichseans,
had begun to move me even at Carthage, in that
he brought forth things from the Scriptures not
easily withstood, to which their answer appeared
to me feeble. And this answer they did not
give forth publicly, but only to us in private,
— when they said that the writings of the New
Testament had been tampered with by I know

1 See iv. 26, note 2, above.

* See above, sec, 12, note.

* The dualistic belief of the Manichasan ever led him to contend
that Christ only appeared in a resemblance of flesh, and did not
touch its substance so as to be defiled. Hence Faustus characteris-
tically speaks of the Incarnation (Con. Faust, xxxii. 7) as "the
shameful birth of Jesus from a woman," and when pressed (ibid.
xi. I) with such passages as, Christ was " born of the seed of David
according to the flesh" (Rom. 1. 3), he would fall back upon what

. in these days we are familiar with as that " higher criticism," which
rejects such parts of Scripture as it is inconvenient to receive. Paul,
he said, then only " spoke as a child" (i Cor ,\iii. 11), but when he
became a man in doctrine, he put away childish things, and then
declared, " Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth know we Him no more." See above, sec. 16, note 3.

* See iii. sec. 14, above.


not whom, who were desirous of ingrafting the
Jewish law upon the Christian faith ; ^ but they
themselves did not bring forward any uncor-
rupted copies.® But I, thinking of corporeal
things, very much ensnared and in a measure
stifled, was oppressed by those masses ; ' pant-
ing under which for the breath of Thy Truth,
I was not able to breathe it pure and undefiled.

CHAP. XII. PROFESSING RHETORIC AT ROME, HE

DISCOVERS THE FRAUD OF HIS SCHOLARS.

2 2, Then began I assiduously to practise that
for which I came to Rome — the teaching of
rhetoric ; and first to bring together at my
home some to whom, and through whom, I
had begun to be known ; when, behold, I
learnt that other offences were committed in
Rome which I had not to bear in Africa. For
those subvertings by abandoned young men were
not practised here, as I had been informed ; yet,
suddenly, said they, to evade paying their mas-
ter's fees, many of the youths conspire together,
and remove themselves to another, — breakers
of faith, who, for the love of money, set a
small value on justice. These also my heart
" hated," though not with a "■ perfect hatred ;" *
for, perhaps, I hated them more in that I was to
suffer by them, than for the illicit acts they com-
mitted. Such of a truth are base persons, and
they are unfaithful to Thee, loving these transi-
tory mockeries of temporal things, and vile gain,
which begrimes the hand that lays hold on it ;
and embracing the fleeting world, and scorning
Thee, who abidest, and invitest to return, and
pardonest the prostituted human soul when it
returneth to Thee. And now I hate such
crooked and perverse men, although I love
them if they are to be corrected so as to pre-
fer the learning they obtain to money, and to
learning Thee, O God, the truth and fulness
of certain good and most chaste peace. But
then was the wish stronger in me for my own
sake not to suffer them evil, than was the wish
that they should become good for Thine,

CHAP. XIII. HE IS SENT TO MILAN, THAT HE,

ABOUT TO TEACH RHETORIC, ^LAY BE KNOWN
BY AMBROSE.

23. When, therefore, they of Milan had sent


6 On this matter reference may be made to Con. Faust, xviii. i,
3; xix. 5, 6; xxxiii. i, 3.

6 They might well not like to give the answer in public, for, as
Augustin remarks {De li/or. Ecctes. Cath. sec. 14), every one could
see ■' that this is all that is left lor men to say when it is proved that
they are wrong." The astonishment that he experienced now, that
they did " not bring forward any uncornipted copies," had fast hold
of him, and after his conversion he confronted them on this very
ground. " You ought to bring forward," he says (iliid. sec. 61),
" another manuscript with the same contents, but incorrupt and
more correct, with only the passage wanting which you charge with
being spurious. . . . You say you will not, lest you be suspected of
corrupting it. This is your usual reply, and a true one." See also
De Mor. Munich, sec. 55 ; and Con. Faust, xi. 2, xiii. 5, xviii. 7,
xxii. 15, .x.xxii. 16.

' See above, sec. 19, Fin.

* Ps. cxxxix. 22.


■88


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book V,


to Rome to the prefect of the city, to provide
them with a teacher of rhetoric for their city,
and to despatch him at the public expense, I
made interest through those identical persons,
drunk with Manichsean vanities, to be freed
from whom I was going away, — neither of us,
however, being aware of it, — that Symmachus,
the then prefect, having proved me by propos-
ing a subject, would send me. And to Milan
I came, unto Ambrose the bishop, known to the
whole world as among the best of men. Thy
devout servant ; whose eloquent discourse did
at that time strenuously dispense unto Thy
people the flour of Thy wheat, the "gladness"
of Thy "oil," and the sober intoxication of
Thy "wine."^ To him was I unknowingly
led by Thee, that by him I might knowingly
be led to Thee. That man of God received
me like a father, and looked with a benevolent
and episcopal kindliness on my change of abode.
And I began to love him, not at first, indeed,
as a teacher of the truth, — which I entirely de-
spaired of in Thy Church, — but as a man friendly
to myself. And I studiously hearkened to him
preaching to the people, not with the motive I
should, but, as it were, trying to discover
whether his eloquence came up to the fame
thereof, or flowed fuller or lower than was
asserted ; and I hung on his words intently,
but of the matter I was but as a careless and
contemptuous spectator ; and I was delighted
with the pleasantness of his speech, more eru-
dite, yet less cheerful and soothing in manner,
than that of Faustus. Of the matter, however,
there could be no comparison ; for the latter
was straying amid Manichaean deceptions, whilst
the former was teaching salvation most soundly.
But "salvation is far from the wicked,"^ such
as I then stood before him ; and yet I was
drawing nearer gradually and unconsciously.

CHAP. XIV. HAVING HEARD THE BISHOP, HE

PERCEIVES THE FORCE OF THE CATHOLIC
FAITH, YET DOUBTS, AFTER THE MANNER OF
THE MODERN ACADEMICS.

24. For although I took no trouble to learn
what he spake, but only to hear how he spake
(for that empty care alone remained to me,
despairing of a way accessible for man to Thee),
yet, together with the words which I prized,
there came into my mind also the things about
which I was careless ; for I could not separate
them. And whilst I opened my heart to admit
"how skilfully he spake," there also entered

1 Ps. iv. 7, and civ. 15.
* Ps. cxix 155.


with it, but gradually, "and how truly he
spake ! " For first, these things also had begun
to appear to me to be defensible ; and the Cath-
olic faith, for which I had fancied nothing could
be said against the attacks of the Manichaeans,
I now conceived might be maintained without
presumption ; especially after I had heard one
or two parts of the Old Testament explained,
and often allegorically — which when I accepted
literally, I was "killed" spiritually.* Many
places, then, of those books having been ex-
pounded to me, I now blamed my despair in
having believed that no reply could be made to
those who hated and derided* the Law and the
Prophets. Yet I did not then see that for that
reason the Catholic way was to be held because
it had its learned advocates, who could at length,
and not irrationally, answer objections ; nor that
what I held ought therefore to be condemned
because both sides were equally defensible. For
that way did not appear to me to be vanquished;
nor yet did it seem to me to be victorious.

25. Hereupon did I earnestly bend my mind
to see if in any way I could possibly prove the
Manichsans guilty of falsehood. Could I have
realized a spiritual substance, all their strong-
holds would have been beaten down, and cast
utterly out of my mind ; but I could not. But
yet, concerning the body of this world, and the
whole of nature, which the senses of the flesh
can attain unto, I, now more and more consid-
ering and comparing things, judged that the
greater part of the philosophers held much the
more probable opinions. So, then, after the
manner of the Academics (as they are sup-
posed),^ doubting of everything and fluctuating
between all, I decided that the Manichasans were
to be abandoned ; judging that, even while in
that period of doubt, I could not remain in a
sect to which I preferred some of the philoso-
phers ; to which philosophers, however, because
they were without the saving name of Christ, I
utterly refused to commit the cure of my faint-
ing soul. I resolved, therefore, to be a cate-
chumen® in the Catholic Church, which my
parents had commended to me, until something
settled should manifest itself to me whither I
might steer my course.'


3 I Cor. xiii. 12, and 2 Cor. iii. 6. See vi. sec. 6, note, below.

♦ He frequently alludes to this scoffing spirit, so characteristic of
these heretics. As an example, he says {in Ps. cxlvi. 13) : " There
has sprung up a certain accursed sect of the Manichseans which
derides the Scriptures it takes and reads. It wishes to censure
what it does not understand, and by disturbing and censuring
what it understands not, has deceived many." See also sec. 16,
and iv. sec. 8, above.

6 See above, sec. 19, and note.

6 See vi. sec. 2, note, below.

' In his Benefit of Believing, Augustin adverts to the above ex-
periences with a view to the conviction of his friend Honoratus, who
was then a Manichsean.


BOOK VI.


ATTAINING HIS THIRTIETH YEAR, HE, UNDER THE ADMONITION OF THE DISCOURSES OF AMBROSE, DIS-
COVERED MORE AND MORE THE TRUTH OF THE CATHOLIC DOCTRINE, AND DELIBERATES AS TO THE
BETTER REGULATION OF HIS LIFE.


CHAP.
TO


I.


-HIS MOTHER HAVING FOLLOWED HIM


MILAN, DECLARES THAT SHE WILL NOT


DIE BEFORE HER SON SHALL HAVE EMBRACED
THE CATHOLIC FAITH.

I. O Thou, my hope from my youth, ^ where
wert Thou to me, and whither hadst Thou gone?
For in truth, hadst Thou not created me, and
made a difference between me and the beasts of
the field and fowls of the air? Thou hadst made
me wiser than they, yet did I wander about in
dark and slippery places, and sought Thee
abroad out of myself, and found not the God
of my heart ; ^ and had entered the depths of
the sea, and distrusted and despaired finding
out the truth. By this time my mother, made
strong by her piety, had come to me, following
me over sea and land, in all perils feeling secure
in Thee. For in the dangers of the sea she
comforted the very sailors (to whom the inex-
perienced passengers, when alarmed, vv^ere wont
rather to go for comfort), assuring them of a
safe arrival, because she had been so assured by
Thee in a vision. She found me in grievous
danger, through despair of ever finding truth.
But when I had disclosed to her that I was now
no longer a Manichaean, though not yet a Cath-
olic Christian, she did not leap for joy as at what
was unexpected ; although she was now reassured
as to that part of my misery for which she had
mourned me as one dead, but who would be
raised to Thee, carrying me forth upon the bier
of her thoughts, that Thou mightest say unto
the widow's son, " Young man, I say unto Thee,
arise," and he should revive, and begin to speak,
and Thou shouldest deliver him to his mother.^
Her heart, then, was not agitated with any vio-
lent exultation, when she had heard that to be
already in so great a part accomplished which
she daily, with tears, entreated of Thee might
be done, — that though I had not yet grasped the
truth, I was rescued from falsehood. Yea,
rather, for that she was fully confident that


1 Ps. Ixxi. 5.

* See iv. sec. 18, note, above.

• Luke vii. 12-15.


Thou, who hadst promised the whole, wouldst
give the rest, most calmly, and with a breast
full of confidence, she replied to me, "She
believed in Christ, that before she departed
this life, she would see me a Catholic be-
liever."* And thus much said she to me; but
to Thee, O Fountain of mercies, poured she
out more frequent prayers and tears, that Thou
wouldest hasten Thy aid, and enlighten my
darkness ; and she hurried all the more assidu-
ously to the church, and hung upon the words
of Ambrose, praying for the fountain of water
that springeth up into everlasting life.^ For she
loved that man as an angel of God, because she
knew that it was by him that I had been
brought, for the present, to that perplexing
state of agitation* I was now in, through which
she was fully persuaded that I should pass from


* Fidelem Catholicum — those who are baptized being usually des-
ignated Fideles. The following extract from Kaye's 'i'ertuliian
(pp. 230, 231) is worthy of note ; — " As the converts from heathen-
ism, to use TertuUian's expression, were not born, but became Chris-
tians \Jiu71t, }ion iiasciiniur, Christiant\, they went through a
course of instruction in the principles and doctrines of the gospel,
and were subjected to a strict probation before they were admitted
to the rite of baptism. In this stage of their progress they were
called catechumens, of whom, according to Suicer, there were two
classes, — one called ' Audientes,' who had only entered upon their
course, and begun to hear the word of God ; the other, avvai.TovvTt<;,
or ' Competentes,' who had made such advances in Christian knowl-
edge and practice as to be qualified to appear at the font. Tertullian,
however, appears either not to have known or to have neglected
this distinction, since he applies the names of ' Audientes ' and ' Au-
ditores ' indifferently to all who had not partaken of the rite of bap-
tism. When the catechumens had given full proof of the ripeness
of their knowledge, and of the stedfastness of their faith, they were
baptized, admitted to the table of the Lord, and styled Fideles. The
importance which Tertullian attached to this previous probation of
the candidates for baptism, appears from the fact that he founds
upon the neglect of it one of his charges against the heretics.
' Among them,' he says, ' no distinction is made between the cate-
chumen and the faithful or confirmed Christian ; the catechumen is
pronounced fit for baptism before he is instructed ; all come in indis-
criminately ; all hear, all pray together.' " There were certain pecu-
liar forms used in the admission of catechumens ; as, for example,
anointing with oil, imposition of hands, and the consecration and
giving of salt; and when, from the progress of Christianity, Ter-
tuUian's above description as to converts from heathenism had
ceased to be correct, these forms were continued in many churches
as part of the baptismal service, whether of infants or adults. See
Palmer's Origines Liturgiae, v. i, and also i. sec. 17, above, where
Augustin says : " I was signed with the sign of the cross, and was
seasoned with His salt, even from the womb of my mother."

5 John iv. 14.

6 " Sermons," says Goodwin in his Evangelical Communicant,
"are, for the most part, as showers of rain that water for th'e in-
stant ; such as may tickle the ear and warm the affections, and put
the soul into a posture of obedience. Hence it is that men are oft-
times sermon-sick, as some are sea-sick ; verj' ill, much troubled for
the present, but by and by all is well again as they were."


89


90


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VI.


sickness unto health, after an excess, as it were,
of a sharper fit, which doctors term tlie " crisis."

CHAP. II. SHE, ON THE PROHIBITION OF AM-
BROSE, ABSTAINS FROM HONOURING THE MEM-
ORY OF THE MARTYRS.

2. When, therefore, my mother had at one
time — as was her custom in Africa — brought to
the oratories built in the memory of the saints'
certain cakes, and bread, and wine, and was
forbidden by the door-keeper, so soon as she
learnt that it was the bishop who had forbidden
it, she so piously and obediently acceded to it,
that I myself marvelled how readily she could
bring herself to accuse her own custom, rather
than question his prohibition. For wine-bibbing
did not take possession of her spirit, nor did the
love of wine stimulate her to hatred of the truth,
as it doth too many, both male and female, who
nauseate at a song of sobriety, as men well drunk
at a draught of water. But she, when she had
brought her basket with the festive meats, of
which she would taste herself first and give the
rest away, would never allow herself more than
one little cup of wine, diluted according to her
own temperate palate, which, out of courtesy,
she would taste. And if there were many ora-
tories of departed saints that ought to be hon-
oured in the same way, she still carried round


1 That is, as is explained further on in the section, the Martyrs.
Tertullian gives us many indications of the veneration in which the
martyrs were held towards the close of the second century. The
anniversary of the martyr's death was called his natalitium , or
natal day, as his martyrdom ushered him into eternal life, and obla-
tiones pro de/unctis were then offered. (De E.rhor. Cast. c. n ;
De Coro. c. 3). Many extravagant things were said about the glory
of martyrdom, with the view, doubtless, of preventing apostasy in
time of persecution. It was described {De Bap. c. 16; and De Pat.
c. 13) as a second baptism, and said to secure for a man immediate
entrance into heaven, and complete enjoyment of its happiness.
These views developed in Augustin's time into all the wildness of
Donatism. Augustin gives us an insight into the customs prevailing
in his day, and their significance, which greatly illustrates the pres-
ent section. In his De Civ. Dei, viii. 27, we read : " But, neverthe-
less, we do not build temples, and ordain priests, rites, and sacrifices
for these same martyrs ; for they are not our gods, but their God is
our God. Certainly we honour their reliquaries, as the memorials
of holy men of God, who strove for the truth even to the death of
their bodies, that the true religion might be made known, and false
and fictitious religions exposed. . . . But who ever heard a priest
of the faithful, standing at an altar built for the honour and worship
of God over the holy body of some martyr, say in the prayers, I
oflFer to thee a sacrifice, O Peter, or O Paul, or O Cyprian? For it
is to God that sacrifices are offered at their tombs, — the God who
made them both men and martyrs, and associated them with holy
angels in celestial honour ; and the reason why we pay such hon-
ours to their_ memory is, that by so doing we may both give thanks
to the true God for their victories, and, by recalling them afresh to
remembrance, may stir ourselves up to imitate them by seeking to
obtain like crowns and palms, calling to our help that same God
on whom they called. Therefore, whatever honours the religious
may pay in the places of the martyrs, they are but honours ren-
dered to their memory \ornamenta inemoriarunt], not sacred rites
or sacrifices offered to dead men as to gods. And even such as
bring thither food — which, indeed, is not done by the better Chris-
tians, and in most places of the world is not done at all — do so in
order that it may be sanctified to them through the merits of the
martyrs, in the name of the Lord of the martyrs, first presenting the
food and offering prayer, and thereafter taking it away to be eaten,
or to be in part bestowed upon the needy. But he who knows the
one sacrifice of Christians, which is the sacrifice offered in those
places, also knows that these are not sacrifices offered to the mar-
tyrs." He speaks to the same effect in Book xxii. sec. 10; and in
his Reply to Faustus (xx. 21), who had charged the Christians with
imitating the Pagans, " and appeasing the ' shades ' of the departed
with wine and food." See v. sec. 17, note.


with her the selfsame cup, to be used every-
where ; and this, which was not only very much
watered, but was also very tepid with carrying
about, she would distribute by small sips to those
around ; for she sought their devotion, not pleas-
ure. As soon, therefore, as she found this cus-
tom to be forbidden by that famous preacher
and most pious prelate, even to those who would
use it with moderation, lest thereby an occasion
of excess* might be given to such as were
drunken, and because these, so to say, festivals
in honour of the dead were very like unto the
superstition of the Gentiles, she most willingly
abstained from it. And in lieu of a basket
filled with fruits of the earth, she had learned
to bring to the oratories of the martyrs a heart
full of more purified petitions, and to give all that
she could to the poor;^ that so the communion
of the Lord's body might be rightly celebrated
there, where, after the example of His passion,
the martyrs had been sacrificed and crowned.
But yet it seems to me, O Lord my God, and
thus my heart thinks of it in thy sight, that my
mother perhaps would not so easily have given
way to the relinquishment of this custom had it
been forbidden by another whom she loved not
as Ambrose,* whom, out of regard for my salva-
tion, she loved most dearly ; and he loved her
truly, on account of her most religious conver-
sation, whereby, in good works so " fervent In
spirit,"* she frequented the church ; so that he
would often, when he saw me, burst forth into
her praises, congratulating me that I had such
a mother — little knowing what a son she had in
me, who was in doubt as to all these things.


' Following the example of Ambrose, Augustin used all his in-
fluence and eloquence to correct such shocking abuses in the
churches. In his letter to Alypius, Bishop of Thagaste (when as
yet only a presbyter assisting the venerable Valerius), he gives an
account of his efforts to overcome them in the church of Hippo.
The following passage is instructive (Ep. xxix. g) :— " I explained to
them the circumstances out of which this custom seems to have nec-
essarily risen in the Church, namely, that when, in the peace which
came after such numerous and violent persecutions, crowds of
heathen who wished to assume the Christian religion were kept
back, because, having been accustomed to celebrate the feasts
connected with their worship of idols in revelling and drunkenness,
they could not easily refrain from pleasures so hurtful and so hab-
itual, it had seemed good to our ancestors, making for the time a
concession to this infirmity, to permit them to celebrate, instead of
the festivals which they renounced, other feasts in honour of the
holy martyrs, which were observed, not as before with a profane
design, but with similar self-indulgence."

3 See v. sec. 17, note 5, above.

■1 On another occasion, when Monica's mind was exercised as to
non-essentials, Ambrose gave her advice which has perhaps given
origin to the proverb, " When at Rome, do as Rome does." It will
be found in the letter to Casulanus (Ep. xxxvi. 32), and is as fol-
lows : — " When my mother was with me in that city, I, as being
only a catechumen, felt no concern about these questions; but it
was to her a question causing anxiety, whether she ought, after the
custom of our own town, to fast on the Saturday, or, after the cus-
tom of the church of Milan, not to fast. To deliver her from per-
plexity, I put the question to the man of God whom 1 have first
named. He answered, ' What else can I recommend to others than
what I do myself? ' When I thought that by this he intended
simply to prescribe to us that we should take food on Saturdays, —
for I knew this to be his own practice, — he, following me, added
these words : ' When I am here I do not fast on Saturday, but when
I am at Rome I do ; whatever church you may come to, conform to
its custom, if you would avoid either receiving or giving offence.' "
We find the same incident referred to in Ep. liv. 3.

6 Rom. xii. 11.


Chap. IV.j


THE CONFESSIOxNS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


91


and did not imagine the way of life could be
found out.


CHAP. III. — AS AMBROSE WAS OCCUPIED WITH
BUSINESS AND STUDY, AUGUSTIN COULD SEL-
DOM CONSULT HIM CONCERNING THE HOLY
SCRIPTURES.

3. Nor did I now groan in my prayers that
Thou wouldest help me; but my miud was
wholly intent on knowledge, and eager to dis-
pute. And Ambrose himself I esteemed a
happy man, as the world counted happiness,
in that such great personages held him in
honour; only his celibacy appeared to me a
painful thing. But what hope he cherished,
what struggles he had against the temptations
that beset his very excellences, what solace in
adversities, and what savoury joys Thy bread
possessed for the hidden mouth of his heart
when ruminating! on it, I could neither con-
jecture, nor had I experienced. Nor did he
know my embarrassments, nor the pit of my
danger. For I could not request of him what
I wished as I wished, in that I was debarred
from hearing and speaking to him by crowds
of busy people, whose infirmities he devoted
himself to. With whom when he was not
engaged (which was but a little time), he either
was refreshing his body with necessary suste-
nance, or his mind with reading. But while
reading, his eyes glanced over the pages, and
his heart searched out the sense, but his voice
and tongue were silent. Ofttimes, when we
had come (for no one was forbidden to enter,
nor was it his custom that the arrival of those
who came should be announced to him), we saw
him thus reading to himself, and never other-
wise ; and, having long sat in silence (for who
durst interrupt one so intent ?), we were fain to
depart, inferring that in the little time he secured
for the recruiting of his mind, free from the
clamour of other men's business, he was un-
willing to be taken off. And perchance he was
fearful lest, if the author he studied should ex-
press aught vaguely, some doubtful and attentive
hearer should ask him to expound it, or to dis-
cuss some of the more abstruse questions, as


that, his time being thus occupied, he could not
turn over as many volumes as he wished ; al-
though the preservation of his voice, which was
very easily weakened, might be the truer reason
for his reading to himself. But whatever was
his motive in so doing, doubtless in such a man
was a good one.

4. But verily no opportunity could I find of
ascertaining what I desired from that Thy so
holy oracle, his breast, unless the thing might
be entered into briefly. But those surgings in
me required to find him at full leisure, that I
might pour them out to him, but never were
they able to find him so ; and I heard him,
indeed, every Lord's day, "rightly dividing
the word of truth ' ' ' among the people ; and
I was all the more convinced that all those knots
of crafty calumnies, which those deceivers of
ours had knit against the divine books, could
be unravelled. But so soon as I understood,
withal, that man made "after the image of
Him that created him " ^ was not so understood
by Thy spiritual sons (whom of the Catholic
mother Thou hadst begotten again through
grace), as though they believed and imagined
Thee to be bounded by human form, — although
what was the nature of a spiritual substance* I
had not the faintest or dimmest suspicion, — yet
rejoicing, I blushed that for so many years I
had barked, not against the Catholic faith, but
against the fables of carnal imaginations. For
I had been both impious and rash in this, that
what I ought inquiring to have learnt, I had
pronounced on condemning. For Thou, O
most high and most near, most secret, yet most
present, who hast not limbs some larger some
smaller, but art wholly everywhere, and nowhere
in space, nor art Thou of such corporeal form, yet
hast Thou created man after Thine own image,
and, behold, from head to foot is he confined
by space.


In hii Reply to Faustus (vi. 7), he, conformably with this idea
explains the division into clean and unclean beasts under the Leviti-
cal law symbolically " No doubt," he says, " the animal is pro-
nounced unclean by the law because it does not chew the cud which
IS not a fault, but its nature. But the men of whom this animal is a
symbol are unclean not by nature, but from their own fault ; because
though they gladly hear the words of wisdom, they never reflect on
s^nl^^ffnn^r^ ,f,- ^'" '° ■■<=call, in quiet repose, some useful in-
struction from the stomach of memory to the mouth of reflection is
a kind of spiritual rumination. The animals above mentioned are a

fvfl"fl V" r u^" P^^P'" 'T*"? ^° "°' ^° 'his. And the prohibition of
the Hesh of these animals is a warning against this fault. Another
passage of Scripture (Prov. xxi. 20) speaks of the precious treasure
01 wisdom, and describes ruminating as clean, and not ruminating
as unclean : ' A precious trea^sure resteth in the mouth of a wise man
but a foolLsh man swallows it up.' Symbols of this kind, either in
^?nH "'.T 'hings give useful and pleasant exercise to intelligent
mmds in the way of inquiry and comparison."


CHAP. IV. HE RECOGNISES THE FALSITY OF HIS

OWN OPINIONS, AND COMMITS TO MEMORY THE
SAYING OF AMBROSE.


5. As, then, I knew not how this image of
Thine should subsist, I should have knocked
and propounded the doubt hew it was to be
believed, and not have insultingly opposed it,
as if it were believed. Anxiety, therefore, as
to what to retain as certain, did all the more
sharply gnaw into my soul, the more shame I
felt that, having been so long deluded and de-


* 2 Tim. ii. 15.

*Col. iii. 10, and Gen. i. 26, 27. And because we are created
in the image of God, Augiistin argues (Sertit. Ixxxviii. 6), we have
the ability to see and know Him, just as, having eyes to see, we
can look upon the sun. And hereafter, too {Ep. xcii 3), " We
shall see Him according to the measure in which we shall be like
Him : because now the measure in which we do not see Him is
according to the measure of our unlikeness to Him.

* See iii. sec. 12, note, above.


92


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VI.


ceived by the promise of certainties, I had, with
puerile error and petulance, prated of so many
uncertainties as if they were certainties. For
that they were falsehoods became apparent to
me afterwards. However, I was certain that
they were uncertain, and that I had formerly
held them as certain when with a blind conten-
tiousness I accused Thy Catholic Church, which
though I had not yet discovered to teach truly,
yet not to teach that of which I had so vehe-
mently accused her. In this manner was I con-
founded and converted, and I rejoiced, O my
God, that the one Church, the body of Thine
only Son (wherein the name of Christ had been
set upon me when an infant), did not appre-
ciate these infantile trifles, nor maintained, in her
sound doctrine, any tenet that would confine
Thee, the Creator of all, in space — though ever
so great and wide, yet bounded on all sides by
the restraints of a human form.

6. I rejoiced also that the old Scriptures of
the law and the prophets were laid before me,
to be perused, not now with that eye to which
they seemed most absurd before, when I cen-
sured Thy holy ones for so thinking, whereas
in truth they thought not so ; and with delight
I heard Ambrose, in his sermons to the people,
oftentimes most diligently recommend this text
as a rule, — "The letter killeth, but the Spirit
giveth life;" ' whilst, drawing aside the mystic


I 2 Cor. Hi. 6. The spiritual or allegorical meaning here referred
to is on; that Augustin constantly sought, as did many of the early
Fathers, both Greek and Latin. He only employs this method of
interpretation, however, in a qualified way— never going to the
lengths of Origen or Clement of Ale.vandria. He does not depreci-
ate the letter of Scripture, though, as we have shown above (iii. sec.
14, note), he went as far as he well coidd in interpreting the history
spiritually. He does not seem, however, quite consistent in his
statements as to the relative prominence to be given to the literal
and spiritual meanings, as may be seen by a comparison of the lat-
ter portions of sees, i and 3 of book xvii. of the City of God. His'
general idea may be gathered from the following passage in the 21st
sec. of book xiii. : — " Some allegorize all that concerns paradise it-
self, where the first men, the parents of the human race, are, accord-
ing to the truth of Holy Scripture, recorded to have been ; and
they understand all its trees and fruit-bearing plants as virtues and
habits of life, as if they had no existence in the external world, but
were only so spoken of or related for the sake of spiritual meanings.
As if there could not be a real terrestrial paradise ! As if there
never existed these two women, Sarah and Hagar, nor the two sons
who were born to Abraham, the one of the bond-woman, the other
of the free, because the apostle says that in them the two covenants
were prefigured ! or as if water never flowed from the rock when
Moses struck it, because therein Christ can be seen in a figure, as
the same apostle says : ' Now that rock was Christ' (i Cor. x. 4).
These and similar allegorical interpretations may be suita-
bly put upon paradise without giving offence to any one, \\'\i\\^ yet
we belier'e the strict truth 0/ the history, confirmed by its circum-
stantial narrative of facts." The allusion in the above passage to
Sarah and Hagar invites the remark, that in Galatians iv. 24, the
words in our version rendered, " which things are an allegory,"
should be, " which things are such as may be allegorized." [ Arii/a I
€<TTii' otAArjyopoii/aei'a. See Jelf, 398, sec. 2.] It is important to
note this, as the passage has been quoted in support of the more
extreme method of allegorizing, though it could clearly go no fur-
ther than to sanction allegorizing by way of spiritual meditation
upon Scripture, and not in the interpretation of it — which first, as
Waterland thinks {Works, \o\. v. p. 311), was the end contem-
plated by most of the Fathers. Thoughtful students of Scripture
will feel that we have no right to make historical facts typical or
allegorical, unless (as in the case of the manna, the brazen serpent,
Jacob's ladder, etc.) we have divine authority for so doing; and
few such will dissent from the opinion of Bishop Marsh (Lecture
vi.) that the type must not only resemble the antitype, but must
have been designed to resemble it, and further, that we must have
the authority of Scripture for the existence of such design. The


veil, he spiritually laid open that which, accepted
according to the "letter," seemed to teach
perverse doctrines — teaching herein nothing
that offended me, though he taught such things
as I knew not as yet whether they were true.
For all this time I restrained my heart from
assenting to anything, fearing to fall headlong ;
but by hanging in suspense I was the worse
killed. For my desire was to be as well
assured of those things that I saw not, as I was
that seven and three are ten. For I was not so
insane as to believe that this could not be com-
prehended ; but I desired to have other things
as clear as this, whether corporeal things, which
were not present to my senses, or spiritual,
whereof I knew not how to conceive except
corporeally. And by believing I might have
been cured, that so the sight of my soul being
cleared,^ it might in some way be directed
towards Thy truth, which abideth always, and
faileth in naught. But as it happens that he
who has tried a bad physician fears to trust
himself with a good one, so was it with the
health of my soul, which could not be healed
but by believing, and, lest it should believe
falsehoods, refused to be cured — resisting Thy
hands, who hast prepared for us the medica-
ments of faith, and hast applied them to the
maladies of the whole world, and hast bestowed
upon them so great authority.

CHAP. v. FAITH IS THE BASIS OF HUMAN LIFE ;

MAN CANNOT DISCOVER THAT TRUTH WHICH
HOLY SCRIPTURE HAS DISCLOSED.

7. From this, however, being led to prefer
the Catholic doctrine, I felt that it was wath more
moderation and honesty that it commanded
things to be believed that were not demonstrated


text, " The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life," as a perusal of
the context will show, has nothing whatever to do with either
" literal " or " spiritual " meanings. Augustin himself interprets it
in one place (De Spir. et Lit. cc. 4, 5) as meaning the killing letter
of the law, as compared with the quickening power of the gospel.
"An opinion," to conclude with the thoughtful words of Alfred
Morris on this chapter ( Words for the Heart and Life, p. 203),
" once common must therefore be rejected. Some still talk of
'letter' and 'spirit' in a way which has no sanction here. The
' letter' with them is the literal meaning of the text, the ' spirit' is
its symbolic meaning. And, as the ' spirit ' possesses an evident
superiority to the ' letter,' they fly away into the region of secret
senses and hidden doctrines, find types where there is nothing typi-
cal, and allegories where there is nothing allegorical ; make Genesis
more evangelical than the Epistle to the Romans, and Leviticus
than the Epistle to the Hebrews ; mistaking lawful criticism for
legal Christianity, they look upon the exercise of a sober judgment
as a proof of a depraved taste, and forget that diseased as well as
very powerful eyes may see more than others. It is not the obvious
meaning and the secret meaning that are intended by ' letter' and
' spirit,' nor any two meanings of Christianity, nor two meanings of
any thing or things, but the two systems of Moses and of Christ."
Reference may be made on this whole subject of allegorical inter-
pretation in the writings of the Fathers to Blunt's Right Use 0/ the
Early Fathers, series i. lecture 9.

2 Augustin frequently dilates on this idea. In sermon 88 (cc. 5, 6,
etc.), he makes the whole of the ministries of religion subservient to
the clearing of the inner eye of the soul; and in his De Trin. i. 3,
he says ; "And it is necessary to purge our minds, in order to be
able to see ineffably that which is ineffable \i. e. the Godhead],
whereto not having yet attained, we are to be nourished by faith,
and led by such ways as are more suited to our capacity, that we
may be rendered apt and able to comprehend it."


Chap. VI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


93


(whether it was that they could be demon-
strated, but not to any one, or could not be
demonstrated at all), than was the method of
the Manichaeans, where our credulity was
mocked by audacious promise of knowledge,
and then so many most fabulous and absurd
things were forced upon belief because they
were not capable of demonstration.^ After
that, O Lord, Thou, by little and little, with
most gentle and most merciful hand, drawing
and calming my heart, didst persuade me, —
taking into consideration what a multiplicity of
things which I had never seen, nor was present
when they were enacted, like so many of the
things in secular history, and so many accounts
of places and cities which I had not seen ; so
many of friends, so many of physicians, so many
now of these men, now of those, which unless
we should believe, we should do nothing at all
in this life ; lastly, with how unalterable an
assurance I believed of what parents I was born,
which it would have been impossible for me to
know otherwise than by hearsay, — taking into
consideration all this. Thou persuadest me that
not they who believed Thy books (which, with
so great authorit)'. Thou hast established among
nearly all nations), but those who believed them
not were to be blamed;^ and that those men
were not to be listened unto who should say to
me, " How dost thou know that those Script-
ures were imparted unto mankind by the Spirit
of the one true and most true God?" For
it was the same thing that was most of all to be
believed, since no wranglings of blasphemous
questions, whereof I had read so many amongst
the self-contradicting philosophers, could once


1 He similarly exalts the claims of the Christian Church over
Manichaeanism in his Reply to Faustus (xxxii. 19) : " If you submit
to receive a load of endless fictions at the bidding of an obscure and
irrational authority, so that you believe all those things because they
are written in the books which your misguided judgment pronounces
trustworthy, though there is no evidence of their truth, why not
rather submit to the evidence of the gospel, which is so well-
founded, so confirmed, so generally acknowledged and admired,
and which has an unbroken series of testunonies from the apostles
down to our own day, that so you may have an intelligent belief,
and may come to know that all your objections are the fruit of folly
and perversity? " And again, in his Reply to Manichceus' Funda-
mental Epistle (sec. 18), alluding to the credulity required in
those who accept Manichaean teaching on the mere authority of the
teacher : " W'hoever thoughtlessly yields this becomes a Alanich-
aean, not by knowing undoubted truth, but by believing doubtful
statements. Such were we when in our inexperienced youth we
were deceived."

2 He has a like train of thought in another place (De Fide Rer.
quce non I'id. sec. 4) : " If, then (harmony being destroyed), human
society itself would not stand if we believe not that we see not, how
much more should we have faith in divine things, though we see them
not; which if we have it not, we do not violate the friendship of a
few men, but the profoundest religion — so as to have as its conse-

tuence the profoundest misery." Again, referring to belief in
cripture, he argues ( Con. Faust, xxxiii. 6) that, if we doubt its evi-
dence, we may equally doubt that of any book, and asks, " How
do we know the authorship of the works of Plato, .4ristotle, Cicero,
Varro, and other similar writers, but by the unbroken chain of evi-
dence?" And once more he contends {De Mor. Cath. Eccles.
xxix. 60) that, " The utter overthrow of all literature will follow,
and there will be an end to all books handed down from the past, if
what is supported by such a strong popular belief, and established
by the uniform testimony of so many men and so many times, is
brought into such suspicion that it is not allowed to have the credit
land the authority of common history."


wring the belief from me that Thou art, — what-
soever Thou wert, though what I knew not, — or
that the government of human affairs belongs
to Thee.

8. Thus much I believed, at one time more
strongly than another, yet did I ever believe
both that Thou wert, and hadst a care of us,
although I was ignorant both what was to be
thought of Thy substance, and what way led, or
led back to Thee. Seeing, then, that we were
too weak by unaided reason to find out the
tmth, and for this cause needed the authority
of the holy writings, I had now begun to believe
that Thou wouldest by no means have given
such excellency of authority to those Scriptures
throughout all lands, had it not been Thy will
thereby to be believed in, and thereby sought.
For now those things which heretofore appeared
incongruous to me in the Scripture, and used
to offend me, having heard divers of them ex-
pounded reasonably, I referred to the depth of
the mysteries, and its authority seemed to me
all the more venerable and worthy of religious
belief, in that, while it was visible for all to
read it, it reserved the majesty of its secret^
within its profound significance, stooping to all
in the great plainness of its language and lowli-
ness of its style, yet exercising the application
of such as are not light of heart ; that it might
receive all into its common bosom, and through
narrow passages waft over some few towards
Thee, yet many more than if it did not stand
upon such a height of authority, nor allured
multitudes within its bosom by its holy humil-
ity. These things T meditated upon, and Thou
wert with me ; I sighed, and Thou heardest
me; I vaciUated, and Thou didst guide me ; I
roamed through the broad way* of the world,
and Thou didst not desert me.

CHAP. VI. ON THE SOURCE AND CAUSE OF TRUE

JOV, THE EXAMPLE OF THE JOYOUS BEGGAR

BEING ADDUCED.

9. I longed for honours, gains, wedlock ;
and Thou mockedst me. In these desires I
underwent most bitter hardships. Thou being
the more gracious the less Thou didst suffer
anything which was not Thou to grow sweet to
me. Behold my heart, O Lord, who wouldest
that I should recall all this, and confess unto
Thee. Now let my soul cleave to Thee, which
Thou hast freed from that fast-holding bird-lime
of death. How wretched was it ! And Thou
didst irritate the feeling of its wound, that, for-
saking all else, it might be converted unto Thee,
— who art above all, and without whom all things
would be naught, — be converted and be healed.


8 See i. sec. 10, note, above.
* Matt. vii. 13.


94


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VJ.


How wretched was I at that time, and how didst
Thou deal with me, to make me sensible of my
wretchedness on that day wherein I was prepar-
ing to recite a panegyric on the Emperor,' wherein
I was to deliver many a lie, and lying was to be
applauded by those who knew I lied ; and my
heart panted with these cares, and boiled over
with the feverishness of consuming thoughts.
For, while walking along one of the streets of
Milan, I observed a poor mendicant, — then, I
imagine, with a full belly, — ^joking and joyous;
and I sighed, and spake to the friends around
me of the many sorrows resulting from our mad-
ness, for that by all such exertions of ours, — as
those wherein I then laboured, dragging along,
under the spur of desires, the burden of my own
unhappiness, and by dragging increasing it, —
we yet aimed only to attain that very joyousness
which that mendicant had reached before us,
who, perchance, never would attain it ! For
what he had obtained through a few begged
pence, the same was I scheming for by many a
wretched and tortuous turning, — the joy of a
temporary felicity. For he verily possessed not
true joy, but yet I, with these my ambitions,
was seeking one much more untrue. And in truth
he was joyous, I anxious ; he free from care, I
full of alarms. But should any one inquire of
me whether I would rather be merry or fearful,
I would reply, Merry. Again, were I asked
whether I would rather be such as he was, or as
I m3'self then was, I should elect to be myself,
though beset with cares and alarms, but out of
perversity ; for was it so in truth ? For I ought
not to prefer myself to him because I happened
to be more learned than he, seeing that I took
no delight therein, but sought rather to please
men by it ; and that not to instruct, but only to
please. Wherefore also didst Thou break my
bones with the rod of Thy correction."''

lo. Away with those, then, from my soul, who
say unto it, " It makes a difference from whence
a man's joy is derived. That mendicant re-
joiced in drunkenness ; thou longedst to rejoice
in glory. ' ' What glory, O Lord ? That which
is not in Thee. For even as his was no true
joy, so was mine no true glory ; * and it sub-
verted my soul more. He would digest his
drunkenness that same night, but many a night
had I slept with mine, and risen again with it,
and was to sleep again and again to rise with it,
I know not how oft. It does indeed "make a
difference whence a man's joy is derived." I

1 In the Benedictine edition it is suggested that this was probably
Valentinian the younger, whose court was, according to Possidius
(c. i.), at Milan when Augustin was professor of rhetoric there, who
writes {Con. Litt. Petit, ili. 25) that he in that city recited a pane-
gyric to Bauto, the consul, on the first of January, according to the
requirements of his profession of rhetoric.

2 Prov. xxii. 15.

' Here, as elsewhere, we have the feeling which finds its expres-
sion in i. sec. i, above : " Thou hast formed us for Thyself, and our
hearts are restless till they find rest in Thee."


know it is so, and that the joy of a faithful hope
is incomparably beyond such vanity. Yea, and
at that time was he beyond me, for he truly was
the hapj)ier man ; not only for that he was thor-
oughly steeped in mirth, I torn to pieces with
cares, but he, by giving good wishes, had gotten
wine, I, by lying, was following after pride.
Much to this effect said I then to mv dear
friends, and I often marked in them how it
fared with me ; and I found that it went ill
with me, and fretted, and doubled that very
ill. And if any prosperity smiled upon me,
I loathed to seize it, for almost before I could
grasp it it flew away.

CHAP. VII. HE LEADS TO REFORMATION HIS

FRIEND ALVPIUS, SEIZED WITH MADNESS FOR
THE CIRCENSIAN GAMES.

11. These things we, who lived like friends
together, jointly deplored, but chiefly and most
familiarly did I discuss them with Alypius and
Nebridius, of whom Alypius was born in the
same town as myself, his parents being of the
highest rank there, but he being younger than
I. For he had studied under me, first, when I
taught in our own town, and afterwards at Car-
thage, and esteemed me highly, because I ap-
peared to him good and learned ; and I esteemed
him for his innate love of virtue, which, in one
of no great age, was sufficiently eminent. But
the vortex of Carthaginian customs (amongst
whom these frivolous spectacles are hotly fol-
lowed) had inveigled him into the madness of
the Circensian games. But while he was mis-
erably tossed about therein, I was professing
rhetoric there, and had a public school. As
yet he did not give ear to my teaching, on ac-
count of some ill-feeling that had arisen between
me and his father. I had then found how fatally
he doted upon the circus, and was deeply grieved
that he seemed likely — if, indeed, he had not
already done so — to cast away his so great
promise. Yet had I no means of advising, or
by a sort of restraint reclaiming him, either by
the kindness of a friend or by the authority of
a master. For I imagined that his sentiments
towards me were the same as his father's ; but •
he was not such. Disregarding, therefore, his
father's will in that matter, he commenced to
salute me, and, coming into my lecture-room,
to listen for a little and depart.

12. But it slipped my memory to deal with
him, so that he should not, through a blind and
headstrong desire of empty pastimes, undo so
great a wit. But Thou, 0 Lord, who governest
the helm of all Thou hast created, hadst not
forgotten him, who was one day to be amongst
Thy sons, the President of Thy sacrament;*


* Compare v. sec. 17, note, above, and sec. 15, note, below.


Chap. VIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


95


and that his amendment might plainly be at-
tributed to Thyself, Thou broughtest it about
through me, but I knowing nothing of it. For
one day, when I was sitting in my accustomed
place, with my scholars before me, he came in,
saluted me, sat himself down, and fixed his at-
tention on the subject I was then handling. It
so happened that I had a passage in hand, which
while I was explaining, a simile borrowed from
the Circensian games occurred to me, as likely
to make what I wished to convey pleasanter and
plainer, imbued with a biting jibe at those whom
that madness had enthralled. Thou knowest,
O our God, that I had no thought at that time
of curing Alypiijs of that plague. But he took
it to himself, and thought that I would not have
said it but for his sake. And what any other
man would have made a ground of offence
against me, this worthy young man took as a
reason for being offended at himself, and for
loving me more fervently. For Thou hast said
it long ago, and written in Thy book, " Rebuke
a wise man, and he will love thee." ^ But I had
not rebuked him, but Thou, who makest use of
all consciously or unconsciously, in that order
which Thyself knowest (and that order is
right), wroughtest out of my heart and tongue
burning coals, by which Thou mightest set on
fire and cure the hopeful mind thus languishing.
Let him be silent in Thy praises who meditates
not on Thy mercies, which from my inmost
parts confess unto Thee. For he upon that
speech rushed out from that so deep pit, wherein
he was wilfully plunged, and was blinded by its
miserable pastimes ; and he roused his mind with
a resolute moderation ; whereupon all the filth
of the Circensian pastimes^ flew off from him,
and he did not approach them further. Upon
this, he prevailed with his reluctant father to let
him be my pupil. He gave in and consented.
And Alypius, beginning again to hear me, was
involved in the same superstition as I was, loving
in the Manichaeans that ostentation of conti-
nency^ which he believed to be true and un-


1 Prov. ix. 8.

* The games in the provinces of the empire were on the same
model as those held in the Circus Maximus at Rome, though not so
imposing. This circus was one of those vast works executed by
Tarquinius Prisons. Hardly a vestige of it at the present time re-
mains, though the Cloaca Maxima, another of his stupendous
works, has not, after more than 2500 years, a stone displaced, and
still performs its appointed service of draining the city of Rome into
the Tiber. In the circus were exhibited chariot and foot races,
fights on horseback, representations of battles (on which occasion
camps were pitched in the circus), and the Grecian athletic sports
introduced after the conquest of that country. See also sec. 13,
note, below.

* Augiistin, in book v. sec. 9, above, refers to the reputed sanctity
of Manichaeus, and it may well be questioned whether the sect de-
served that unmitigated reprobation he pours out upon them in his
De Moribus, and in parts of his controversy with Faustus. Certain
it is that Faustus laid claim, on behalf of his sect, to a very different
moral character to that Augustin would impute to them. He says
{Con. Faust, v. i) : " Do I believe the gospel? You ask me if I
believe it, though my obedience to its commands shows that I do.
[ should rather ask you if you believe it, since you give no proof of
jTour belief I have left my father, mother, wife, and children, and
lU else that the Gospel requires (Matt. xix. 29) ; and do you ask if


feigned. It was, however, a senseless and
seducing continency, ensnaring precious souls,
not able as yet to reach the height of virtue,
and easily beguiled with the veneer of what was
but a shadowy and feigned virtue.

CHAP. Vni. THE SAME WHEN AT ROME, BEING

LED BY OTHERS INTO THE AMPHITHEATRE, IS
DELIGHTED WITH THE GLADIATORIAL GAMES.

13. He, not relinquishing that worldly way
which his parents had bewitched him to pursue,
had gone before me to Rome, to study law, and
there he was carried away in an extraordinary
manner with an incredible eagerness after the
gladiatorial shows. For, being utterly opposed
to and detesting such spectacles, he was one day
met by chance by divers of his acquaintance and
fellow-students returning from dinner, and they
with a friendly violence drew him, vehemently
objecting and resisting, into the amphitheatre,
on a day of these cruel and deadly shows, he
thus protesting: "Though you drag my body
to that place, and there place me, can you force
me to give my mind and lend my eyes to these
shows ? Thus shall I be absent while present,
and so shall overcome both you and them."
They hearing this, dragged him on nevertheless,
desirous, perchance, to see whether he could do
as he said. When they had arrived thither, and
had taken their places as they could, the whole
place became excited with the inhuman sports.
But he, shutting up the doors of his eyes, for-
bade his mind to roam abroad after such naughti-
ness ; and would that he had shut his ears also !
For, upon the fall of one in the fight, a mighty
cry from the whole audience stirring him strong-
ly, he, overcome by curiosity, and prepared as
it were to despise and rise superior to it, no mat-
ter what it were, opened his eyes, and was struck
with a deeper wound in his soul than the other,
whom he desired to see, was in his body ; * and


I believe the gospel ? Perhaps you do not know what is called the
gospel. The gospel is nothing else than the preaching and the pre-
cept of Christ. I have parted with all gold and silver, and have
left off carrying money in my purse ; content with daily food ; with-
out anxiety for to-morrow ; and without solicitude about how I shall
be fed, or wherewithal I shall be clothed ; and do you ask if I believe
the gospel? You see in me the blessings of the gospel (Matt. v. 3-11) ;
and do you ask if I believe the gospel ? You see me poor, meek, a
peacemaker, pure in heart, mourning, hungering, thirsting, bearing
persecutions and enmity for righteousness' sake ; and do you doubt
my belief in the gospel? " It is difficult to understand that Mani-
chaeanism can have spread as largely as it did at that time, if the
asceticism of many amongst them had not been real. It may be
noted that in his controversy with Fortunatus, Augustin strangely
declines to discuss the charges of immorality that had been brought
against the Manichseans ; and in the last chapter of his De Morihus,
it appears to be mdicated that one, if not more, of those whose evil
deeds are there spoken of had a desire to follow the rule of life laid
down by Manichseus.

■t The scene of this episode was, doubtless, the great Flavian Am-
phitheatre, known by us at this day as the Colosseum. It stands in
the valley between the Ca;lian and Esquiline hills, on the site of a
lake formerly attached to the palace of Nero. Gibbon, in his graphic
way, says of the building (Decline and Fail, i. 355) ; " Posterity ad-
mires, and will long admire, the awful remains of the amphitheatre
of Titus, which so well deserved the epithet of colossal. It was a
building of an elliptic figure, five hundred and sixty-four feet in
length, and four hundred and sixty-seven in breadth, founded on


96


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VI.


he fell more miserably than he on whose fall
that mighty clamour was raised, which entered
through his ears, and unlocked his eyes, to
make way for the striking and beating down of
his soul, which was bold rather than valiant
hitherto ; and so much the weaker in that it
presumed on itself, which ought to have de-
pended on Thee. For, directly he saw that
blood, he therewith imbibed a sort of savage-
ness ; nor did he turn away, but fixed his eye,
drinking in madness unconsciously, and was
delighted with the guilty contest, and drunken


fourscore arches, and rising, with four successive orders of archi-
tecture, to the height of one hundred and forty feet. The outside
of the edifice was encrusted with marble, and decorated with statues.
The slopes of the vast concave which formed the inside were filled
and surrounded with sixty or eighty rows of seats of marble, like-
wise covered with cushions, and capable of receiving with ease above
fourscore thousand spectators. Si.\ty-four vomitories (for by that
name the doors were very aptly distinguished) poured forth the im-
mense multitude ; and the entrances, passages, and staircases were
contrived with such e.\quisite skill, that each person, whether of the
senatorial, the equestrian, or the plebeian order, arrived at his des-
tined place without trouble or confusion. Nothing was omitted
which in any respect could be subservient to the convenience or
pleasure of the spectators. They were protected from the sun and
rain by an ample canopy occasionally drawn over their heads. The
air was continually refreshed by the playing of fountains, and pro-
fusely impregnated by the grateful scent of aromatics. In the cen-
tre of the edifice, the arena, or stage, was strewed with the finest
sand, and successively assumed the most different forms ; at one
moment it seemed to rise out of the earth, like the garden of the
Hesperides, and was afterwards broken into the rocks and caverns
of Thrace. The subterraneous pipes conveyed an inexhaustible
supply of water ; and what had just before appeared a level plain
might be suddenly converted into a wide lake, covered with armed
vessels and replenished with the monsters of the deep. In the deco-
ration of these scenes the Roman emperors displayed their wealth
and liberality ; and we read, on various occasions, that the whole
furniture of the amphitheatre consisted either of silver, or of gold,
or of amber." In this magnificent building were enacted vcnatios
or hunting scenes, sea-fights, and gladiatorial shows, in all of whicli
the greatest lavishness was exhibited. The men engaged were for
the most part either criminals or captives taken in war. On the
occasion of the triumph of Trajan for his victory over the Dacians,
it is said that ten thousand gladiators were engaged in combat, and
that in the naumachia. or sea-fight shown by Domitian, ships and
men in force equal to two real fleets were engaged, at an enormous
expenditure of human life. " If," says James JSIartineau {En-
di^avours after the Christian Life, pp. 261, 262), " you would wit-
ness a scene characteristic of the popular life of old, you must go to
the amphitheatre of Rome, mingle with its eighty thousand specta-
tors, and watch the eager faces of senators and people ; observe how
the masters of the world spend the wealth of conquest, and indulge
the pride of power. See every wild creature that God has made to
dwell, from the jungles of India to the mountains of Wales, from the
forests of Germany to the deserts of Nubia, brought hither to be
hunted down in artificial groves by thousands in an hour; behold
the captives of war, noble, perhaps, and wise in their own land,
turned loose, amid yells of insult, more terrible for their foreign
tongue, to contend with brutal gladiators, trained to make death
the lavourite amusement, and present the most solemn of individual
realities as a wholesale public sport ; mark the light look with which
the multitude, by uplifted finger, demands that the wounded com-
batant be slain before their eyes ; notice the troop of Christian mar-
tyrs awaiting hand in hand the leap from the tiger's den. And when
the day's spectacle is over, and the blood of two thousand victims
stains the ring, follow the giddy crowd as it streams from the vomi-
tories into the street, trace its lazy course into the Forum, and hear
it there scrambling for the bread of private indolence doled out by
the purse of public corruption ; and see how it suns itself to sleep
in the open ways, or crawls into foul dens till morning brings the
hope of games and merry blood again ; — and you have an idea of
the Imperial people, and their passionate living for the moment,
which the gospel found in occupation of the world." The desire
for these shows increased as the empire advanced. Constantine
failed to put a stop to them at Rome, though they were not admitted
into the Christian capital he established at Constantinople. We
have already shown (iii. sec. 2, note, above) how strongly attend-
ance at stage-plays and scenes like these was condemned by the
Christian teachers. The passion, however, for these exhibitions
was so great, that they were only brought to an end after the monk
Telemachus — horrified that Christians should witness such scenes
— had been battered to death by the people in their rage at his fling-
ing himself between the swordsmen to stop the combat. This tragic
episode occurred in the year 403, at a show held in commemoration
of a temporary success over the troops of Alaric.


with the bloody pastime. Nor was he now the
same he came in, but was one of the throng he
came unto, and a true companion of those who
had brought him thither. Why need I say
more ? He looked, shouted, was excited,
carried away with him the madness which
would stimulate him to return, not only with
those who first enticed him, but also before
them, yea, and to draw in others. And from
all this didst Thou, with a most powerful and
most merciful hand, pluck him, and taughtest
him not to repose confidence in himself, but in
Thee — but not till long after.

CHAP. IX. INNOCENT ALYPIUS, BEING APPRE-
HENDED AS A THIEF, IS SET AT LIBERTY BY
THE CLEVERNESS OF AN ARCHITECT.

14. But this was all being stored up in his
memory for a medicine hereafter. As was that
also, that when he was yet studying under me
at Carthage, and was meditating at noonday in
the market-place upon what he had to recite (as
scholars are wont to be exercised), Thou suffer-
edst him to be apprehended as a thief by the
officers of the market-place. For no other
reason, I apprehend, didst Thou, O our God,
suifer it, but that he who was in the future to
prove so great a man should now begin to learn
that, in judging of causes, man should not with
a reckless credulity readily be condemned by
man. For as he was walking up and down
alone before the judgment-seat with his tablets
and pen, lo, a young man, one of the scholars,
the real thief, privily bringing a hatchet, got in
without Alypius' seeing him as far as the leaden
bars which protect the silversmiths' shops, and
began to cut away the lead. But the noise of
the hatchet being heard, the silversmiths below
began to make a stir, and sent to take in cus-
tody whomsoever they should find. But the
thief, hearing their voices, ran away, leaving
his hatchet, fearing to be taken with it. Now
Alypius, who had not seen him come in, caught
sight of him as he went out, and noted with
what speed he made off. And, being curious to
know the reasons, he entered the place, where,
finding the hatchet, he stood wondering and
pondering, when behold, those that were sent
caught him alone, hatchet in hand, the noise
whereof had startled them and brought them
thither. They lay hold of him and drag him
away, and, gathering the tenants of the market-
place about them, boast of having taken a noto-
rious thief, and thereupon he was being led away
to apppear before the judge. ;

15. But thus far was he to be instructed. For^
immediately, O Lord, Thou camest to the sue
cour of his innocency, whereof Thou wert the
sole witness. For, as he was being led either to
prison or to punishment, they were met by a


Chap. X.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


97


arty

n

■hetto

■by!


certain architect, who had the chief charge of
the pubhc buildings. They were specially glad
to come across him, by whom they used to be
suspected of stealing the goods lost out of the
market-place, as though at last to convince him
by whom these thefts were committed. He,
however, had at divers times seen Alypius at
the house of a certain senator, whom he was
wont to visit to pay his respects ; and, recog-
nising him at once, he took him aside by the
hand, and inquiring of him the cause of so great
a misfortune, heard the whole affair, and com-
manded all the rabble then present (who were
very uproarious and full of threatenings) to go
with him. And they came to the house of the
young man who had committed the deed.
There, before the door, was a lad so young as
not to refrain from disclosing the whole through
the fear of injuring his master. For he had fol-
lowed his master to the market-place. Whom,
so soon as Alypius recognised, he intimated it
to the architect ; and he, showing the hatchet
to the lad, asked him to whom it belonged.
"To us," quoth he immediately; and on being
further interrogated, he disclosed everything.
Thus, the crime being transferred to that house,
and the rabble shamed, which had begun to
triumph over Alypius, he, the future dispenser
of Thy word, and an examiner of numerous
causes in Thy Church,^ went away better ex-
perienced and instructed.

CHAP. X. THE WONDERFUL INTEGRITY OF ALY-
PIUS IN JUDGMENT. THE LASTING FRIENDSHIP
OF NEBRIDIUS WITH AUGUSTIN.

1 6. Him, therefore, had I lighted upon at
Rome, and he clung to me by a most strong tie,
and accompanied me to Milan, both that he
might not leave me, and that he might practise
something of the law he had studied, more with
a view of pleasing his parents than himself.
There had he thrice sat as assessor with an un-
corruptness wondered at by others, he rather
wondering at those who could prefer gold to in-
tegrity. His character was tested, also, not only
by the bait of covetousness, but by the spur of
fear. At Rome, he was assessor to the Count
of the Italian Treasury.'^ There was at that time
a most potent senator, to whose favours many
were indebted, of whom also many stood in
fear. He would fain, by his usual power, have
a thing granted him which was forbidden by the

1 "Alypius became Bishop of Thagaste (Aug. Be Gestis c. Ent-
k^-zV. sees. I and 5). On the necessity which bishops were under of
|hearing secular causes, and its use, see Bingham, ii. c. 7," — E. B. P.

2 " The Lord High Treasurer of the Western Empire was called
Comes Sacrarum largitiottum . He had six other treasurers in so
many provinces under him, whereof he of Italy was one under
jvhom this Alypius had some office of judicature, something like
[though far inferior) to our Baron of the Exchequer. See Sir Henry
spelman's Gio.':sary, in the word Comes ; and Cassiodor, Var. v. c.
p."_W. W.


laws. This Alypius resisted ; a bribe was prom-
ised, he scorned it with all his heart ; threats
were employed, he trampled them under foot,
— all men being astonished at so rare a spirit,
which neither coveted the friendship nor feared
the enmity of a man at once so powerful and so
greatly famed for his innumerable means of
doing good or ill. Even the judge whose coun-
cillor Alypius was, although also unwilling that
it should be done, yet did not openly refuse it,
but put the matter off upon Alypius, alleging
that it was he who would not permit him to do
it ; for verily, had the judge done it, Alypius
would have decided otherwise. With this one
thing in the way of learning was he very nearly
led away, — that he might have books copied for
him at prsetorian prices." But, consulting jus-
tice, he changed his mind for the better, es-
teeming equity, whereby he was hindered, more
gainful than the power whereby he was per-
mitted. These are little things, but " He that
is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also
in much."* Nor can that possibly be void
which proceedeth out of the mouth of Thy
Truth. " If, therefore, ye have not been faith-
ful in the unrighteous mammon, who will com-
mit to your trust the true riches? And if ye
have not been faithful in that which is another
man's, who shall give you that which is your
own?"* He, being such, did at that time
cling to me, and wavered in purpose, as I did,
what course of life was to be taken.

17. Nebridius also, who had left his native
country near Carthage, and Carthage itself,
where he had usually lived, leaving behind his
fine paternal estate, his house, and his mother,
who intended not to follow him, had come to
Milan, for no other reason than that he might live
with me in a most ardent search after truth and
wisdom. Like me he sighed, like me he wav-
ered, an ardent seeker after true life, and a most
acute examiner of the most abstruse questions. ®
So were there three begging mouths, sighing
out their wants one to the other, and waiting
upon Thee, that Thou mightest give them their
meat in due season.' And in all the bitterness
which by Thy mercy followed our worldly pur-
suits, as we contemplated the end, why this suf-
fering should be ours, darkness came upon us ;
and we turned away groaning and exclaiming,
" How long shall these things be? " And this
we often said ; and saying so, we did not relin-
quish them, for as yet we had discovered noth-


3 Pretiis pmtorianis. Du Cange says that " Pretium regiujK
is the right of a king or lord to purchase commodities at a certain
and definite price." This may perhaps help us to understand the
phrase as above employed.

* Luke xvi. 10.

6 Luke xvi. 11, 12.

8 Augustin makes a similar allusion to Nebridius' ardour in exam-
ining difficult questions, especially those which refer ad doctrinam
pietatis, in his 98th Epistle.

' Ps. cxlv. 15.


98


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VI.


ing certain to which, when reUnquished, we
might betake ourselves.

CHAP. XI. BEING TROUBLED BY HIS GRIEVOUS

ERRORS, HE MEDITATES ENTERING ON A NEW
LIFE.

i8. And I, puzzhng over and reviewing these
things, most marvelled at the length of time
from that my nineteenth year, wherein I began
to be inflamed with the desire of wisdom, re-
solving, when I had found her, to forsake all the
empty hopes and lying insanities of vain desires.
And behold, I was now getting on to my thir-
tieth year, sticking in the same mire, eager for
the enjoyment of things present, which fly away
and destroy me, whilst I say, "To-morrow I
shall discover it ; behold, it will appear plainly,
and I shall seize it ; behold, Faustus will come
and explain everything ! O ye great men, ye
Academicians, it is then true that nothing cer-
tain for the ordering of life can be attained !
Nay, let us search the more diligently, and let
us not despair. Lo, the things in the ecclesias-
tical books, which appeared to us absurd afore-
time, do not appear so now, and may be other-
wise and honestly interpreted. I will set my
feet uix)n that step, where, as a child, my parents
placed me, until the clear truth be discovered.
But where and when shall it be sought ? Am-
brose has no leisure, — we have no leisure to
read. Where are we to find the books ? Whence
or when procure them ? From whom borrow
them ? Let set times be appointed, and certain
hours be set apart for the health of the soul.
Great hope has risen upon us, the Catholic faith
doth not teach what we conceived, and vainly
accused it of. Her learned ones hold it as an
abomination to believe that God is limited by
the form of a human body. And do we doubt
to 'knock,' in order that the rest may be
'opened'?^ The mornings are taken up by
our scholars ; how do we employ the rest of the
day? Why do we not set about this? But
when, then, pay our respects to our great
friends, of whose favours we stand in need ?
When prepare what our scholars buy from us ?
When recreate ourselves, relaxing our minds
from the pressure of care ? ' '

19. " Perish everything, and let us dismiss
these empty vanities, and betake ourselves solely
to the search after truth ! Life is miserable, death
uncertain. If it creeps upon us suddenly, in
what state shall we depart hence, and where
shall we learn what we have neglected here ?
Or rather shall we not suffer the punishment of
this negligence? What if death itself should
cut off and put an end to all care and feeling ?
This also, then, must be inquired into. But

1 Matt. vii. 7.


God forbid that it should be so. It is not with-
out reason, it is no empty thing, that the so
eminent height of the authority of the Christian
faith is diffused throughout the entire world.
Never would such and so great things be wrought
for us, if, by the death of the body, the life of
the soul were destroyed. Why, therefore, do
we delay to abandon our hopes of this world,
and give ourselves wholly to seek after God and
the blessed life ? But stay ! Even those things
are enjoyable ; and they possess some and no
little sweetness. We must not abandon them
lightly, for it would be a shame to return to
them again. Behold, now is it a great matter
to obtain some post of honour ! And what
more could we desire? We have crowds of
influential friends, though we have nothing else,
and if we make haste a presidentship may be
offered us ; and a wife with some money, that
she increase not our expenses ; and this shall be
the height of desire. Many men, who are great
and worthy of imitation, have applied them-
selves to the study of wisdom in the marriage
state."

20. Whilst I talked of these things, and these
winds veered about and tossed my heart hither
and thither, the time passed on ; but I was slow
to turn to the Lord, and from day to day de-
ferred to live in Thee, and deferred not daily to
die in myself. Being enamoured of a happy
life, I yet feared it in its own abode, and, iiee-
ing from it, sought after it. I conceived that I
should be too unhappy were I deprived of the
embracements of a woman ; ^ and of Thy mer-
ciful medicine to cure that infirmity I thought
not, not having tried it. As regards conti-
nency, I imagined it to be under the control of
our own strength (though in myself I found it
not), being so foolish as not to know what is writ-
ten, that none can be continent unless Thou give
it ;^ and that Thou wouldst give it, if with heart-
felt groaning I should knock at Thine ears, and
should with firm faith cast my care upon Thee.

CHAP. XII. — DISCUSSION WITH ALYPIUS CONCERN-
ING A LIFE OF CELIBACY.

21. It was in truth Alypius who prevented
me from marrying, alleging that thus we could


2 " I was entangled in the life of this world, clinging to dull hopes
of a beauteous wife, the pomp of riches, the emptiness of honours,
and the other hurtful and destructive pleasures " (Aug. De Util.
Credendi, sec. 3). "After I had shaken off the Manichseans and
escaped, especially when I had crossed the sea, the Academics long
detained me tossing in the waves, winds from all quarters beating
against my helm. And so I came to this shore, and there found a
pole-star to whom to entrust myself. For I often observed in the,
discourses of our priest [Ambrose], and sometimes in yours [Theo-
dorus], that you had no corporeal notions when you thought of God,,
or even of the soul, which of all things is next to God. But I wasi
withheld, I own, from casting myself speedily into the bosom of
true wisdom by tiie alluring hopes of marriage and honours ; mean-J
ing, when I had obtained these, to press (as few singularly happyfl
had before me) with oar and sail into that haven, and there rest"
(Aug. De Vita Beata, sec. 4).— E. B. P.

3 Wisd. viii. 2, Vulg. y


Chap. XIV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


99


[loit
:s

tK

Aim


by no means live together, having so much un-
distracted leisure in the love of wisdom, as we
had long desired. For he himself was so chaste
in this matter that it was wonderful — all the
more, too, that in his early youth he had entered
upon that path, but had not clung to it ; rather
had he, feeling sorrow and disgust at it, lived
from that time to the present most continently.
But I opposed him with the examples of those
who as married men had loved wisdom, found
favour with God, and walked faithfully and lov-
ingly with their friends. From the greatness
of whose spirit I fell far short, and, enthralled
with the disease of the flesh and its deadly
sweetness, dragged my chain along, fearing to
be loosed, and, as if it pressed my wound, re-
jected his kind expostulations, as it were the
hand of one who would unchain me. More-
over, it was by me that the serpent spake unto
Alypius himself, weaving and laying in his path,
by my tongue, pleasant snares, wherein his hon-
ourable and free feet ^ might be entangled.

22. For when he wondered that I, for whom
he had no slight esteem, stuck so fast in the
bird-lime of that pleasure as to affirm whenever
we discussed the matter that it would be impos-
sible for me to lead a single life, and urged in
my defence when I saw him wonder that there
was a vast difference between the life that he
had tried by stealth and snatches (of which he
had now but a faint recollection, and might
therefore, without regret, easily despise), and
my sustained acquaintance with it, whereto if
but the honourable name of marriage were added,
he would not then be astonished at my inability
to contemn that course, — then began he also to
wish to be married, not as if overpowered by
the lust of such pleasure, but from curiosity.
For, as he said, he was anxious to know what
that could be without which my life, which was
so pleasing to him, seemed to me not life but a
penalty. For his mind, free from that chain,
was astounded at my slavery, and through that
astonishment was going on to a desire of trying
it, and from it to the trial itself, and thence,
perchance, to fall into that bondage whereat he

1 " Paulinus says that though he lived among the people and sat
over them, ruling the sheep of the Lord's fold, as a watchful shep-
herd, with anxious sleeplessness, yet by renunciation of the world,
and denial of flesh and blood, he had made himself a wilderness,
severed from the many, called among the few " ( Ap. Aug. £p. 24,
sec. 2). St. Jerome calls him " his holy and venerable brother.
Father (Papa) Alypius" {Ep. ^g,ibid.). Earlier, Augustin speaks
of him as "abiding in union with him, to be an example to the
brethren who wished to avoid the cares of this world " {Ep. 22) ;
and to Paulinus {Ep. 27), [Romanianus] " is a relation of the ven-
erable and truly blessed Bishop Alypius, whom you embrace with
your whole heart deservedly ; for whosoever thinks favourably of
that man, thinks of the great mercy of God. Soon, by the help of
God, I shall transfuse Alypius wholly into your soul [Paulinus had
asked Alypius to write him his life, and Augustin had, at Alypius'
request, undertaken to relieve him, and to do it] ; for I feared chiefly
lest he should shrink from laying open all which the Lord has
bestowed upon him, lest, if read by any ordinary person (for it
would not be read by you only), he should seem not so much to set
forth the gifts of God committed to men, as to exalt himself." —
E. B. P.


was so astonished, seeing he was ready to enter
into "a covenant with death; "^ and he that
loves danger shall fall into it.^ For whatever
the conjugal honour be in the office of well-
ordering a married life, and sustaining children,
influenced us but slightly. But that which did
for the most part afflict me, already made a slave
to it, was the habit of satisfying an insatiable
lust ; him about to be enslaved did an admiring
wonder draw on. In this state were we, until
Thou, O most High, not forsaking our lowliness,
commiserating our misery, didst come to our
rescue by wonderful and secret ways.

CHAP. Xin. BEING URGED BY HIS MOTHER TO

TAKE A WIFE, HE SOUGHT A MAIDEN THAT
WAS PLEASING UNTO HIM.

23. Active efforts were made to get me a
wife. I wooed, I was engaged, my mother
taking the greatest pains in the matter, that
when I was once married, the health-giving bap-
tism might cleanse me ; for which she rejoiced
that I was being daily fitted, remarking that her
desires and Thy promises were being fulfilled in
my faith. At which time, verily, both at my
request and her own desire, with strong heartfelt
cries did we daily beg of Thee that Thou would-
est by a vision disclose unto her something con-
cerning my future marriage ; but Thou wouldest
not. She saw indeed certain vain and fantastic
things, such as the earnestness of a human spirit,,
bent thereon, conjured up ; and these she told
me of, not with her usual confidence when Thou,
hadst shown her anything, but slighting them.
For she could, she declared, through some feel-
ing which she could not express in words, dis-
cern the difference betwixt Thy revelations and
the dreams of her own spirit. Yet the affair-
was pressed on, and a maiden sued who wanted
two years of the marriageable age ; and, as she
was pleasing, she was waited for.

CHAP. XIV. THE DESIGN OF ESTABLISHING A^

COMMON HOUSEHOLD WITH HIS FRIENDS IS
SPEEDILY HINDERED.

24. And many of us friends, consulting on
and abhorring the turbulent vexations of human
life, had considered and now almost determined
upon living at ease and separate from the tur-
moil of men. And this was to be obtained in
this way ; we were to bring whatever we could
severally procure, and make a common house-
hold, so that, through the sincerity of our friend-
ship, nothing should belong more to one than
the other ; but the whole, being derived from
all, should as a whole belong to each, and the
whole unto all. It seemed to us that this


2 Isa. xxviii. 15.

3 Ecclus. ill. 27.


lOO


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VI.


society might consist of ten persons, some of
whom were very rich, especially Romanianus,^
our townsman, an intimate friend of mine from
his childhood, whom grave business matters had
then brought up to Court ; who was the most
earnest of us all for this project, and whose voice
was of great weight in commending it, because
his estate was far more ample than that of the
rest. We had arranged, too, that two officers
should be chosen yearly, for the providing of
all necessary things, whilst the rest were left un-
disturbed. But when we began to reflect whether
the wives which some of us had already, and
others hoped to have, would permit this, all that
plan, which was being so well framed, broke to
pieces in our hands, and was utterly wrecked
and cast aside. Thence we fell again to sighs
and groans, and our steps to follow the broad
and beaten ways^ of the world ; for many
thoughts were in our heart, but Thy counsel
standeth for ever.^ Out of which counsel Thou
didst mock ours, and preparedst Thine OAvn,
purposing to give us meat in due season, and to
open Thy hand, and to fill our souls with
blessing.*

CHAP. XV. — HE DISMISSES ONE MISTRESS, AND
CHOOSES ANOTHER.

25 . Meanwhile my sins were being multiplied,
and my mistress being torn from my side as an
impediment to my marriage, my heart, which
clave to her, was racked, and wounded, and
bleeding. And she went back to Africa, mak-
ing a vow unto Thee never to know another
man, leaving with me my natural son by her.
But I, unhappy one, who could not imitate a
woman, impatient of delay, since it was not
until two years' time I was to obtain her I
sought, — being not so much a lover of marriage
as a slave to lust, — procured another (not a wife,
though), that so by the bondage of a lasting

1 Romanianus was a relation of Alypius (Aug. Ep. i-j, ad Paulin.'),
of talent which astonished Augustin himself (C Acad. i. i, ii. i),
" surrounded by affluence from early youth, and snatched by what
are thought adverse circumstances from the absorbing whirlpools of
life" (ibid.). Augustm frequently mentions his great wealth, as
also this vexatious suit, whereby he was harassed (C Acad. i. i, ii.
I, 2), and which so clouded his mind that his talents were almost
unknown (C. Acad. ii. 2) ; as also his very great kindness to him-
self, when, " as a poor lad, setting out to foreign study, he had re-
ceived him in his house, supported and (yet more) encouraged him ;
when deprived of his father, comforted, animated, aided him ; when
returning to Carthage, in pursuit of a higher employment, supplied
him with all necessaries." " Lastly," says Augustin, " whatever
ease I now enjoy, that I have escaped the bonds of useless desires,
that, laying aside the weight of dead cares, I breathe, recover,
return to myselt, that with all earnestness I am seeking the truth
[Augustin wrote this the year before his baptism], that I am attain-
ing it, that I trust wholly to arrive at it, you encouraged, impelled,
effected " ( C Acad. ii. 2). Augustin had " cast him headlong with
himself" (as so many other of his friends) into the Manichsean heresy
{ibid. i. sec. 3), and it is to be hoped that he extricated him with
himself; but we only learn positively that he continued to be fond
of the works of Augustin (Ep. 2j), whereas in that which he dedi-
cated to him (C Acad.), Augustin writes very doubtingly to him,
and afterwards recommends him to Paulinus, " to be cured wholly or
in part by his conversation" {Ep. 27). — E. B. P.

2 Matt. vii. 13.

3 Ps. xxxiii. II.

* Ps. cxlv. 15, i5.


habit the disease of my soul might be nursed
up, and kept up in its vigour, or even increased,
into the kingdom of marriage. Nor was that
wound of mine as yet cured which had been
caused by the separation from my former mis-
tress, but after inflammation and most acute
anguish it mortified,^ and the pain became
numbed, but more desperate.

CHAP. XVI. THE FEAR OF DEATH AND JUDGMENT

CALLED HIM, BELIEVING IN THE IMMORTALITY
OF THE SOUL, BACK FROM HIS WICKEDNESS, HIM
WHO AFORETIME BELIEVED IN THE OPINIONS OF
EPICURUS.

26. Unto Thee be praise, unto Thee be glory,

0 Fountain of mercies ! I became more wretched,
and Thou nearer. Thy right hand was ever
ready to pluck me out of the mire, and to
cleanse me, but I was ignorant of it. Nor did
anything recall me from a yet deeper abyss of
carnal pleasures, but the fear of death and of
Thy future judgment, which, amid all my fluc-
tuations of opinion, never left my breast. And
in disputing with my friends, Alypius and Ne-
bridius, concerning the nature of good and evil,

1 held that Epicurus had, in my judgment, won
the palm, had I not believed that after death
there remained a life for the soul, and places of
recompense, which Epicurus would not believe.®
And I demanded, " Supposing us to be immor-
tal, and to be living in the enjoyment of per-
petual bodily pleasure, and that without any
fear of losing it, why, then, should we not be
happy, or why should we search for anything
else? " — not knowing that even this very thing
was a part of my great misery, that, being thus
sunk and blinded, I could not discern that light

6 In his Zfc Natura Con. Manich. he has the same idea. He is
speaking of the evil that has no pain, and remarks : " Likewise in
the body, better is a wound with pain than putrefaction without pain,
which is specially styled corruption;" and the same idea is em-
bodied in the extract from Caird's Sermons, on p. 5, note 7. I

6 The ethics of Epicurus were a modified Hedonism (Diog. Laert.
De Vitis, etc., x. 123). With him the earth was a congeries of atoms
{ibid. 38, 40), which atoms existed from eternity, 3.T\A/o>->ned t/ietn-
Sf/7'es, uninfluenced by the gods. The soul he held to be material.
It was diffused through the body, and was in its nature somewhat
like air. At death it was resolved into its original atoms, when the"
being ceased to exist (ibid. 63, 64). Hence death was a matter of
indifference to man [0 Sai'aro? ovSiv Trph<; ii/iia5, ibid. 124, etc.]. In
that great upheaval after the scholasticism of the Middle Ages, the
various ancient philosophies were revived. This of Epicurus was
disentombed and, as it were, vitalized by Gassendi, in the begin-
ning of the seventeenth century ; and it has a special importance
from its bearing on the physical theories and investigations of mod^J
ern times. Archer Butler, adverting to the inadequacy of the chiefjf
philosophical schools to satisfy the wants of the age in the early dayM
of the planting of Christianity {Lectures on Ancient Philosophy, i\M
333), says of the Epicurean : " Its popularity was unquestioneci ; itsi
adaptation to a luxurious age could not be doubted. But it was noil
formed to satisfy the wants of the time, however it might ministe(l
to its pleasures. It was, indeed, as it still continues to be, the taciW
philosophy of the careless, and might thus number a larger armjfl
of disciples than any contemporary system. But its supremacy ex
isted only when it estimated numbers, it ceased when tried by weight
The eminent men of Rome were often its avowed favourers ; bu
they were for the most part men eminent in arms and statesmanship
rather than the influential directors of the world of speculation
Nor could the admirable poetic art of Lucretius, or the still mor
attractive ease of Horace, confer such strength or dignity upon th
system as to enable it to compete with the new and mysterious elt
ments now upon all sides gathering into conflict."


Chap. XVI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


lOI


of honour and beauty to be embraced for its
own sake/ which cannot be seen by the eye of
the flesh, it being visible only to the inner man.
Nor did I, unhappy one, consider out of what
vein it emanated, that even these things, loath-
some as they were, I with pleasure discussed with
my friends. Nor could I, even in accordance
with my then notions of happiness, make myself
happy without friends, amid no matter how
great abundance of carnal pleasures. And these
friends assuredly I loved for their own sakes,

1 See viii. sec. 17, note, below.


and I knew myself to be loved of them again
for my own sake. O crooked ways ! Woe to
the audacious soul which hoped that, if it for-
sook Thee, it would find some better thing !
It hath turned and re-turned, on back, sides,
and belly, and all was hard,^ and Thou alone
rest. And behold, Thou art near, and deliver-
est us from our wretched wanderings, and stab-
lishest us in Thy way, and dost comfort us, and
say, "Run; I will carry you, yea, I will lead
you, and there also will I carry you."

2 See above, iv. cc. i, 10, and 12.


BOOK VII.

HE RECALLS THE BEGINNING OF HIS YOUTH, i. e. THE THIRTY-FIRST YEAR OF HIS AGE, IN WHICH VERY
GRAVE ERRORS AS TO THE NATURE OF GOD AND THE ORIGIN OF EVIL BEING DISTINGUISHED, AND
THE SACRED BOOKS MORE ACCURATELY KNOWN, HE AT LENGTH ARRIVES AT A CLEAR KNOWLEDGE
OF GOD, NOT YET RIGHTLY APPREHENDING JESUS CHRIST.


CHAP. I. HE REGARDED NOT GOD INDEED UNDER

THE FORM OF A HUMAN BODY, BUT AS A COR-
POREAL SUBSTANCE DIFFUSED THROUGH SPACE.

I. Dead now was that evil and abominable
youth of mine, and I was passing into early
manhood : as I increased in years, the fouler
became I in vanity, who could not conceive of
any substance but such as I saw with my own
eyes. I thought not of Thee, O God, under
the form of a human body. Since the time I
began to hear something of wisdom, I always
avoided this ; and I rejoiced to have found the
same in the faith of our spiritual mother, Thy
Catholic Church. But what else to imagine
Thee I knew not. And I, a man, and such a
man, sought to conceive of Thee, the sovereign
and only true God ; and I did in my inmost
heart believe that Thou wert incorruptible, and
inviolable, and unchangeable; because, not
knowing whence or how, yet most plainly did I
see and feel sure that that which may be cor-
rupted must be worse than that which cannot,
and what cannot be violated did I without hesi-
tation prefer before that which can, and deemed
that which suffers no change to be better than
that which is changeable. Violently did my
heart cry out against all my phantasms, and
with this one blow I endeavoured to beat away
from the eye of my mind all that unclean crowd
which fluttered around it.^ And lo, being scarce
put oil, they, in the twinkling of an eye, pressed
in multitudes around me, dashed against my
face, and beclouded it; so that, though I
thought not of Thee under the form of a human
body, yet was I constrained to image Thee to
be something corporeal in space, either infused
into the world, or infinitely diffused beyond it,
— even that incorruptible, inviolable, and un-
changeable, which I preferred to the corrupti-
ble, and violable, and changeable ; since what-
soever I conceived, deprived of this space,
appeared as nothing to me, yea, altogether
nothing, not even a void, as if a body were

1 See iii. sec. 12, iv. sees. 3 and 12, and v. sec. 19, above.
102


removed from its place and the place should
remain empty of any body at all, whether
earthy, terrestrial, watery, aerial, or celestial,
but should remain a void place — a spacious
nothing, as it were.

2. I therefore being thus gross-hearted, nor
clear even to myself, whatsoever was not
stretched over certain spaces, nor diffused, nor
crowded together, nor swelled out, or which
did not or could not receive some of these di-
mensions, I judged to be altogether nothing.^
For over such forms as my eyes are wont to
range did my heart then range ; nor did I see
that this same observation, by which I formed
those same images, was not of this kind, and
yet it could not have formed them had not it-
self been something great. In like manner did
I conceive of Thee, Life of my life, as vast
through infinite spaces, on every side penetrat-
ing the whole mass of the world, and beyond
it, all ways, through immeasurable and bound-
less spaces ; so that the earth should have Thee,
the heaven have Thee, all things have Thee,
and they bounded in Thee, but Thou nowhere.
For as the body of this air which is above the
earth preventeth not the light of the sun from
passing through it, penetrating it, not by burst-
ing or by cutting, but by filling it entirely, so
I imagined the body, not of heaven, air, and
sea only, but of the earth also, to be pervious


2 " For with what understanding can man apprehend God, who
does not yet apprehend that very understanding itself of his own by
which he desires to apprehend Him? And if he does already appre-
hend this, let him carefully consider that there is nothing in his own
nature better than it ; and let him see whether he can there see any
outlines of forms, or brightness of colours, or greatness oi space, or
distance of parts, or extension of size, or any movements through
intervals of place, or any such thing at all. Certainly we find
nothing of all this in that, than which we find nothing better in our
own nature, that is, in our own intellect, by which we apprehend
wisdom according to our capacity. What, therefore, we do not
find in that, which is our own best, we ought not to seek in Him,
who is far better than that best of ours ; that so we may understand
God, if we are able, and as much as we are able, as good without
quality, great without quantity, a Creator though He lack nothing,
ruling but from no position, sustaining all things without ' having'
them, in His wholeness everywhere yet without place, eternal
without time, making things that are changeable without change of
Himself, and without passion. Whoso thus thinks of God, although
he cannot yet find out in all ways what He is, yet piously takes
heed, as much as he is able, to think nothing of Him that lie is
not." — De Trin. v. 2.


Chap. III.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


103


to Thee, and in all its greatest parts as well as
smallest penetrable to receive Thy presence, by
a secret inspiration, both inwardly and out-
wardly governing all things which Thou hast
created. So I conjectured, because I was
unable to think of anything else ; for it was
untrue. For in this way would a greater part
of the earth contain a greater portion of Thee,
and the less a lesser ; and all things should so
be full of Thee, as that the body of an elephant
should contain more of Thee than that of a
sparrow by how much larger it is, and occupies
more room ; and so shouldest Thou make the
portions of Thyself present unto the several
portions of the world, in pieces, great to the
great, little to the little. But Thou art not
such a one ; nor hadst Thou as yet enlightened
my darkness.

CHAP. II. THE DISPUTATION OF NEBRIDIUS

AGAINST THE MANICH^ANS, ON THE QUESTION
"WHETHER GOD BE CORRUPTIBLE OR INCOR-
RUPTIBLE."

3. It was sufficient for me, O Lord, to oppose
to those deceived deceivers and dumb praters
(dumb, since Thy word sounded not forth from
them) that which a long while ago, while we
were at Carthage, Nebridius used to pro^Dound,
at which all we who heard it were disturbed :
"What could that reputed nation of darkness,
which the Manichseans are in the habit of set-
ting up as a mass opposed to Thee, have done
unto Thee hadst Thou objected to fight with it?
For had it been answered, ' It would have done
Thee some injury,' then shouldest Thou be sub-
ject to violence and corruption ; but if the
reply were : ' It could do Thee no injury,' then
was no cause assigned for Thy fighting with it ;
and so fighting as that a certain portion and
member of Thee, or offspring of Thy very sub-
stance, should be blended with adverse powers
and natures not of Thy creation, and be by
them corrupted and deteriorated to such an ex-
tent as to be turned from happiness into misery,
and need help whereby it might be delivered
and purged ; and that this offspring of Thy sub-
stance was the soul, to which, being enslaved,
contaminated, and corrupted, Thy word, free,
pure, and entire, might bring succour ; but yet
also the word itself being corruptible, because
it was from one and the same substance. So
that should they affirm Thee, whatsoever Thou
art, that is, Thy substance whereby Thou art,
to be incorruptible, then were all these asser-
tions false and execrable ; but if corruptible,
then that were false, and at the first utterance
to be abhorred."^ This argument, then, was


1 Similar arguments are made us* of in his controversy with For-
tunatus (Dis. ii. 5), where he says, that as Fortunatus could find no
answer, so neither could he when a Manichaean, and that this led


enough against those who wholly merited to be
vomited forth from the surfeited stomach, since
they had no means of escape without horrible
sacrilege, both of heart and tongue, thinking
and speaking such things of Thee.

CHAP. III. THAT THE CAUSE OF EVIL IS THE

FREE JUDGMENT OF THE WILL.

4. But I also, as yet, although I said and was
firmly persuaded, that Thou our Lord, the true
God, who madest not only our souls but our
bodies, and not our souls and bodies alone, but
all creatures and all things, wert uncontamina-
ble and inconvertible, and in no part mutable ;
yet understood I not readily and clearly what
was the cause of evil. And yet, whatever it
was, I perceived that it must be so sought out as
not to constrain me by it to believe that the
immutable God was mutable, lest I myself

him to the true faith. Again, in his De Moribus (sec. 25), where
he examines the answers which had been given, he commences:
" For this gives rise to the question, which used to throw us into
great perplexity, even when we were your zealous disciples, nor
could we find any answer, — what the race of darkness would have
done to God, supposing He had refused to fight with it at the cost
of such calamity to part of Himself. For if God would not have suf-
fered any loss by remaining quiet, we thought it hard that we had
been sent to endure so much. Again, if He would have suffered.
His nature cannot have been mcorruptible, as it behooves the nature
of God to be." We have already in the note to book iv. sec. 26,
referred to some of the matters touched on in this section ; but they
call for further elucidation, ^"he following passage, quoted by
Augustin from Manichaeus himself {Con. Ep. Manich. ig), dis-
closes to us (i) their ideas as to the nature and position of the two
kingdoms : " In one direction, on the border of this bright and holy
region, there was a land of darkness, deep and vast in extent, where
abode fiery bodies, destructive races. Here was boundless dark-
ness flowing from the same source in immeasurable abundance,
with the productions properly belonging to it. Beyond this were
muddy, turbid waters, with their inhabitants; and inside of them
winds terrible and violent, with their prince and their progenitors.
Then, again, a fiery region of destruction, with its chiefs and peo-
ples. And similarly inside of this, a race full of smoke and gloom,
where abode the dreadful prince and chief of all, having around him
innumerable princes, himself the mind and source of them all.
Such are the five natures of the region of corruption." Augustin
also designates them (ibid. sec. 20) "the five dens of the race of
darkness." The nation of darkness desires to possess the kingdom
of light, and prepares to make war upon it; and in the controversy
with Faustus we have (2) the beginning and issue of the war {Con.
Faust, ii. 3; see also De Hceres, 46). Augustin says: " You dress
up for our benefit some wonderful First Man, who came down from
the race of light, to war with the race of darkness, armed with his
waters against the waters of the enemy, and with his fire against
their fire, and with his winds against their winds." And again
{ibid. sec. 5) : " You say that he mingled with the principles of
darkness in his conflict with the race of darkness, that by capturing
these principles the world might be made out of the mixture. So
that, by your profane fancies, Christ is not only mingled with
heaven and all the stars, but conjoined and compounded with the
earth and all its productions, — a Saviour no more, but needing to
be saved by you, by your eating and disgorging Him. This foolish
custom of making your disciples bring you food, that your teeth
and stomach may be the means of relieving Christ, who is bound
up in it, is a consequence of your profane fancies. You declare
that Christ is liberated in this way, — not, however, entirely ; for
you hold that some tiny particles of no value still remain in the ex-
crement, to be mixed up and compounded again and again in
various material forms, and to be released and purified at any rate
by the fire in which the world will be burned up, if not before.
Nay, even then, you say, Christ is not entirely liberated, but some
extreme particles of His good and divine nature, which have been
so defiled that they cannot be cleansed, are condemned to stay for
ever in the mass of darkness." The result of this commingling of
the light with the darkness was, that a certain portion and member
of God was turned " from happiness into misery," and placed in
bondage in the world, and was in need of help "whereby it might
be delivered and purged." (See also Con. Fortunat. i. i.) Refer-
ence may be made (3), for information as to the method by which
the divine substance was released in the eating of the elect, to the
notes on book iii. sec. 18, above ; and for the influence of the sun
and moon in accomplishing that release, to the note on book v. sec.
12, above.


I04


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VIL


should become the thing that I was seeking out.
I sought, therefore, for it free from care, certain
of the untruthfulness of what these asserted,
whom I shunned with my whole heart ; for I
perceived that through seeking after the origin
of evil, they were filled with malice, in that
they liked better to think that Thy Substance
did suffer evil than that their own did commit it.^

5. And I directed my attention to discern
what I now heard, that free will'^ was the cause
of our doing evil, and Thy righteous judgment
of our suffering it. But I was unable clearly to
discern it. So, then, trying to draw the eye
of my mind from that pit, I was plunged again
therein, and trying often, was as often plunged
back again. But this raised me towards Thy
light, that I knew as well that I had a will as
that I had life : when, therefore, I was willing
or unwilling to do anything, I was most certain
that it was none but myself that was willing and
unwilling ; and immediately I perceived that
there was the cause of my sin. But what I did
against my will I saw that I suffered rather than
did, and that judged I not to be my fault, but
my punishment ; whereby, believing Thee to
be most just, I quickly confessed myself to be
not unjustly punished. But again I said :
"Who made me? Was it not my God, who
is not only good, but goodness itself? Whence
came I then to will to do evil, and to be
unwilling to do good, that there might be
cause for my just punishment? Wlio was
it that put this in me, -and implanted in me
the root of bitterness, seeing I was altogether
made by my most sweet God? If the devil
were the author, whence is that devil ? And if
he also, by his own perverse will, of a good
angel became a devil, whence also was the evil
will in him whereby he became a devil, seeing
that the angel was made altogether good by that
most good Creator ? " By these reflections was
I again cast down and stifled ; yet not plunged
into that hell of error (where no man confesseth
unto Thee),^ to think that Thou dost suffer evil,
rather than that man doth it.

CHAP. IV. THAT GOD IS NOT CORRUPTIBLE, WHO,

IF HE WERE, WOULD NOT BE GOD AT ALL.

6. For I was so struggling to find out the
rest, as having already found that what was
incorruptible must be better than the corrupti-
ble ; and Thee, therefore, whatsoever Thou
wert, did I acknowledge to be incorruptible. For
never yet was, nor will be, a soul able to con-
ceive of anything better than Thou, who art the
highest and best good. But whereas most
truly and certainly that which is incorruptible

1 See iv. sec. 26, note, above.

2 See iii. sec. 12, note, and iv. sec. 26, note, above.
"'Ps. vi. 5.


is to be preferred to the corruptible (like as I
myself did now prefer it), then, if Thou were
not incorruptible, I could in my thoughts have
reached unto something better than my God.
Where, then, I saw that the incorruptible was
to be preferred to the corruptible, there ought
I to seek Thee, and there observe "whence evil
itself was," that is, whence comes the corrup-
tion by which Thy substance can by no means
be profaned. For corruption, truly, in no way
injures our God, — by no will, by no necessity,
by no unforeseen chance, — because He is God,
and what He wills is good, and Himself is
that good ; but to be corrupted is not good.
Nor art Thou compelled to do anything against
Thy will in that Thy will is not greater than
Thy power. But greater should it be wert
Thou Thyself greater than Thyself; for the will
and power of God is God Himself. And what
can be unforeseen by Thee, who knowest all
things ? Nor is there any sort of nature but
Thou knowest it. And what more should we
say "why that substance which God is should
not be corruptible," seeing that if it were so it
could not be God ?

CHAP. V. QUESTIONS CONCERNING THE ORIGIN

OF EVIL IN REGARD TO GOD, WHO, SINCE HE IS
THE CHIEF GOOD, CANNOT BE THE CAUSE OF
EVIL.

7. And I sought "whence is evil?" And
sought in an evil way ; nor saw I the evil in my
very search. And I set in order before the
view of my spirit the whole creation, and what-
ever we can discern in it, such as earth, sea, air,
stars, trees, living creatures ; yea, and whatever
in it we do not see, as the firmament of heaven,
all the angels, too, and all the spiritual inhabit-
ants thereof. But these very beings, as though
they were bodies, did my fancy dispose in such
and such places, and I made one huge mass of
all Thy creatures, distinguished according to
the kinds of bodies, — some of them being real
bodies, some what I myself had feigned for
spirits. And this mass I made huge, — not as it
was, which I could not know, but as large as I
thought well, yet every way finite. But Thee,

0 Lord, I imagined on every part environing
and penetrating it, though every way infinite ;
as if there were a sea everywhere, and on every
side through immensity nothing but an infinite
sea ; and it contained within itself some sponge,
huge, though finite, so that the sponge would
in all its parts be filled from the immeasurable
sea. So conceived I Thy creation to be itself
finite, and filled by Thee, the Infinite. And

1 said, Behold God, and behold what God hath
created ; and God is good, yea, most mightily
and incomparably better than all these ; but yet
He, who is good, hath created them good, and


Chap. VI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


lO:


behold how He encircleth and filleth them.
Where, then, is evil, and whence, and how
crept it in hither? What is its root, and what
its seed ? Or hath it no being at all ? Why,
then, do we fear and shun that which hath no
being? Or if we fear it needlessly, then surely
is that fear evil whereby the heart is unnecessa-
rily pricked and tormented, — and so much a
greater evil, as we have naught to fear, and yet
do fear. Therefore either that is evil which we
fear, or the act of fearing is in itself evil.
Whence, therefore, is it, seeing that God, who
is good, hath made all these things good ? He,
indeed, the greatest and chiefest Good, hath
created these lesser goods ; but both Creator
and created are all good. Whence is evil ? Or
was there some evil matter of which He made
and formed and ordered it, but left something
in it which He did not convert into good ? But
why was this ? Was He powerless to change
the whole lump, so that no evil should remain
in it, seeing that He is omnipotent ? Lastly,
why would He make anything at all of it, and
not rather by the same omnipotency cause it
not to be at all ? Or could it indeed exist con-
trary to His will ? Or if it were from eternity,
why did He permit it so to be for infinite spaces
of times in the past, and was pleased so long
after to make something out of it ? Or if He
wished now all of a sudden to do something,
this rather should the Omnipotent have accom-
plished, that this evil matter should not be at
all, and that He only should be the whole, true,
chief, and infinite Good. Or if it were not
good that He, who was good, should not also
be the framer and creator of what was good,
then that matter which was evil being removed,
and brought to nothing. He might form good
matter, whereof He might create all things.
For He would not be omnipotent were He not
able to create something good without being
assisted by that matter which had not been cre-
ated by Himself.^ Such like things did I re-
volve in my miserable breast, overwhelmed with
most gnawing cares lest I should die ere I dis-
covered the truth; yet was the faith of Thy
Christ, our Lord and Saviour, as held in the
Catholic Church, fixed firmly in my heart,
unformed, indeed, as yet upon many points,
and diverging from doctrinal rules, but yet my
mind did not utterly leave it, but every day
rather drank in more and more of it.

CHAP. VI. HE REFUTES THE DIVINATIONS OF

THE ASTROLOGERS, DEDUCED FROM THE CON-
STELLATIONS.

8. Now also had I repudiated the lying divi-
I nations and impious absurdities of the astrolo-


• See xi. sec. 7, note, below.


gers. Let Thy mercies, out of the depth of my
soul, confess unto thee^ for this also, O my
God. For Thou, Thou altogether, — for who
else is it that calls us back from the death of all
errors, but that Life which knows not how to
die, and the Wisdom which, requiring no light,
enlightens the minds that do, whereby the uni-
verse is governed, even to the fluttering leaves
of trees ? — Thou providedst also for my obsti-
nacy wherewith I struggled with Vindicianus,^
an acute old man, and Nebridius, a young one
of remarkable talent ; the former vehemently
declaring, and the latter frequently, though
with a certain measure of doubt, saying, "That
no art existed by which to foresee future things,
but that men's surmises had oftentimes the help
of luck, and that of many things which they
foretold some came to pass unawares to the
predicters, who lighted on it by their oft speak-
ing." Thou, therefore, didst provide a friend
for me, who was no negligent consulter of the
astrologers, and yet not thoroughly skilled in
those arts, but, as I said, a curious consulter with
them; and yet knowing somewhat, which he said
he had heard from his father, which, how far it
would tend to overthrow the estimation of that
art, he knew not. This man, then, by name
Firminius, having received a liberal education,
and being well versed in rhetoric, consulted
me, as one very dear to him, as to what I
thought on some affairs of his, wherein his
worldly hopes had ri.sen, viewed with regard to
his so-called constellations ; and I, who had
now begun to lean in this particular towards
Nebridius' opinion, did not indeed decline to
speculate about the matter, and to tell him what
came into my irresolute mind, but still added
that I was now almost persuaded that these
were but empty and ridiculous follies. Upon
this he told me that his father had been very
curious in such books, and that he had a friend
who was as interested in them as he was him-
self, who, with combined study and consulta-
tion, fanned the flame of their affection for
these toys, insomuch that they would observe
the moment when the very dumb animals which
bred in their houses brought forth, and then
observed the position of the heavens with re-
gard to them, so as to gather fresh proofs of
this so-called art. He said, moreover, that his
father had told him, that at the time his mother
was about to give birth to him (Firminius), a
female servant of that friend of his father's was
also great with child, which could not be
hidden from her master, who took care with
most diligent exactness to know of the birth of
his very dogs. And so it came to pass that
(the one for his wife, and the other for his ser-


2 Ps. cvii. 8, Vu/g-.

s See iv. sec. 5, note, above.


io6


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VII.


vant, with the most careful observation, calcu-
lating the days and hours, and the smaller
divisions of the hours) both were delivered at the
same moment, so that both were compelled to
allow the very selfsame constellations, even to the
minutest point, the one for his son, the other
for his young slave. For so soon as the women
began to be in travail, they each gave notice
to the other of what was fallen out in their re-
spective houses, and had messengers ready to
despatch to one another so soon as they had
information of the actual birth, of which they
had easily provided, each in his own province,
to give instant intelligence. Thus, then, he
said, the messengers of the respective parties
met one another in such equal distances from
either house, that neither of them could discern
any difference either in the position of the stars
or other most minute points. And yet Firmi-
nius, born in a high estate in his parents' house,
ran his course through the prosperous paths of
this world, was increased in wealth, and elevated
to honours ; whereas that slave — the yoke of
his condition being unrelaxed — continued to
serve his masters, as Firminius, who knew him,
informed me.

9. Upon hearing and believing these things,
related by so reliable a person, all that resist-
ance of mine melted away ; and first I endeav-
oured to reclaim Firminius himself from that
curiosity, by telling him, that upon inspecting
his constellations, I ought, were I to foretell
truly, to have seen in them parents eminent
among their neighbours, a noble family in its
own city, good birth, becoming education, and
liberal learning. But if that servant had con-
sulted me upon the same constellations, since
they were his also, I ought again to tell him,
likewise truly, to see in them the meanness of
his origin, the abjectness of his condition, and
everything else altogether removed from and at
variance with the former. Whence, then, look-
ing upon the same constellations, I should, if I
spoke the truth, speak diverse things, or if I
spoke the same, speak falsely ; thence assuredly
was it to be gathered, that whatever, upon con-
sideration of the constellations, was foretold
truly, was not by art, but by chance ; and
whatever falsely, was not from the unskilfulness
of the art, but the error of chance.

ID. An opening being thus made, I ruminated
within myself on such things, that no one of
those dotards (who followed such occupations,
and whom I longed to assail, and with derision
to confute) might urge against me that Firmi-
nius had informed me falsely, or his father him :
I turned my thoughts to those that are born
twins, who generally come out of the womb so
near one to another, that the small distance of
time between them — how much force soever


they may contend that it has in the nature of
things — cannot be noted by human observation,
or be expressed in those figures which the astrol-
oger is to examine that he may pronounce the
truth. Nor can they be true ; for, looking into
the same figures, he must have foretold the same
of Esau and Jacob,^ whereas the same did not
happen to them. He must therefore speak
falsely ; or if truly, then, looking into the same
figures, he must not speak the same things.
Not then by art, but by chance, would he speak
truly. For Thou, O Lord, most righteous
Ruler of the universe, the inquirers and inquired
of knowing it not, workest by a hidden inspira-
tion that the consulter should hear what, accord-
ing to the hidden deservings of souls, he ought
to hear, out of the depth of Thy righteous judg-
ment, to whom let not man say, " What is this? "
or " Why that? " Let him not say so, for he
is man.

CHAP. VII. — HE IS SEVERELY EXERCISED AS TO
THE ORIGIN OF EVIL.

II. And now, O my Helper, hadst Thou
freed me from those fetters ; and I inquired,
" Whence is evil? " and found no result. But
Thou sufferedst me not to be carried away from
the faith by any fluctuations of thought, whereby
I believed Thee both to exist, and Thy sub-
stance to be unchangeable, and that Thou hadst
a care of and wouldest judge men ; and that
in Christ, Thy Son, our Lord, and the Holy
Scriptures, which the authority of Thy Catholic
Church pressed upon me. Thou hadst planned
the way of man's salvation to that life which is to
come after this death. These things being safe
and immoveably settled in my mind, I eagerly
inquired, " Whence is evil? " What torments
did my travailing heart then endure ! What
sighs, O my God ! Yet even there were Thine
ears open, and I knew it not ; and when in still-
ness I sought earnestly, those silent contritions
of my soul were strong cries unto Thy mercy.
No man knoweth, but only Thou, what I
endured. For what was that which was thence
through my tongue poured into the ears of my
most familiar friends? Did the whole tumult
of my soul, for which neither time nor speech
was sufficient, reach them? Yet went the whole
into Thine ears, all of which I bellowed out
from the sighings of my heart ; and my desire
was before Thee, and the light of mine eyes was
not with me;* for that was within, I without.
Nor was that in place, but my attention was
directed to things contained in place ; but there
did I find no resting-place, nor did they receive
me in such a way as that I could say, "It is

1 He uses the same illustration when speaking of the ttiathema-
tici, or astrologers, in his De Doct. Christ, ii. 33.

2 Ps. xxxvii. 9-11, Vulg.


B


Chap. IX.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


107


sufificient, it is well ; ' ' nor did they let me turn
back, where it might be well enough with me.
For to these things was I superior, but inferior
to Thee ; and Thou art my true joy when I am
subjected to Thee, and Thou hadst subjected to
me what Thou createdst beneath me.^ And
this was the true temperature and middle region
of my safety, to continue in Thine image, and
by serving Thee to have dominion over the
body. But when I lifted myself proudly against
Thee, and " ran against the Lord, even on His
neck, with the thick bosses" of my buckler,^
even these inferior things were placed above
me, and pressed upon me, and nowhere was
there alleviation or breathing space. They
encountered my sight on every side in crowds
and troops, and in thought the images of
bodies obtruded themselves as I was return-
ing to Thee, as if they would say unto me,
*' Whither goest thou, unworthy and base one ? ' '
And these things had sprung forth out of my
wound ; for thou humblest the proud like one
that is wounded,^ and through my own swel-
ling was I separated from Thee ; yea, my too
much swollen face closed up mine eyes.

CHAP. VIII. BY god's assistance HE BY DEGREES

ARRIVES AT THE TRUTH.

12. ''But Thou, O Lord, shalt endure for
ever,"* yet not for ever art Thou angry with us,
because Thou dost commiserate our dust and
ashes ; and it was pleasing in Thy sight to re-
form my deformity, and by inward stings didst
Thou disturb me, that I should be dissatisfied
until Thou wert made sure to my inward sight.
And by the secret hand of Thy remedy was my
swelling lessened, and the disordered and dark-
ened eyesight of my mind, by the sharp anoint-
ings of healthful sorrows, was from day to day
made whole.


CHAP. IX. HE COMPARES THE DOCTRINE OF THE

PLATONISTS CONCERNING THE Aoyog WITH
THE MUCH MORE EXCELLENT DOCTRINE OF
CHRISTIANITY.

13. And Thou, willing first to show me how
Thou " resistest the proud, but givest grace
anto the humble,"^ and by how great an act of
mercy Thou hadst pointed out to men the
path of humility, in that Thy "Word was


1 Man can only control the forces of nature by yielding obedience
O nature's laws ; and our true joy and safety is only to be found in
)eing " subjected " to God. So Augustin says in another place
De Trin. x. 7), the soul is enjoined to know itself, " in order that

may consider itself, and live according to its own nature ; that is,
eek to be regulated according to its own nature, viz. under Him to
vhom it ought to be subject, and above those things to which it is
0 be preferred ; under Him by whom it ought to be ruled, above
hose things which it ought to rule."

* Job XV. 26.

* Ps. Ixxxix. II, Vulg.

* Ps. cii. 12.

* Jas. iv. 6, and i Pet. v. 5.


made flesh" and dwelt among men, — Thou
procuredst for me, by the instrumentality
of one inflated with most monstrous pride,
certain books of the Platonists,® translated from
Greek into Latin.' And therein I read, not in-
deed in the same words, but to the selfsame
effect,® enforced by many and divers reasons,

6 " This," says Watts, " was likely to be the book of Amelius the
Platonist, who hath indeed this beginning of St. John's Gospel,
calling the apostle a barbarian." This Amelius was a disciple of
Plotinus, who was the first to develope and formulate the Neo-Pla-
tonic doctrines, and of whom it is said that he would not have his
likeness taken, nor be reminded of his birthday, because it would
recall the existence of the body he so much despised. A popular
account of the theories of Plotinus, and their connection with the
doctrines of Plato and of Christianity respectively, will be found in
Archer Butler's Lectures on Ancient Philosophy, vol. ii. pp. 348-
358. For a more systematic view of his writings, see Ueberweg's
History of Philosophy, sec. 58. Augustin alludes again in his De
Vita Beata (sec. 4) to the influence the Platonic writings had on
him at this time; and it is interesting to note how in God's provi-
dence they were drawing him to seek a fuller knowledge of Him,
just as in his nineteenth year (book iii. sec. 7, above) the Horten-
sius of Cicero stimulated him to the pursuit of wisdom. Thus in
his experience was exemplified the truth embodied in the saying
of Clemens Alexandrinus, — " Philosophy led the Greeks to Christ,
as the law did the Jews." Archbishop Trench, in his Hutsean
Lectures (lees, i and 3, 1846, " Christ the Desire of all Nations"),
enters with interesting detail into this question, specially as it re-
lates to the heathen world. "None," he says in lecture 3, " can
thoughtfully read the early history of the Church without marking
how hard the Jewish Christians found it to make their own the true
idea of a Son of God, as indeed is witnessed by the whole Epistle to
the Hebrews — how comparatively easy the Gentile converts ; how
the Hebrew Christians were continually in danger of sinking down
into Ebionite heresies, making Christ but a man as other men, re-
fusing to go on unto perfection, or to realize the truth of His higher
nature ; while, on the other hand, the genial promptness is as re-
markable with which the Gentile Church welcomed and embraced
the offered truth, ' God manifest in the flesh.' We feel that there
must have been effectual preparations in the latter, which wrought
its greater readiness for receiving and heartily embracing this truth
when it arrived." The passage from Amelius the Platonist, re-
ferred to at the beginning of this note, is examined in Burton's
Bampton Lectures, note 90. It has been adverted to by Eusebius,
Theodoret, and perhaps by Augustin in the De Civ. Dei, x. 29,
quoted in note 2, sec. 25, below. See Kayes' Clement, pp. 116-
124.

7 See i. sec. 23, note, above, and also his Li/e, in the last vol. of
the Benedictine edition of his works, for a very fair estimate of his
knowledge of Greek.

8 The Neo-Platonic ideas as to the "Word" or Adyos, which
Augustin (i) contrasts during the remainder of this book with the
doctrine of the gospel, had its germ in the writings of Plato. The
Greek term expresses both reason and the expression of reason in
sjjeech ; and the Fathers frequently illustrate, by reference to this
connection between ideas and uttered words, the fact that the
"Word" that was with God had an incarnate existence in the
world as the " Word" vtade flesh. By the Logos of the Alexan-
drian school something ver>' different was meant from the Christian
doctrine as to the incarnation, of which the above can only be taken
as a dim illustration. It has been questioned, indeed, whether the
philosophers, from Plotinus to the Gnostics of the time of St. John,
believed the Logos and the supreme God to have in any sense sepa-
rate "personalities." Dr. Burton, in his Bampton Lectures, con-
cludes that they did not (lect. vii. p. 215, and note 93; compare
Dorner, Person of Christ, i. 27, Clark) ; and quotes Origen when
he points out to Celsus, that " while the heathen use the reason of
God as another term for God Himself, the Christians use the term
Logos for the Son of God" Another point of difference which
appears in Augustin's review of Platonism above, is found in the
Platonist's discarding the idea of the Logos becoming man. This
the very genius of their philosophy forbade them to hold, since they
looked on matter as impure. (2) It has been charged against
Christianity by Gibbon and other sceptical writers, that it has bor-
rowed largely from the doctrines of Plato ; and it has been said that
this doctrine of the Logos was taken from them by Justin Mar-
tyr. This charge, says Burton {ibid. p. 194), " has laid open in its
supporters more inconsistencies and more misstatements than any
other which ever has been advanced." We have alluded in the
note to book iii. sec. 8, above, to Justin Martyr's search after truth.
He endeavoured to find it successively in the Stoical, the Peripa-
tetic, the Pythagorean, and the Platonic schools; and he appears
to have thought as highly of Plato's philosophy as did Augus-
tin. He does not, however, fail to criticise his doctrine when
inconsistent with Christianity (see Burton, ibid, notes 18 and 86).
Justin Martj'r has apparently been chosen for attack as being the
earliest of the post-apostolic Fathers. Burton, however, shows that
Ignatius, who knew St. John, and was bishop of Antioch thirty
years before his death, used precisely the same expression as
applied to Christ (ibid. p. 204). This would appear to be a conclu-


io8


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VII,


that, " In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God. All
things were made by Him; and without Him
was not any thing made that was made." That
which was made by Him is "life; and the life
was the light of men. And the light shineth in
darkness ; and the darkness comprehendeth it
not."^ And that the soul of man, though it
" bears witness of the light," "^ yet itself " is not
that light ;^ but the Word of God, being God,
is that true light that lighteth every man that
Cometh into the world." * And that " He was
in the world, and the world was made by Him,
and the world knew Him not."* But that
" He came unto His own, and His own re-
ceived Him not.* But as many as received
Him, to them gave He power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe on His
name. ' ' '' This I did not read there.

14. In like manner, I read there that God
the Word was born not of flesh, nor of blood,
nor of the will of man, nor of the will of the
flesh, but of God. But that " the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us,"* I read not
there. For I discovered in those books that it
was in many and divers ways said, that the Son
was in the form of the Father, and " thought it
not robbery to be equal with God," for that
naturally He was the same substance. But that
He emptied Himself, "and took upon Him
the form of a servant, and was made in the like-
ness of men : and being found in fashion as a
man, He humbled Himself, and became obedi-
ent unto death, even the death of the cross.
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him ' '


sive answer to this objection. (3) It may be well to note here Bur-
ton's general conclusions as to the employment of this term Logos
in St. John, since it occurs frequently in this part of the Confessions.
Every one must have observed St. John's use of the term is peculiar
as compared with the other apostles, but it is not always borne in
mind that a generation probably elapsed between the date of his
gospel and that of the other apostolic writings. In this interval the
Gnostic heresy had made great advances ; and it would appear that
John, finding this term Logos prevalent when he wrote, infused into
it a nobler meaning, and pointed out to those being led away by
this heresy that there was indeed One who might be called " the
Word" — One who was not, indeed, God's mind, or as the word
that comes from the mouth and passes away, but One who, while
He had been " made flesh " like unto us, was yet co-eternal with
God. " You will perceive," says Archer Butler {Ancient Philoso-
phy, vol. ii. p. 10), " how natural, or rather how necessary, is such
a process, when you remember that this is exactly what every
teacher must do who speaks of God to a heathen ; he adopts the
term, but he refines and exalts its meaning. Nor, indeed, is the
procedure diflferent in any use whatever of language in sacred
senses and for sacred purposes. It has been justly remarked, by
(I think) Isaac Casaubon, that the principle of all these adaptations
is expressed in the sentence of St. Paul, "Oi' a.-yvoovvn-; eva-epelre,
TovTov e-yi) KarayyiWio vfil:'." On the charge against Christian-
ity of having borrowed from heathenism, reference may be made to
Trench's Hulsean Lectures, lect. i. (1846) ; and for the sources of
Gnosticism, and St. John's treatment of lieresies as to the " Word,"
lects. ii. and v. in Mansel's Gnostic Heresies will be consulted with
profit.

1 John i. 1-5.

8 Ibid. i. 7, 8.

3 See note, sec. 23, below.

* John i. 9.
10.


5 Ibid.

6 Ibid. i.
1 Ibid. i.
8 Ibid. i.


II.
12.
14-


from the dead, "and given Him a name above
every name ; that at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth ;
and that every tongue should" confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father ;"''
those books have not. For that before all
times, and above all times. Thy only-begotten
Son remaineth unchangeably co-eternal with
Thee ; and that of " His fulness " souls receive,^"
that they may be blessed ; and that by partici-
pation of the wisdom remaining in them they
are renewed, that they may be wise, is there.
But that "in due time Christ died for the
ungodly,"" and that Thou sparedst not Thine
only Son, but deliveredst Him up for us all,^'' is
not there. " Because Thou hast hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed
them unto babes ;"^^ that they "that labour
and are heavy laden" might "come" unto
Him and He might refresh them," because He
is "meek and lowly in heart." ^* " The meek
will He guide in judgment ; and the meek will
He teach His way ;"^* looking upon our humil-
ity and our distress, and forgiving all our sins."
But such as are puffed up with the elation of
would-be sublimer learning, do not hear Him
saying, "Learn of Me; for I am meek and
lowly in heart : and ye shall find rest unto your
souls. " ^® " Because that, when they knew God,
they glorified Him not as God, neither were
thankful ; but became vain in their imagina-
tions, and their foolish heart was darkened.
Professing themselves to be wise, they became
fools. "i»

15. And therefore also did I read there, that
they had changed the glory of Thy incorrupti-
ble nature into idols and divers forms, — " into
an image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things,"^" namely, into that Egyptian food"
for which Esau lost his birthright ; ^^ for that
Tliy first-born people worshipped the head of a
four-footed beast instead of Thee, turning back '\
in heart towards Egypt, and prostrating Thy;
image — their own soul — before the image "of


B Phil. ii. 6-11. t

10 John i. 16.

11 Rom. v. 6.

12 Rom. viii. 32.

13 Matt. xi. 25.
!■* Ibid. ver. 28.

15 Ibid. ver. 29. '\

IS Ps. XXV. 9.

" Ibid. ver. 18. t

18 Matt. xi. 29.

19 Rom. i. 21, 22. '
=n Ibid. \. 23.

21 In the Benedictine edition we have reference to Augustin's in Pi.
xlvi. 6, where he says : " We find the lentile is an Egj'ptian food,
for it abounds in Egj'pt, whence the Alexandrian lentile is esteemed
so as to be brought to our country, as if it grew not here. Esau,l>y
desiring Egj'ptian food, lost his birthright ; and so the Jewish peo-
ple, of whom it is said they turned back in heart to Eg>'pt, in a
manner craved for lentiles, and lost their birthright." See Ex. xvt'
3 ; Num. xi. 5.

22 Gen. XXV. 33, 34.


Chap. X.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


109


an ox that eateth grass." ^ These things found
I there ; but I fed not on them. For it pleased
Thee, O Lord, to take away the reproach of
diminution from Jacob, that the elder should
serve the younger ; ^ and Thou hast called the
Gentiles into Thine inheritance. And I had
come unto Thee from among the Gentiles, and
I strained after that gold which Thou willedst
Thy people to take from Egypt, seeing that
wheresoever it was it was Thine.* And to the
Athenians Thou saidst by Thy apostle, that in
Thee " we live, and move, and have our being ;"
as one of their own poets has said.* And verily
these books came from thence. But I set not
my mind on the idols of Egypt, whom they
ministered to with Thy gold,* " who changed
the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and
served the creature more than the Creator. ' ' ®

CHAP. X. DIVINE THINGS ARE THE MORE

CLEARLY MANIFESTED TO HIM WHO WITHDRAWS
INTO THE RECESSES OF HIS HEART.


16.


And being thence warned to return to


myself, I entered into my inward self. Thou

1 Ps. cvi. 20; Ex. x.xxii. 1-6.

' Rom. ix. 12.

8 Similarly, as to all truth being God's, Justin Martyr says :
" Whatever things were rightly said among all men are the prop-
erty of us Christians" {Apol. ii. 13). In this he parallels what
Augustin claims in another place (De Doctr. Christ, ii. 28) : " Let
every good and true Christian understand that wherever truth may
be found, it belongs to his Master." Origen has a similar allusion
to that of Augustin above (^Ep. ad Gregor. vol. i. 30), but echoes
the experience of our erring nature, when he says that the gold of
Egypt more frequently becomes transformed into an idol, than into
an ornament for the tabernacle of God. Augustin gives us at length
his views on this matter in his De Doctr. Christ, ii. 60, 61 : " If
those who are called philosophers, and especially the Platonists,
have said aught that is true and in harmony with our faith, we are
not only not to shrink from it, but to claim it for our own use from
those who have unlawful possession of it. For, as the Egj'ptians
had not only the idols and heavy burdens which the people of Israel
hated and fled from, but also vessels and ornaments of gold and sil-
ver, and garments, which the same people when going out of Eg>-pt
appropriated to themselves, designing them for a better use, — not
doing this on their own authority, but by the command of God, the
Egyptians themselves, in their ignorance, providing them with
things which they themselves were not making a good use of (E.x.
hi. 21, 22, xii. 35, 36) ; in the same way all branches of heathen
learning have not only false and superstitious fancies and heavy
burdens of unnecessary toil, which every one of us, when going out
under the leadership of Christ from the fellowship of the heathen,
ought to abhor and avoid, but they contain also liberal instruction,
which is better adapted to the use of the truth, and some most ex-
cellent precepts of morality ; and some truths in regard even to the
worship of the One God are found among them. Now these are, so
to speak, their gold and silver, which they did not create them-
selves, but dug out of the mines of God's providence which are
everywhere scattered abroad, and are perversely and unlawfully
prostituting to the worship of devils. These, therefore, the Chris-
tian, when he separates himself in spirit from the miserable fellow-
ship of these men, ought to take away from them, and to devote to
their proper use in preaching the gospel. Their garments, also, —
that is, human institutions such as are adapted to that intercourse
with men which is indispensable in this life, — we must take and
turn to a Christian use. And what else have many good and faith-
ful men among our brethren done? Do we not see with what a
quantity of gold and silver, and garments, Cyprian, that most per-
suasive teacher and most blessed martyr, was loaded when he came
out of Egypt ? How much Lactantius brought with him ! And
Victorinus, and Optatus, and Hilary, not to speak of living men !
How much Greeks out of number have borrowed ! And, prior to
all these, that most faithful servant of God, Moses, had done the
same thing ; for of him it is written that he was learned in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians (Acts vii. 22). . . . For what was done at
the time of the exodus was no doubt a type prefiguring what hap-
pens now."

* Acts xvii. 28.

6 Hosea ii. 8.

' Rom, i. 25.


leading me on ; and I was able to do it, for
Thou wert become my helper. And I entered,
and with the eye of my soul (such as it was)
saw above the same eye of my soul, above my
mind, the Unchangeable Light.' Not this com-
mon light, which all flesh may look upon, nor,
as it were, a greater one of the same kind, as
though the brightness of this should be much
more resplendent, and with its greatness fill up
all things. Not like this was that light, but
different, yea, very different from all these.
Nor was it above my mind as oil is above water,
nor as heaven above earth ; but above it was,
because it made me, and I below it, because I
was made by it. He who knows the Truth
knows that Light ; and he that knows it
knoweth eternity. Love knoweth it. O Eter-
nal Truth, and true Love, and loved Eternity ! ^
Thou art my God ; to Thee do I sigh both
night and day. When I first knew Thee, Thou
liftedst me up, that L might see there was that
which I might see, and that yet it was not I
that did see. And Thou didst beat back the
infirmity of my sight, pouring forth upon me
most strongly Thy beams of light, and I trem-
bled with love and fear ; and I found myself to
be far off from Thee, in the region of dissimi-
larity, as if I heard this voice of Thine from on
high : "I am the food of strong men ; grow,
and thou shalt feed upon me ; nor shalt thou
convert me, like the food of thy flesh, into thee,
but thou shalt be converted into me." And I
learned that Thou for iniquity dost correct man,
and Thou dost make my soul to consume away
like a spider.* And I said, "Is Truth, there-
fore, nothing because it is neither diffused
through space, finite, nor infinite?" And
Thou criedst to me from afar, "Yea, verily, 'I
AM THAT I AM. ' " '" And I heard this, as things


' Not the "corporeal brightness" which as a Manichee he had
believed in, and to which reference has been made in iii. sees. 10,
12, iv. sec. 3, and sec. 2, above. The Christian belief he indicates
in his De Trin. viii. 2 : " God is Light (i John i. 5), not in such
way that these eyes see, but in such way as the heart sees when it
is said, ' He is Truth.' " See also note i, sec. 23, above.

8 If we knew not God, he says, we could not love Him {De Trin.
viii. 12) ; but in language very similar to that above, he tells us
" we are men, created in the image of our Creator, whose eternity
is true, and whose truth is eternal ; whose love is eternal and true,
and who Himself is the eternal, true, and adorable Trinity, without
confusion, without separation" {De Civ. Dei, xi. 28); God, then,
as even the Platonists hold, being the principle of all knowledge.
" Let Him," he concludes, in his De Civ. Dei (viii. 4), " be sought
in whom all things are secured to us, let Him be discovered in
whom all truth becomes certain to us, let Him be loved in whom all
becomes right to us."

9 Ps. xxxix. II, Vulg.

10 Ex. iii. 14. Augustin, when in his De Civ. Dei (vm. 11, 12) he
makes reference to this text, leans to the belief, from certain paral-
lels between Plato's doctrines and those of the word of God, that
he may have derived information concerning the Old Testament
Scriptures from an interpreter when in F.gj'pt. He says : " The
most striking thing in this connection, and that which most of all
inclines me almost to assent to the opinion that Plato was not igno-
rant of those writings, is the answer which was given to the ques-
tion elicited from the holy Moses when the words of God were con-
veyed to him by the angel ; for when he asked what was the name
of that God who was commanding him to go and deliver the
Hebrew people out of Egypt, this answer was given : ' I am who
am; and thou shalt say to the children of Israel, He who is sent
me unto you; ' as though, compared with Him that truly is, because


no


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VII.


are heard in the heart, nor was there room for
doubt ; and I should more readily doubt that I
live than that Truth is not, which is "clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are
made."^

CHAP. XI. THAT CREATURES ARE MUTABLE AND

GOD ALONE IMMUTABLE.

17. And I viewed the other things below
Thee, and perceived that they neither altogether
are, nor altogether are not. They are, indeed,
because they are from Thee ; but are not,
because they are not what Thou art. For that
truly is which remains immutably.'* It is good,
then, for me to cleave unto God,^ for if I remain
not in Him, neither shall I in myself; but He,
remaining in Himself, reneweth all things.* And
Thou art the Lord my God, since Thou stand-
est not in need of my goodness.*

CHAP. XII. — WHATEVER THINGS THE GOOD GOD
HAS CREATED ARE VERY GOOD.

18. And it was made clear unto me that those
things are good which yet are corrupted, which,
neither were they supremely good, nor unless
they were good, could be corrupted ; because if
supremely good, they were incorruptible, and
if not good at all, there was nothing in them to
be corrupted. For corruption harms, but, un-
less it could diminish goodness, it could not
harm. Either, then, corruption harms not,
which cannot be ; or, what is most certain, all
which is corrupted is deprived of good. But
if they be deprived of all good, they will cease
to be. For if they be, and cannot be at all cor-
rupted, they will become better, because they
shall remain incorruptibly. And what more
monstrous than to assert that those things
which have lost all their goodness are made
better? Therefore, if they shall be deprived
of all good, they shall no longer be. So long.


He is unchangeable, those things which have been created mutable
are not, — a truth which Plato vehemently held, and most diligently-
commended. And I know not whether this sentiment is anywhere
to be found in the books of those who were before Plato, unless in
that book where it is said, ' I am who am ; and thou shalt say to
the children of Israel, IVho is sent me unto you.' But we need not
determine from what source he learned these things,— whether it
was from the books of the ancients who preceded him, or, as is more
likely, from the words of the apostle (Rom. i. 20), ' Because that
which is known of God has been manifested among them, for God
hath manifested it to them. For His invisible things from the cre-
ation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by those things
which have been made, also His eternal power and Godhead.' " —
De Civ. Dei, viii. 11, 12.

1 Rom. i. 20.

S Therefore, he argues, is God called the I AM (De Nat. Boni,
19) ; for omnis mutatio facit non esse quod erat. Similarly, we
find him speaking in his De iMor. Manich. (c. i.) : " For that exists
in the highest sense of the word which continues always the same,
which is throughout like itself, which cannot in any part be cor-
rupted or changed, which is not subject to time, which admits of
no variation in its present as compared with its former condition.
This is existence in its true sense." See also note 3, p. 158.

3 Ps. Ixxiii. 28.
Wisd. vii. 27.
Ps. xvi. 2.


therefore, as they are, they are good ; therefore
whatsoever is, is good. That evil, then, which I
sought whence it was, is not any substance ; for
were it a substance, it would be good. For
either it would be an incorruptible substance,
and so a chief good, or a corruptible substance,
which unless it were good it could not be cor-
rupted. I perceived, therefore, and it was made
clear to me, that Thou didst make all things
good, nor is there any substance at all that was
not made by Thee ; and because all that Thou
hast made are not equal, therefore all things are ;
because individually they are good, and alto-
gether very good, because our God made all
things very good.®

CHAP. XIII. IT IS MEET TO PRAISE THE CREATOR

FOR THE GOOD THINGS WHICH ARE MADE IN
HEAVEN AND EARTH.

19. And to Thee is there nothing at all evil,
and not only to Thee, but to Thy whole crea-
tion ; because there is nothing without which
can break in, and mar that order which Thou
hast appointed it. But in the parts thereof,
some things, because they harmonize not with
others, are considered evil ; ' whereas those very
things harmonize with others, and are good, and
in themselves are good. And all these things
which do not harmonize together harmonize
with the inferior part which we call earth, hav-
ing its own cloudy and windy sky concordant
to it. Far be it from me, then, to say, " These
things should not be." For should I see noth-
ing but these, I should indeed desire better ; but
yet, if only for these, ought I to praise Thee ; for
that Thou art to be praised is shown from the
"earth, dragons, and all deeps; fire, and hail;
snow, and vapours ; stormy winds fulfilling Thy
word; mountains, and all hills; fruitful trees,
and all cedars ; beasts, and all cattle ; creeping
things, and flying fowl ; kings of the earth, and
all people ; princes, and all judges of the earth ;
both young men and maidens ; old men and
children, ' ' praise Thy name. But when, ' ' from
the heavens," these praise Thee, praise Thee,
our God, "in the heights," all Thy "angels,"
all Thy " hosts," " sun and moon," all ye stars
and light, "the heavens of heavens," and the
" waters that be above the heavens," praise Thy
name.* I did not now desire better things,
because I was thinking of all ; and with a better
judgment I reflected that the things above were
better than those below, but that all were better
than those above alone.


^ Gen i. 31, and Ecclus. xxxix. 21. Evil, with Augustin, is a
" privation of good." See iii, sec. 12, note, above.

^ See V. sec. 2, note i, above, where Augustin illustrates the exist-
ence of good and evil by the lights and shades in a painting, etc.

8 Ps. cxlviii. 1-12.


Chap. XVII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


Ill


CHAP. XIV. BEING DISPLEASED WITH SOME PART

OF god's creation, he conceives of two

ORIGINAL SUBSTANCES.

20. There is no wholeness in them whom
aught of Thy creation displeaseth ; no more
than there was in me, when many things which
Thou madest displeased me. And, because my
soul dared not be displeased at my God, it
would not suffer aught to be Thine which dis-
pleased it. Hence it had gone into the opinion
of two substances, and resisted not, but talked
foolishly. And, returning thence, it had made
to itself a god, through infinite measures of all
space ; and imagined it to be Thee, and placed
it in its heart, and again had become the tem-
ple of its own idol, which was to Thee an abom-
ination. But after Thou hadst fomented the
head of me unconscious of it, and closed mine
eyes lest they should " behold vanity," ' I ceased
from myself a little, and my madness was lulled
to sleep; and I awoke in Thee, and saw Thee
to be infinite, though in another way ; and this
sight was not derived from the flesh.

CHAP. XV. WHATEVER IS, OWES ITS BEING TO

GOD.

21. And I looked b.ack on other things, and
I perceived that it was to Thee they owed their
being, and that they were all bounded in Thee ;
but in another way, not as being in space, but
because Thou boldest all things in Thine hand
in truth : and all things are true so far as they
have a being ; nor is there any falsehood, unless
that which is not is thought to be. And I saw
that all things harmonized, not with their places
only, but with their seasons also. And that
Thou, who only art eternal, didst not begin to
work after innumerable spaces of times ; for that
all spaces of times, both those which have passed
and which shall pass, neither go nor come, save
through Thee, working and abiding.^

CHAP. XVI. EVIL ARISES NOT FROil A SUBSTANCE,

BUT FRO-M THE PERVERSION OF THE WILL.

2 2. And I discerned and found it no marvel,
that bread Avhich is distasteful to an unhealthy
palate is pleasant to a healthy one ; and that the
light, which is painful to sore eyes, is delightful
to sound ones. And Thy righteousness dis-
pleaseth the Avicked ; much more the viper and
little worm, which Thou hast created good,
fitting in with inferior parts of Thy creation ;
with which the wicked themselves also fit in, the
more in proportion as they are unlike Thee,
but with the superior creatures, in proportion
as they become like to Thee.^ And I inquired
what iniquity was, and ascertained it not to be

1 Ps. cxix. 37.

' See xi. sees. 15, 16, 26, etc., below.

'See V. sec. 2, note i, above.


a substance, but a perversion of the will, bent
aside from Thee, O God, the Supreme Substance,
towards these lower things, and casting out its
bowels,* and swelling outwardly.

CHAP. XVII. ABOVE HIS CHANGEABLE MIND, HE

DISCOVERS THE UNCHANGEABLE AUTHOR OF
TRUTH.

23. And I marvelled that I now loved Thee,
and no phantasm in.stead of Thee. And yet I
did not merit to enjoy my God, but was trans-
ported to Thee by Thy beauty, and presently
torn away from Thee by mine own weight,
sinking with grief into these inferior things.
This weight was carnal custom. Yet was there
a remembrance of Thee with me ; nor did I any
way doubt that there was one to whom I might
cleave, but that I was not yet one who could
cleave unto Thee ; for that the body which is
corrupted presseth down the soul, and the
earthly dwelling weigheth down the mind which
thinketh upon many things.^ And most certain
I was that Thy " invisible things from the crea-
tion of the world are clearly seen, being under-
stood by the things that are made, even Thy
eternal power and Godhead."® For, inquiring
whence it was that I admired the beauty of bodies
whether celestial or terrestrial, and what sup-
ported me in judging correctly on things muta-
ble, and pronouncing, "This should be thus,
this not," — inquiring, then, whence I so judged,
seeing I did so judge, I had found the unchange-
able and true eternity of Truth, above my
changeable mind. And thus, by degrees, I
passed from bodies to the soul, which makes
use of the senses of the body to perceive ; and
thence to its inward' faculty, to which the bod-
ily senses represent outward' things, and up to
which reach the capabilities of beasts ; and
thence, again, I passed on to the reasoning
faculty,* unto which whatever is received from

* Ecclus. X. 9. Commenting on this passage of the Apocrj'pha
(Ve Mus. vi. 40), he says, that while the soul's happiness and life is
in God, " what is to go into outer things, but to cast out its inward
parts, that is, to place itself far from God — not by distance of place,
but by the affection of the mind? "

5 Wisd. ix. 15.

6 Rom. i. 20.

' See above, sec. 10.

8 Here, and more explicitly in sec. 25, we have before us what
has been called the "trichotomy" of man. This doctrine Augustin
does not deny in theory, but appears to consider (De Aniina, iv. 32)
it prudent to overlook m practice. The biblical view of psychology
may well be considered here not only on its own account, but as
enabling us clearly to apprehend this passage and that which follows
it. It is difficult to understand how any one can doubt that St.
Paul, when speaking in i Thess. v. 23, of our " spirit, soul, and
body being preserved unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,"
implies a belief in a kind of trinitj* in man. And it is very necessary
to the understanding of other Scriptures that we should realize what
special attributes pertain to the soul and the spirit respectively. It
may be said, generally, that the soul (^vxr\) is that passionate and
affectionate nature which is common to us and the inferior creatures,
while the spirit (Tr^/eO/xa) is the higher intellectual nature which is
peculiar to man. Hence our Lord in His agony in the garden
says (Matt. xxvi. 38), "My soul is exceeding sorro^v/ul" — the
soul being liable to emotions of pleasure and pain. In the same
passage (ver 41) he says to the apostles who had slept during His
great agony, " The spirit indeed is ivilling, but the flesh is weak,"
so that the spirit is the seat of the will. And that the spirit is also


112


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VII.


the senses of the body is referred to be judged,
which also, finding itself to be variable in me,
raised itself up to its own intelligence, and from
habit drew away my thoughts, withdrawing it-
self from the crowds of contradictory phan-
tasms ; that so it might find out that light ^ by
which it was besprinkled, when, without all
doubting, it cried out, " that the unchangeable
was to be preferred before the changeable ; ' *
w^ience also it knew that unchangeable, which,
unless it had in some way known, it could have
had no sure ground for preferring it to the
changeable. And thus, with the flash of a
trembling glance, it arrived at that which is.
And then I saw Thy invisible things understood

the seat of consciousness we gather from St. Paul's words (i Cor.
ii. ii), " What man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of
man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man,
but the Spirit of God." And it is on the spirit o/" man that the
Spirit of God operates ; whence we read (Rom. viii. i6), " The
Spirit beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God." It is important to note that the word " flesh " (crapf) has its
special significance, as distinct from body. The word cumes to us
from the Hebrew through the Hellenistic Greek of the LXX., and
in biblical language (see Bishop Pearson's Prcefatio Parcenetica to
his edition of the LXX.) stands for our human nature with its
worldly surroundings and liability to temptation ; so that when
it is said, " The Word was made flesh," we have what is equiva-
lent to, "The Word put on human nature." It is, therefore, the
flesh and the spirit that are ever represented in conflict one with the
other when men are in the throes of temptation. So it must be while
life lasts ; for it is characteristic of our position in the world that we
possess soulish bodies (to employ the barbarous but e-xpressive word
of Dr. Candlish in his Li/e in a Risen Saviour, p. 182), and only
on the morning of the resurrection will the body be spiritual and
suited to the new sphere of its existence : "It is sown a natural
\\^vxi.KOv, "soulish"] body, it is raised a spiritual [iri'eu/iaTi.KOk]
body" (i Cor. xv. 44) ; " for," as .4ugustin says in his Enchiridion
(c. xci.), "just as now the body is called animate (or, using the
Greek term, as above, instead of the Latin, " soulish"), though it is
a body and not a soul, so then the body shall be called spiritual,
though it shall be a body, not a spirit. . . . No part of our nature
shall be in discord with another ; but as we shall be free from ene-
mies without, so we shall not have ourselves for enemies within."
For further information on this most interesting subject, see De-
litzsch. Biblical Psychology, ii. 4 (" The True and False Trich-
otomy"); Olshausen, Opuscula Theologica, iv. (" De Trich-
otomia"); and cc. 2, 17, and 18 of R. W. Evans' Ministry 0/ the
Body, where the subject is discussed with thoughtfulness and spir-
itual insight. This matter is also treated of in the introductory
chapters of Schlegel's Philosophy of Life.

1 That light which illumines the soul, he tells us in his De Gen.
ad Lit. (.\ii. 31), is God Himself, from whom all light cometh ; and,
though created in His image and likeness, when it tries to dis-
cover Him, palpitat infirmitate, et minus valet. In sec. 13, above,
speaking of Platonism, he describes it as holding " that the soul of
man, though it ' bears witness of the Light,' yet itself ' is not that
Light.' " In his De Civ. Dei, x. 2, he quotes from Plotinus (men-
tioned in note 2, sec. 13, above) in regard to the Platonic doctrine
as to enlightenment from on high. He says : . " Plotinus, comment-
ing on Plato, repeatedly and strongly asserts that not even the soul,
which they believe to be the soul of the world, derives its blessed-
ness from any other source than we do, viz. from that Light which
is distinct from it and created it, and by whose intelligible illumina-
tion it enjoys light in things intelligible. He also compares those
spiritual things to the vast and conspicuous heavenly bodies, as if
God were the sun, and the soul the moon ; for they suppose that the
moon derives its light from the sun. That great Platonist, there-
fore, says that the rational soul, or rather the intellectual soul, —
in which class he comprehends the souls of the blessed immortals
who inhabit heaven, — has no nature superior to it save God, the
Creator of the world and the soul itself, and that these heavenly
spirits derive their blessed life, and the light of truth, from the same
source as ourselves, agreeing with the gospel where we read, ' There
was a man sent from God, whose name was John. The same came
for a witness, to bear witness of that Light, that through Him all
might believe. He was not that Light, but that he might bear wit-
ness of the Light. That was the true Light, which lighteth everj'
man that cometh into the world ' (John i. 6-9) ; — a distinction which
sufficiently proves that the rational or intellectual soul, such as John
had, cannot be its own light, but needs to receive illumination from
another, the true Light. This John himself avows when he de-
hvers his witness {ibid. 16) : ' We have all received of His ful-
ness.' " Comp. TertuUian, De Testim. Anim., and the note to iv.
sec. 25, above, where other references to God's being the Father of
Lights are given.


by the things that are made.'^ But I was not
able to fix my gaze thereon ; and my infirmity
being beaten back, I was thrown again on my
accustomed habits, carrying along with me
naught but a loving memory thereof, and an
appetite for what I had, as it were, smelt the
odour of, but was not yet able to eat.

CHAP. XVIII. JESUS CHRIST, THE MEDIATOR, IS

THE ONLY WAY OF SAFETY.

24. And I sought a way of acquiring strength
sufficient to enjoy Thee ; but I found it not
until I embraced that " Mediator between God
and man, the man Christ Jesus," ^ " who is over
all, God blessed for ever,"* calling unto me,
and saying, " I am the way, the truth, and the
life,"^ and mingling that food which I was
unable to receive with our flesh. For "the
Word was made flesh," ^ that Thy wisdom, by
which Thou createdst all things, might provide
milk for our infancy. For I did not grasp my
Lord Jesus, — I, though humbled, grasped not
the humble One ; ' nor did I know what lesson
that infirmity of His would teach us. For Thy
Word, the Eternal Truth, pre-eminent above
the higher parts of Thy creation, raises up
those that are subject unto Itself; but in this
lower world built for Itself a humble habit-
ation of our clay, whereby He intended to
abase from themselves such as would be subjected
and bring them over unto Himself, allaying
their swelling, and fostering their love ; to the
end that they might go on no further in self-
confidence, but rather should become weak,
seeing before their feet the Divinity weak by
taking our "coats of skins;"* and wearied,
might cast themselves down upon It, and It
rising, might lift them up.

CHAP. XIX. HE DOES NOT YET FULLY UNDER-
STAND THE SAYING OF JOHN, THAT "THE
WORD WAS MADE FLESH."

25. But I thought differently, thinking only
of my Lord Christ as of a man of excellent
wisdom, to whom no man could be equalled ;
especially for that, being wonderfully born of a
virgin, He seemed, through the divine care for
us, to have attained so great authority of leader-
ship,— for an example of contemning temporal
things for the obtaining of immortality. But
what mystery there was in, "The Word was


2 Rom. i. 20.

3 I Tim. ii. 5.
* Rom. ix. 5.
5 John xiv. 6.
s John i. 14.

' Christ descended that we may ascend. See iv. sec. 19, notes i
and 3, above.

8 Gen. iii. 21. Augustin frequently makes these " coats of skin"
symbolize the mortality to which our first parents became subject
by being deprived of the tree of life (see iv. sec. 15, note 3, above) ;
and in his Enarr. in Ps. (ciii. i, 8), he says they are thus symbol-
ical inasmuch i\s the skin is only taken from animals when dead.


Chap. XX.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


Its


made flesh," ^ I could not even imagine. Only
I had learnt out of what is delivered to us in
writing of Him, that He did eat, drink, sleep,
walk, rejoice in spirit, was sad, and discoursed ;
that flesh alone did not cleave unto Thy Word, but
with the human soul and body. All know thus
who know the unchangeableness of Thy Word,
which I now knew as well as I could, nor did I
at all have any doubt about it. For, now to
move the limbs of the body at will, now not ;
now to be stirred by some affection, now not ;
now by signs to enunciate wise sayings, now to
keep silence, are properties of a soul and mind
subject to change. And should these things be
falsely written of Him, all the rest would risk
the imputation, nor would there remain in those
books any saving faith for the human race.
Since, then, they were written truthfully, I
acknowledged a perfect man to be in Christ —
not the body of a man only, nor with the body
a sensitive soul without a rational, but a very
man ; whom, not only as being a form of truth,
but for a certain great excellency of human
nature and a more perfect participation of wis-
dom, I decided was to be preferred before
others. But Alypius imagined the Catholics to
believe that God was so clothed with flesh, that,
besides God and flesh, there was no soul in
Christ, and did not think that a human mind
was ascribed to Him. And, because He was
thoroughly persuaded that the actions which
were recorded of Him could not be performed
except by a vital and rational creature, he
moved the more slowly towards the Christian
faith. But, learning afterwards that this was the
error of the Apollinarian heretics,^ he rejoiced


1 We have already seen, in note i, sec. 13, above, how this text
(i) runs counter to Platonic beUefs as to the Logos. The following
passage from Augustin's De Civ. Dei, x. 29, is worth putting on
record in this connection: — "Are ye ashamed to be corrected?
This is the vice of the proud. It is, forsooth, a degradation for
learned men to pass from the school of Plato to the discipleship of
Christ, who by His Spirit taught a fisherman to think and to say,
' In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God.
All things were made by Him, and without Him was not any thing
made that was made. In Him was life ; and the life was the light
of men. And the light shineth in darkness ; and the darkness com-
prehended it not' (John i. 1-5). The old saint Simplicianus, after-
wards Bishop of Milan, used to tell me that a certain Platonist was
in the habit of saying that this opening passage of the holy Gospel
entitled, ' According to John," should be written in letters of gold,
ind hung up in all churches in the most conspicuous place. But
:he proud scorn to take God for their Master, because ' the Word
ivas made flesh and dwelt among us' (John i. 14). So that with
these miserable creatures it is not enough that they are sick, but
_hey boast of their sickness, and are ashamed of the medicine which
:ould heal them. And doing so, they secure not elevation, but a
nore disastrous fall." This text, too, as Irenseus has remarked, (2)
intirely opposes the false teaching of the Docette, who, as their name
mp>orts, believed, with the Manichaeans, that Christ only appeared
ohave a body; as was the case, they said, with the angels enter-
ained by Abraham (see Burton's Bampton Lectures, lect. 6). It is
urious to note here that Augustin maintained that the Angel of the
Covenant was not an anticipation, as it were, of the incarnation of
he Word, but only a created angel (De Civ. Dei, xvi. 29, and De
Vrin iii. 11'), thus unconsciously playing into the hands of the Arians.
«e Bull's Def. Fid. Nic. i. i, sec. 2, etc., and iv. 3, sec. 14.
* The founder of this heresy was ApoUinaris the younger. Bishop
fLaodicea, whose erroneous doctrine was condemned at the Coun-
il of Constantinople, A. D, 381. Note 4, sec. 23, above, on the
trichotomy," affords help in understanding it. ApoUinaris seems
) have desired to exalt the Saviour, not to detract from His


in the Catholic faith, and was conformed to it.
But somewhat later it was, I confess, that I
learned how in the sentence, "The Word was
made flesh," the Catholic truth can be distin-
guished from the falsehood of Photinus.* For
the disapproval of heretics makes the tenets of
Thy Church and sound doctrine to stand out
boldly.* For there must be also heresies, that the
approved may be made manifest among the weak.^

CHAP. XX. HE REJOICES THAT HE PROCEEDED

FROM PLATO TO THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, AND
NOT THE REVERSE.

26. But having then read those books of the

honour, like Arius. Before his time men had written much on the
divine and much on the human side of our Lord's nature. He
endeavoured to show (see Dorner's Person of Christ, A. ii. 252,
etc., Clark) in what the two natures united differed from human
nature. He concluded that our Lord had no need of the human
■nvf.vii.aL, and that its place was supplied by the divine nature, so
that God " the Word," the body and the i/'vyij, constituted the be-
ing of the Saviour. Dr. Pusey quotes the following passages here-
on : — " The faithful who believes and confesses in the Mediator a
real human, /. e, our nature, although God the Word, taking it in a
singular manner, sublimated it into the only Son of God, so that He
who took it, and what He took, was one person in the Trinity. For,
after man was assumed, there became not aquaternity but remained
the Trinity, that assumption making in an ineffable way the truth
of one person in God and man. Since we do not say that Christ is
only God, as do the Manichsean heretics, nor only man, as the
Photinian heretics, nor in such wise man as not to have anything
which certainly belongs to human nature, whether the soul, or in
the soul itself the rational mind, or the flesh not taken of the
woman, but made of the Word, converted and changed into flesh,
which three false and vain statements made three several divisions
of the Apollinarian heretics ; but we say that Christ is true God,
born of God the Father, without any beginning of time, and also
true man, born of a human mother in the fulness of time ; and that
His humanity, whereby He is inferior to the Father, does not dero-
gate from His divinity, whereby He is equal to the Father" {De
Dono Persev. sec. ult.). " There was formerly a heresy — its rem-
nants perhaps still e.xist — of some called Apollinarians. Some of
them said that that man whom the Word took, when ' the Word
was made flesh,' had not the human, i. e. rational (A071/C61') mind,
but was only a soul without human intelligence, but that the very
Word of God was in that man instead of a mind. They were cast
out, — the Catholic faith rejected them, and they made a heresy. It
was established in the Catholic faith that that man whom the wis-
dom of God took had nothing less than other men, with regard to
the integrity of man's nature, but as to the excellency of His person,
had more than other men. For other men may be said to be par-
takers of the W'ord of God, having the Word of God, but none of .
them can be called the Word of God, which He was called when it is
said, ' T/ie ll'ord was made flesh ' " {in Ps. xxix., Enarr. ii. sec. 2).
" But when they reflected that, if their doctrine were true, they
must confess that the only-begotten Son of God. the Wisdom
and Word of the Father, by whom all things were made, is be-
lieved to have taken a sort of brute with the figure of a human
body, they were dissatisfied with themselves ; yet not so as to
amend, and confess that the whole man was assumed by the wisdom
of God, without any diminution of nature, but still more boldly
denied to Him the soul itself, and ever>'thing of any worth in mar>,
and said that He only took human flesh " {De 83, Div. Qutrst. qu.
80). Reference on the questions touched on in this note may be
made to Neander's Church History, ii. 401, etc. (Clark); and
Hagenbach, History 0/ Doctrines, i. 270 (Clark).

3 See notes on p. 107.

* Archbishop "Trench's words on this sentence in the Confessions
(Hulsean Lectures, lect. v. 1845) have a special interest in the pre-
sent attitude of the Roman Church : — " Doubtless there is a true
idea of scriptural developments which has always been recognised,
to which the great Fathers of the Church have set their seal ; this,
namely, that the Church, informed and quickened by the Spirit of
God, more and more discovers what in Holy Scripture is given her;
but not this, that she unfolds by an independent power anything fur-
ther therefrom. She has always possessed what she now possesses
of doctrine and truth, only not always with the same distinctness of
consciousness. She has not added to her wealth, but she has be-
come more and more aware of that wealth ; her dowr>' has re-
mained always the same, but that dowrj' was so rich and so rare, that
only little by little she has counted over and taken stock and invent-
ory of her jewels. She has consolidated her doctrine, compelled to
this by the challenges and provocation of enemies, or induced to it
by the growing sense of her own needs." Perhaps no one, to turn
from the Church to individual men, has been more indebted than was
Augustin to controversies with heretics for the evolvement of truth.

6 I Cor. xi. 19.


114


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VII.


Platonists, and being admonished by them to
search for incorporeal truth, I saw Thy invisible
things, understood by those things that are
made;^ and though repulsed, I perceived what
that was, which through the darkness of my
mind I was not allowed to contemplate, — ^as-
sured that Thou wert, and wert infinite, and yet
not diffused in space finite or infinite ; and that
Thou truly art, who art the same ever,^ varying
neither in part nor motion ; and that all other
things are from Thee, on this most sure ground
alone, that they are. Of these things was I in-
deed assured, yet too weak to enjoy Thee. I
chattered as one well skilled ; but had I not
sought Thy way in Christ our Saviour, I would
have proved not skilful, but ready to perish.
For now, filled with my punishment, I had
begun to desire to seem Avise ; yet mourned I
not, but rather was puffed up with knowledge.^
For where was that charity building upon the
"foundation" of humility, "which is Jesus
Christ " ? * Or, when would these books teach
me it ? Upon these, therefore, I believe, it was
Thy pleasure that I should fall before I studied
Thy Scriptures, that it might be impressed on
my memory how I was affected by them ; and
that afterwards when I was subdued by Thy
books, and when my wounds were touched by
Thy healing fingers, I might discern and distin-
guish what a difference there is between pre-
sumption and confession, — between those who
saw whither they were to go, yet saw not the
way, and the way which leadeth not only to
behold but to inhabit the blessed country.* For
had I first been moulded in Thy Holy Scrip-
tures, and hadst Thou, in the familiar use of
them, grown sweet unto me, and had I after-
wards fallen upon those volumes, they might
perhaps have withdrawn me from the solid
ground of piety ; or, had I stood firm in that
wholesome disposition which I had thence im-
bibed, I might have thought that it could have
been attained by the study of those books alone.

CHAP. XXI. WHAT HE FOUND IN THE SACKED

BOOKS WHICH ARE NOT TO BE FOUND IN
PLATO.

27. Most eagerly, then, did I seize that ven-
erable writing of Thy Spirit, but more espec-

1 Rom. i. 20.

'•^ See sec. 17, note, above.

3 I Cor. viii. i.

4 I Cor. iii. II.

5 We have already quoted a passage from Augustin's Sertnofts (v.
sec. 5, note 7, above), where Christ as God is described as the coun-
trj' we seek, while as man He is the way to go to it. The Fathers
frequently point out in their controversies with the philosophers that
It little profited that they should know of a goal to be attained unless
they could learn the -way to reach it. And, in accordance with this
sentiment, Augustin says : " For it is as man that He is the Mediator
and the Way. Since, if the way lieth between him who goes and
the place whither he goes, there is hope of his reaching it; but if
there be no way, or if he know not where it is, what boots it to
know whither he should go?" {De Cni. Dei, xi. 2.) And again,
in his De Trin. iv. 15 : " But of what use is it for the proud man.


ially the Apostle Paul ; ® and those difiiculties
vanished away, in which he at one time appeared
to me to contradict himself, and the text of
his discourse not to agree with the testimonies
of the Law and the Prophets. And the face of
that pure speech appeared to me one and the
same ; and I learned to " rejoice with tremb-
ling."'' So I commenced, and found that
whatsoever truth I had there read was declared
here with the recommendation of Thy grace ;
that he who sees may not so glory as if he had
not received* not only that which he sees, but
also that he can see (for what hath he which he
hath not received?) ; and that he may not only
be admoni.shed to see Thee, who art ever the
same, but also may be healed, to hold Thee ; and
that he who from afar off is not able to see, may
still walk on the way by which he may reach,
behold, and possess Thee. For though a man
" delight in the law of God after the inward
man,"^ what shall he do with that other law in
his members which warreth against the law of
his mind, and bringeth him into captivity to the
law of sin, which is in his members ?'" For Thou
art righteous, O Lord, but we have sinned and
committed iniquity, and have done wickedly,"
and Thy hand is grown heavy upon us, and we
are justly delivered over unto that ancient sin-
ner, the governor of death ; for he induced our
will to be like his will, whereby he remained not
in Thy truth. What shall "wretched man"
do? " Who shall deliver him from the body of
this death," but Thy grace only, " through
Jesus Christ our Lord,"^'^ whom Thou hast
begotten co-eternal, and createdst ^* in the begin-

who, on that account, is ashamed to embark upon the ship of wood,
to behold from afar his countrj' beyond the sea? Or how can it
hurt the humble man not to behold it from so great a distance, when
he is actually coming to it by that wood upon which the other dis-
dains to be borne?"

6 Literally, " The venerable pen of Thy Spirit {venerabilem sti-
luin S/>iritHs Tni) ; words which would seem to imply a belief on
Augustin's part in a verbal inspiration of Scripture. That he gave
Scripture the highest honour as God's inspired word is clear not'
only from this, but other passages in his works. It is equally clear,
however, that he gave full recognition to the human element in the
word See De Cons. Evang. ii. 12, where both these aspects arej
plainly discoverable. Compare also ibid. c. 24.

J Ps. ii. II. I

8 I Cor. iv. 7. I

9 Rom. vii. 22.

10 Ibid. ver. 23.

11 Song of the Three Children, 4 sg.

'■- Rom. vii. 24, 25. 1

13 Prov. viii. 22, as quoted from the old Italic version. It must not,
be understood to teach that the Lord is a creature, (i) Augustin,;
as mdeed is implied in the Confessions above, understands the pas-i
sage of the incarnation of Christ, and in his De Doct. Christ, i. 38,*
he distinctly so applies it : " For Christ . . . desiring to be Hlmsell |
the Way to those who are just setting out, determined to take a'
fleshly body. Whence also that e.xpression, ' The Lord created me
in the beginning of his Way,' — that is, that those who wish to ciiine
might begin their journey in Him " Again, in a remarkable p.ts-
sage in his De Trin. i. 24, he makes a similar application of the
words : " According to the form of a servant, it is said, ' The Lord
created me in the beginning of His ways.' Because, according to
the form of God, he said, ' 1 am the Truth ; ' and, according to the
form of a servant, ' I am the Way.' " {2) Again, cri-asti\?,irom the
LXX. e/CTi<Tf, which is that version's rendering in this verse of the
Hebrew ''JJp. The Vulgate, more correctly translating from the

Hebrew, gives possedit , thus corresponding to our English version.
" The \j3xA. possessed me," etc. The LXX. would appear to have
made an erroneous rendering here, for (cri^w is generally in tha


Chap. XXL]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


115


ning of Thy ways, in whom the Prince of this
world found nothing worthy of death,' yet
killed he Him, and the handwriting which was
contrary to us was blotted out?''' This those
writings contain not. Those pages contain not
the expression of this piety, — the tears of con-
fession, Thy sacrifice, a troubled spirit, "a
broken and a contrite heart," ^ the salvation of
the people, the espoused city,* the earnest of the
Holy Ghost,^ the cup of our redemption.^ No
man sings there, Shall not my soul be subject
unto God ? For of Him cometh my salvation,
for He is my God and my salvation, my de-
fender, I shall not be further moved.' No one
there hears Him calling, " Come unto me all
ye that labour." They scorn to learn of Him,
because He is meek and lowly of heart ; ® for
" Thou hast hid those things from the wise and
prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes."®
For it is one thing, from the mountain's wooded


version the equivalent for XI3, " to create," while PUP is usually

It is true that

viii. 22 among

these very pas-


rendered hy KTOLOfnat, "to possess," "to acquire.
Gesenius supposes that in a few passages, and Prov
them, njp should be rendered " to create ; " but

'r
sages our authorized version renders "to get," or
and, as Dr. Tregelles observes, referring to M'Call
Sonship, " in all passages cited for that sense, ' to pi
to be the true meaning."

1 John xviii. 38.

2 Col. ii. 14.
8 Ps. li. 17.

* Rev. xxi. 2.
6 2 Cot. V. 5.

* Ps. C-xvi. 13.
' Ps. Ixii. I, 2.
8 Matt. xi. 28, 29.

* Matt. xi. 25.


" to possess; "

on the Divine

ossess ' appears


summit to see the land of peace/" and not to
find the way thither, — in vain to attempt im-
passable ways, opposed and waylaid by fugitives
and deserters, under their captain the " lion " "
and the " dragon ;"^^ and another to keep to
the way that leads thither, guarded by the host
of the heavenly general, where they rob not
who have deserted the heavenly army, which
they shun as torture. These things did in a
wonderful manner sink into my bowels, when I
read that "least of Thy apostles," " and had
reflected upon Thy works, and feared greatly.

10 Deut. xx.xii. 49.

11 I Pet. V. 8.

12 Rev. xii. 3.

'3 I Cor. XV. 9. In giving an account, remarks Pusey, of this
periodto his friend and patron Romanianus, St. Augustin seems to
have Blended together this and the history of his completed conver-
sion, which was also wrought in connection with words in the same
apostle, but the account of which he uniformly suppresses, for fear,
probably, of injuring the individual to whom he was writing (see on
book ix. sec. 4, note, below). " Since that vehement flame which
was about to seize me as yet was not, I thought that by which I was
slowly kindled was the very greatest. When lo ! certain books,
when they had distilled a very few drops of most precious unguent
on that tiny flame, it is past belief, Romanianus, past belief, and
perhaps past what even you believe of me (and what could I say
more?), nay, to myself also is it past belief, what a conflagration of
myself they lighted. What ambition, what human show, what
empty love of fame, or, lastly, what incitement or band of this mor-
tal life could hold me then? I turned speedily and wholly back into
myself. I cast but a glance, I confess, as one passing on, upon that
religion which was implanted into us as boys, and interwoven with
our very inmost selves ; but she drew me unknowing to herself. So
then, stumbling, hurrying, hesitating, I seized the Apostle Paul ;
' for never,' said I, ' could they have wrought such things, or lived
as it is plain they did live, if their writings and arguments were
opposed to this so high good.' I read the whole most intently and
carefully. But then, never so little light having been shed thereon-,
such a countenance of wisdom gleamed upon me, that if I could
exhibit it — I say not to you, who ever hungeredst after her, though
unknown — but to your very adversary' (see book vi. sec. 24, note,
above), casting aside and abandoning whatever now stimulates him
so keenly to whatsoever pleasures, he would, amazed, panting, en-
kindled, fly to her Beauty" {Con. Acad. ii. 5).


BOOK VIII.


HE FINALLY DESCRIBES THE THIRTY-SECOND YEAR OF HIS AGE, THE MOST MEMORABLE OF HIS WHOLE
LIFE, IN WHICH, BEING INSTRUCTED BY SIMPLICIANUS CONCERNING THE CONVERSION OF OTHERS,
AND THE MANNER OF ACTING, HE IS, AFTER A SEVERE STRUGGLE, RENEWED IN HIS WHOLE MIND,
AND IS CONVERTED UNTO GOD.


CHAP. I. HE, NOW GIVEN TO DIVINE THINGS,

AND YET ENTANGLED BY THE LUSTS OF LOVE,
CONSULTS SIMPLICIANUS IN REFERENCE TO THE
RENEWING OF HIS MIND.

I. O MY God, let me with gratitude remem-
ber and confess unto Thee Thy mercies be-
stowed upon me. Let my bones be steeped in
Thy love, and let them say. Who is like unto
Thee, O Lord ? ^ " Thou hast loosed my bonds,
I will offer unto Thee the sacrifice of thanks-
giving. ' ' ^ And how Thou hast loosed them I
will declare ; and all who worship Thee when
they hear these things shall say: "Blessed be
the Lord in heaven and earth, great and won-
derful is His name." Thy words had stuck
fast into my breast, and I was hedged round
about by Thee on every side.^ Of Thy eternal
life I was now certain, although I had seen it
"through a glass darkly."* Yet I no longer
doubted that there was an incorruptible sub-
stance, from which was derived all other sub-
stance ; nor did I now desire to be more cer-
tain of Thee, but more stedfast in Thee. As
for my temporal life, all things were uncertain,
and my heart had to be purged from the old
leaven.^ The "Way,"® the Saviour Himself,
was pleasant unto me, but as yet I disliked to
pass through its straightness. And Thou didst
put into my mind, and it seemed good in my
eyes, to go unto Simplicianus,'' who appeared to
me a faithful servant of Thine, and Thy grace

1 Ps. XXXV. lO.

* Ps. cxvi. i6, 17.
8 Job. i. 10.

* I Cor. xiii. 12.

* I Cor. V. 7.

* John xiv. 6.

' " Simplicianus ' became a successor of the most blessed Ambrose,
Bishop of the Church of Milan ' (Aug. Retnict. ii. i). To him St.
Augustin wrote two books, De Diversis Quoestionihus (0/>. t. vi. p.
82 sg.), and calls him ' father ' {ibid.), speaks of his ' fatherly affec-
tions from his most benevolent heart, not recent or sudden, but tried
and known' {Ep. 37), requests his ' remarks and corrections of any
books of his which might chance to fall into his holy hands' {Hid.).
St. Ambrose mentions his ' having traversed the whole world, for tlie
sake of the faith, and of acquiring divine knowledge, and having
given the whole period of this life to holy reading, night and day :
that he had an acute mind, whereby he took in intellectual studies,
and was in the habit of proving how far the books of philosophy
were gone astray from the truth,' Ep. 65, sec. 5, p. 1052, ed. Ben.
See also Tillemont, H. E. t. 10, Art. ' S. Simplicien.' "— E. B. P.

116


shone in him. I had also heard that from his
very youth he had lived most devoted to Thee.
Now he had grown into years, and by reason of
so great age, passed in such zealous following of
Thy ways, he appeared to me likely to have
gained much experience ; and so in truth he
had. Out of which experience I desired him
to tell me (setting before him my griefs) which
would be the most fitting way for one afflicted
as I was to walk in Thy way.

2. For the Church I saw to be full, and one
went this way, and another that. But it was
displeasing to me that I led a secular life ; yea,
now that my passions had ceased to excite me
as of old with hopes of honour and wealth, a
very grievous burden it was to undergo sa great
a servitude. For, compared with Thy sweet-
ness, and the beauty of Thy house, which I
loved,* those things delighted me no longer.
But still very tenaciously was I held by the love
of women ; nor did the apostle forbid me to
marry, although he exhorted me to something
better, especially wishing that all men were as
he himself was.® But I, being weak, made
choice of the more agreeable place, and because
of this alone was tossed up and down in all be-
side, faint and languishing with withering cares,
because in other matters I was compelled,
though unwilling, to agree to a married life, to
which I was given up and enthralled. I had
heard from the mouth of truth that "there be
eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs
for the kingdom of heaven's sake;" but, saith
He, "he that is able to receive it, let him re-
ceive it."^° Vain, assuredly, are all men in
whom the knowledge of God is not, and who
could not, out of the good things which are
seen, find out Him who is good.^^ But I was
no longer in that vanity ; I had surmounted it,
and by the united testimony of Thy whole cre-
ation had found Thee, our Creator, ^^ and Thy

8 Ps. xxvi. 8.

9 I Cor. vii. 7.
10 Matt. xix. 12.
1' Wisd. xiii. i.
12 See iv. sec. 18, and note, above.


Chap. II.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


117


Word, God with Thee, and together with Thee
and the Holy Ghost ^ one God, by whom Thou
createdst all things. There is yet another kind
of impious men, who "when they knew God,
they glorified Him not as God, neither were
thankfiil."^ Into this also had I fallen; but
Thy right hand held me up,^ and bore me away,
and Thou placedst me where I might recover.
For Thou hast said unto man, " Behold, the
fear of the Lord, that is wisdom;"* and desire
not to seem wise,' because, " Professing them-
selves to be wise, they became fools. ' ' ® But I
had now found the goodly pearl, ^ which, sell-
ing all that I had,* I ought to have bought ; and
I hesitated.

CHAP. II. THE PIOUS OLD MAN REJOICES THAT

HE READ PLATO AND THE SCRIPTURES, AND
TELLS HIM OF THE RHETORICIAN VICTORINUS
HAVING BEEN CONVERTED TO THE FAITH
THROUGH THE READING OF THE SACRED
BOOKS.

3. To Simplicianus ^hen I went, — the father
of Ambrose^ (at that time a bishop) in receiv-
ing Thy grace, and whom he truly loved as a
father. To him I narrated the windings of my
error. But when I mentioned to him that I
had read certain books of the Platonists, which
Victorinus, sometime Professor of Rhetoric at
Rome (who died a Christian, as I had been
told), had translated into Latin, he congratu-
lated me that I had not fallen upon the writings
of other philosophers, which were full of falla-
cies and deceit, "after the rudiments of the
world," ^° whereas they," in many ways, led to
the belief in God and His word.'''' Then, to


1 "And the Holy Ghost." These words, though in the text of
the Benedictine edition are not, as the editors point out, found in
the majority of the best MSS.

2 Rom. 1. 21.

8 Ps. xviii. 35.

* Job xxviii. 28.
5 Prov. iii. 7.

* Rom. i. 22.

' In his Qucsst. ex Matt. 13, likewise, Augustin compares Christ
to the pearl of great price, who is in every way able to satisfy the
cravings of man.

8 Matt. xiii. 46.

9 Simphcianus succeeded Ambrose, 397 A. d. He has already been
referred to, in the extract from De Civ. Dei, in note i, p. 113, above,
as " the old saint Simplicianus, afterwards Bishop of Milan." In
E'P- 37. Augustin addresses him as " his father, most worthy of be-
ing cherished with respect and sincere affection." When Simpli-
cianus is spoken of above as "the father of Ambrose in receiving
Thy grace," reference is doubtless made to his having been instru-
mental in his conversion — he having "begotten" him "through
the gospel" (i Cor. iv. 15). Ambrose, when writing to him {Ep.
65), concludes, " Vale, et nos parentis affectu dilige, ut facis."

W Col. ii. 8.

" i. e. the Platonists.

12 In like manner Augustin, in his De Civ. Dei (viii. 5), says : " No
philosophers come nearer to us than the Platonists;" and else-
where, in the same book, he speaks, in exalted terms, of their supe-
riority to other philosophers. When he speaks of the Platonists, he
means the Neo- Platonists, from whom he conceived that he could
best derive a knowledge of Plato, who had, by pursuing the Socra-
tic method in coniealing his opinions, rendered it difficult " to dis-
cover clearly what he himself thought on various matters, any more
than it is to discover what were the real opinions of Socrates " (ibid.
sec. 4). Whether Plato himself had or not knowledge of the reve-
lation contained in the Old Testament Scriptures, as Augustin sup-
posed {De Civ. Dei, viii. 11, 12), it is clear that the later Platonists


exhort me to the humility of Christ,'^ hidden
from the wise, and revealed to little ones,'* he
spoke of Victorinus himself,'^ whom, whilst he
was at Rome, he had known very intimately ;
and of him he related that about which I will
not be silent. For it contains great praise of
Thy grace, which ought to be confessed unto
Thee, how that most learned old man, highly
skilled in all the liberal sciences, who had read,
criticised, and explained so many works of the
philosophers ; the teacher of so many noble
senators ; who also, as a mark of his excellent
discharge of his duties, had (which men of this
world esteem a great honour) both merited and
obtained a statue in the Roman Forum, he, —
even to that age a worshipper of idols, and a
participator in the sacrilegious rites to which
almost all the nobility of Rome were wedded,
and had inspired the people with the love of

" The dog Anubis, and a medley crew
Of monster gods [who] 'gainst Neptune stand in arms,
'Gainst Venus and Minerva, steel-clad Mars," l*

whom Rome once conquered, now worshipped,
all which old Victorinus had with thundering
eloquence defended so many years, — he now
blushed not to be the child of Thy Christ, and
an infant at Thy fountain, submitting his neck
to the yoke of humility, and subduing his fore-
head to the reproach of the Cross.

4. O Lord, Lord, who hast bowed the
heavens and come down, touched the moun-
tains and they did smoke," by what means didst
Thou convey Thyself into that bosom? He
used to read, as Simplicianus said, the Holy
Scripture, most studiously sought after and
searched into all the Christian writings, and.
said to Simplicianus, — not openly, but secretly,,
and as a friend, — "Know thou that I am a.
Christian." To which he replied, "I will not
believe it, nor will I rank you among the Chris-
tians unless I see you in the Church of Christ,"'
Whereupon he replied derisively, "Is it then-,
the walls that make Christians ? ' ' And this he


were considerably aff'ected by Judaic ideas, even as the philoso-
phizing Jews were indebted to Platonism. This view has been^
embodied in the proverb frequently found in the Fathers, Latin as-
well as Greek, 'H \i\a.Tu>v ^\.koviC,ii rj <t>iAajv TrAarioi'i^ei. Anchen
Butler, in the fourth of his Lectures on Ancient Philosophy , treats
of the vitality of Plato's teaching and the causes of its influenae,
and shows how in certain points there is a harmony between his
ideas and the precepts of the gospel. On the difificultj- of unravel-
ling the subtleties of the Platonic philosophy, see Burton's Bampton
Lectures (lect. 3).

!■* See iv. sec. 19, above.

1* ISIatt. xi. 25.

15 " Victorinus, by birth an African, taught rhetoric at Rome
under Constantius, and in extreme old age, giving himself up to the
faith of Christ, wrote some books against Arius, dialectically [and
so] very obscure, which are not understood but by the learned, and
a commentary on the Apostle" [Paul] (Jerome, De Viris III. c.
loi). It is of the same, probably, that Gennadius speaks {De Viris
III. c. 60), " that he commented in a Christian and pious strain, but
inasmuch as he was a man taken up with secular literature, and
not trained in the Divine Scriptures by any teacher, he produced
what was comparatively of little weight.'' Comp. Jerome, Pnef.
in Comm. in Gal., and see Tillemont, 1. c. p. 179, sg. Some of his
works are extant. — E. B. P.

IS ^■Eneid, viii. 736-8. The Kennedys.

1' Ps. cxliv. 5.


ii8


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VIII.


often said, that he already was a Christian ; and
Simplicianus making the same answer, tlie con-
ceit of the "walls" was by the other as often
renewed. For he was fearful of offending his
friends, proud demon-worshippers, from the
height of whose Babylonian dignity, as from
cedars of Lebanon which had not yet been
broken by the Lord,^ he thought a storm of
enmity would descend upon him. But after
that, from reading and inquiry, he had derived
strength, and feared lest he should be denied
by Christ before the holy angels if he now was
afraid to confess Him before men,'^ and ap-
peared to himself guilty of a great fault in being
ashamed of the sacraments* of the humility of
Thy word, and not being ashamed of the
sacrilegious rites of those proud demons,
whose pride he had imitated and their rites
adopted, he became bold-faced against vanity,
and shame-faced toward the truth, and sud-
denly and unexpectedly said to Simplicianus, —
as he himself informed me, — "Let us go to
the church; I wish to be made a Christian."
But he, not containing himself for joy, accom-
panied him. And having been admitted to the
first sacraments of instruction,* he not long


1 Ps. xxix. 5.

'^ Luke ix. 26.

s ' ' I'he Fathers gave the name of sacratneni, or mystery, to every-
thing which conveyed one signification or property to unassisted
reason, and another to faith. Hence Cyprian speaks of the ' sacra-
ments ' of the Lord's Prayer, meaning the hidden meaning con-
veyed therein, which could only be appreciated by a Christian.
The Fathers sometimes speak of confirmation as a sacrament, be-
cause the chrism signified the grace of the Holy Ghost ; and the
imposition of hands was not merely a bare sign, but the form by
which it was conveyed. See Bingham, book xii. c. i, sec. 4. Yet
at the same time they continually speak of two great sacraments of
the Christian Church " (Palmer's Origines Liturgicce, vol. ii. c. 6,
sec. I, p. 201).

< That is, he became a catechumen. In addition to the informa-
tion on this subject, already given in the note to book vi. sec. 2,
above, the following references to it may prove instructive, (i) Jus-
tin Martyr, describing the manner of receiving converts into the
Church in his day, says \Apol. i. 61) : "As many as are persuaded and
believe that what we teach and say is true, and undertake to be able
to live accordingly, are instructed to pray, and to entreat God with
fasting for the remission of their sins that are past, we praying and
fasting with them. Then they are brought by us where there is
water, and are regenerated in the same manner in which we were
ourselves regenerated. And this washing is called illumination, be-
cause they who learn these things are illuminated in their under-
standings." And again {ibid. 65): "We, after we have thus
washed him who has been convinced and has assented to our teach-
ing, bring him to the place where those who are called brethren are
assembled, in order that we may offer hearty prayers, in common
for ourselves and for the baptized [illuminated] person, and for all
others in every place. . . . Having ended the prayers, we salute
one another with a kiss. There is then brought to the president of
the brethren bread, and a cup of wine mixed with water ; and he,
taking them, gives praise and glory to the Father of the universe,
through the name of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. . . . And
when the president has given thanks, and all the people have ex-
pressed their assent, those who are called by us deacons give to
each of those present, to partake of, the bread and wine mixed with
water over which the thank.sgiving was pronounced, and to those
who are absent they carry away a portion." And once more (ibid.
66) : " This food is called among us Euxapio"ria [the Eucharist], of
which no one is allowed to partake but the man who believes that
the things which we teach are true, and who has been washed with
the washing that is for the remission of sins, and unto regeneration,
and who is so living as Christ has enjoined." (2) In Watts' transla-
tion, we have the following note on this episode in our text : " Here
be divers particulars of the primitive fashion, in this storj- of Victo-
rinus. First, being converted, he was to take some well-known
Christian (who was to be his godfather) to go with him to the
bishop, who, upon notice of it, admitted him a catechupienus, and
gave him those six points of catechistical doctrine mentioned Heb.
vi. I, 2. When the time of baptism drew near, the young Christian


after gave in his name, that he might be regene-
rated by baptism, — Rome marvelling, and the
Church rejoicing. The proud saw, and were
enraged ; they gnashed with their teeth, and
melted away ! * But the Lord God was the
hope of Thy servant, and He regarded not van-
ities and lying madness.®

5. Finally, when the hour arrived for him to
make profession of his faith (which at Rome
they who are about to approach Thy grace are
wont to deliver' from an elevated place, in view
of the faithful people, in a set form of words
learnt by heart),* the presbyters, he said, offered


came to give in his heathen name, which was presently registered,
submitting himself to examination. On the eve, was he, in a set
form, first, to renounce the devil, and to pronounce, I confess to
1'hee, O Christ, repeating the Creed with it, in the form here re-
corded. The time for giving in their names must be within the two
first weeks in Lent ; and the solemn day to renounce upon was Maundy
Thursday. So bids the Council of Laodicea (Can. 45 and 46)."
The renunciation adverted to by Watts in the above passage may
be traced to an early period in the writings of the Fathers. It is
mentioned by TertulHan, Ambrose, and Jerome ; and " in the fourth
century," says Palmer {Origines L,iturgicoe, c. 5, sec. 2, where the
authorities will be found), " the renunciation was made with great
solemnity. Cyril of Jerusalem, speaking to those who had been
recently baptized, said, ' First, you have entered into the vestibule
of the baptistry, and, standing towards the west, you have heard,
and been commanded, and stretch forth your hands, and renounce
Satan as if he were present.' This rite of turning to the west at the
renunciation of Satan is also spoken of by Jerome, Gregory, Nazi-
anzen, and Ambrose; and it was sometimes performed with exsuf-
flations and other external signs of enmity to Satan, and rejection
of him and his works. To the present day these customs remain in
the patriarchate of Constantinople, where the candidates for bap-
tism turn to the west to renounce Satan, stretching forth their hands,
and using an exsufflation as a sign of enmity against him. And the
Monophysites of Antioch and Jerusalem, Alexandria and Armenia,
also retain the custom of renouncing Satan with faces turned to the
west."

* Ps. cxii. 10.

^ Ps. xxxi. 6, 14, 18.

7 Literally, "give back," reddcre.

*> Anciently, as Palmer has noted in the introduction to his Ori-
gines Liturg-iciF, the liturgies of the various churches were learnt
by heart. They probably began to be committed to writing about
Augustin's day. The reference, however, in this place, is to the
Apostles' Creed, which. Dr. Pusey in a note remarks, was delivered
orally to the catechumens to commit to niemorj', and bj' them deliv-
ered back, i. e. publicly repeated before they were baptized. " The
symbol [creed] bearing hallowed testimon}-, which ye have together
received, and are this day severally to give back \rcddidistis\, are
the words in which the faith of our mother the Church is solidly con-
structed on a stable foundation, which is Christ the Lord. ' For
other foundation can no man lay,' etc. Ye have received them, and
given back [reddidisiis'\ what ye ought to retain in heart and mind,
what ye should repeat in your beds, think on in the streets, and for-
get not in your meals, and while sleeping in body, in heart watch j
therein For this is the faith, and the rule of salvation, that ' We
believe in God, the Father Almighty,' " etc. (Aug. Serm. 215, in Red-
ditione Sytnboli). " On the Sabbath day [Saturday], when we shall I
keep a vigil through the mercy of God, ye will give back [redditur{\
not the [Lord's] Prayer, but the Creed" {Serm. 58, sec. «//.).
" What ye have briefly heard, ye ought not only to believe, but to I
commit to memory in so many words, and utter with your mouth '"
(Serm. 214, in 'Iradit. Sytnb. 3, sec. 2). " Xor, in order to retain |
the very words of the Creed, ought ye any wise to write it, but to\
learn it thoroughly by hearing, nor, when ye have learnt it, ought j
ye to write it, but always to keep and refresh it in your memories.
— ' This is my covenant, which I will make with them after those \
days,' saith the Lord ; ' I will place my law in their minds, and in 1
their hearts will I write it." To convey this, the Creed is learnt byi
hearing, and not ivritten on tables or any other substance, but on|[
the heart" (Serm. 212, sec. 2). See the Roman Liturgy (Assem,
Cod. Liturg. t. i. p. 11 sg., 16), and the Gothic and Galilean (pp.
30 sg., 38 sg., 40 sg., etc.). " The renunciation of Satan," to quote]
once more from Palmer's Origines (c. 5, sec. 3), " was always fol-S
lowed by a profession of faith in Christ, as it is now in the English!
ritual. . . . The promise of obedience and faith in Christ was madej
by the catechumens and sponsors, with their faces turned towards^
the east, as we learn from Cyril of Jerusalem and many otherj
writers. Tertullian speaks of the profession of faith made at bap-
tism, in the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and in the Church. Cyp-I
rian mentions the interrogation, ' Dost thou believe in eternal life,]
and remission of sins through the Holy Church ? ' Eusebius andl
many other Fathers also speak of the profession of faith made atj
this time ; and it is especially noted in the Apostolical Constitutions,!


Chap. IV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


119


Victorinus to make his profession more privately,
as the custom was to do to those who were
likely, through bashfulness, to be afraid ; but he
chose rather to profess his salvation in the pres-
ence of the holy assembly. For it was not sal-
vation that he taught in rhetoric, and yet he had
publicly professed that. How much less, there-
fore, ought he, when pronouncing Thy word,
to dread Thy meek flock, who, in the delivery
of his own words, had not feared the mad mul-
titudes ! So, then, when he ascended to make
his profession, all, as they recognised him,
whispered his name one to the other, with a
voice of congratulation. And who was there
amongst them that did not know him ? And
there ran a low murmur through the mouths of
all the rejoicing multitude, " Victorinus ! Vic-
torinus ! ' ' Sudden was the burst of exultation
at the sight of him ; and suddenly were they
hushed, that they might hear him. He pro-
nounced the true faith with an excellent bold-
ness, and all desired to take him to their very
heart — yea, by their love and joy they took him
thither ; such were the hands with which they
took him.

CHAP. III. THAT GOD AND THE ANGELS REJOICE

MORE ON THE RETURN OF ONE SINNER THAN
OF MANY JUST PERSONS.

6, Good God, what passed in man to make
him rejoice more at the salvation of a soul
despaired of, and delivered from greater danger,
than if there had always been hope of him, or
the danger had been less ? For so Thou also,
O merciful Father, dost "joy over one sinner
that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine
just persons that need no repentance." And
with much joyfulness do we hear, whenever we
hear, how the lost sheep is brought home again
on the Shepherd's shoulders, while the angels
rejoice, and the drachma is restored to Thy
treasury, the neighbours rejoicing with the
woman who found it ; ^ and the joy of the sol-
emn service of Thy house constraineth to tears,
when in Thy house it is read of Thy younger
son that he " was dead, and is alive again, and
was lost, and is found. "^ For Thou rejoicest
both in us and in Thy angels, holy through holy
charity. For Thou art ever the same ; for all
things which abide neither the same nor for
ever, Thou ever knowest after the same manner.

7. What, then, passes in the soul when it
more delights at finding or having restored to it

which were written in the East at the end of the third or beginning
of the fourth century. The profession of faith in the Eastern
churches has generally been made by the sponsor, or the person to
be baptized, not in the form of answers to questions, but by repeat-
ing the Creed after the priest. In the Western churches, the imme-
morial custom has been, for the priest to interrogate the candidate
for baptism, or his sponsor, on the principal articles of the Christian
laith."

' Luke XV. 4-10.

' Luke XV. 32.


the thing it loves than if it had always pos-
sessed them? Yea, and other things bear wit-
ness hereunto ; and all things are full of wit-
nesses, crying out, "So it is." The victorious
commander triumpheth ; yet he would not have
conquered had he not fought, and the greater
the peril of the battle, the more the rejoicing
of the triumph. The storm tosses the voyagers,
threatens shipwreck, and every one waxes pale
at the approach of death ; but sky and sea grow
calm, and they rejoice much, as they feared
much. A loved one is sick, and his pulse indi-
cates danger ; all who desire his safety are at
once sick at heart : he recovers, though not able
as yet to walk with his former strength, and
there is such joy as was not before when he
walked sound and strong. Yea, the very
pleasures of human life — not those only which
rush upon us unexpectedly, and against our
wills, but those that are voluntary and designed
— do men obtain by difficulties. There is no
pleasure at all in eating and drinking unless the
pains of hunger and thirst go before. And
drunkards eat certain salt meats with the view
of creating a troublesome heat, which the drink
allaying causes pleasure. It is also the custom
that the affianced bride should not immediately
be given up, that the husband may not less es-
teem her whom, as betrothed, he longed not for.*

8. This law obtains in base and accursed joy;
in that joy also which is permitted and lawful;
in the sincerity of honest friendship; and in
Him who was dead, and lived again, had been
lost, and was found.* The greater joy is every-
where preceded by the greater pain. What
meaneth this, O Lord my God, when Thou art
an everlasting joy unto Thine own self, and some
things about Thee are ever rejoicing in Thee?^
What meaneth this, that this portion of things
thus ebbs and flows, alternately offended and
reconciled ? Is this the fashion of them, and is
this all Thou hast allotted to them, whereas from
the highest heaven to the lowest earth, from the
beginning of the world to its end, from the
angel to the worm, from the first movement
unto the last. Thou settedst each in its right
place, and appointedst each its proper seasons,
everything good after its kind ? Woe is me !
How high art Thou in the highest, and how
deep in the deepest ! Thou withdrawest no
whither, and scarcely do we return to Thee.

CHAP. IV. HE SHOWS BY THE EXAMPLE OF VIC-
TORINUS THAT THERE IS MORE JOY IN THE
CONVERSION OF NOBLES.

9. Haste, Lord, and act ; stir us up, and call
us back ; inflame us, and draw us to Thee ; stir


3 See ix. sec. 19, note.

< Luke XV. 32.

5 See xii. sec. 12, and xiii. sec. 11, below.


I20


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VIII.


us up, and grow sweet unto us ; let us now love
Thee, let us " run after Thee." ^ Do not many
men, out of a deeper hell of blindness than that
of Victorinus, return unto Thee, and approach,
and are enlightened, receiving that light, which
they that receive, receive power from Thee
to become Thy sons?^ But if they be less
known among the people, even they that know
them joy less for them. For when many re-
joice together, the joy of each one is the fuller,
in that they are incited and inflamed by one
another. Again, because those that are known
to many influence many towards salvation, and
take the lead with many to follow them. And,
therefore, do they also who preceded them much
rejoice in regard to them, because they rejoice
not in them alone. May it be averted that in
Thy tabernacle the persons of the rich should
be accepted before the poor, or the noble before
the ignoble ; since rather ' ' Thou hast chosen
the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty ; and base things of the
world, and things which are despised, hast Thou
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring
to naught things that are. ' ' ' And yet, even
that "least of the apostles,"* by whose tongue
Thou soundest out these words, when Paulus
the proconsul* — his pride overcome by the
apostle's warfare — was made to pass under the
easy yoke® of Thy Christ, and became a pro-
vincial of the great King, — he also, instead of
Saul, his former name, desired to be called
Paul,' in testimony of so great a victory. For
the enemy is more overcome in one of whom
he hath more hold, and by whom he hath hold
of more. But the proud hath he more hold of
by reason of their nobility ; and by them of
more, by reason of their authority.® By how

1 Cant. i. 4.

2 John i. 12.

<* I Cor. i. 27, 28.

* I Cor. XV. 9.
6 Acts. xiii. 12.

* Matt. xi. 30.

' " ' As Scipio, after the conquest of Africa, took the name of
Africanus, so Saul also, being sent to preach to the Gentiles, brought
back his trophy out of the first spoils won by the Church, the
proconsul Sergius Pauhis, and set up his banner, in that for Saul he
was called Paul ' (Jerome, Coinm. in Ep. ad Philem. itiit ). Ori-
gen mentions the same opinion (which is indeed suggested by the
relation in the Acts), but thinks that the apostle had originally two
names {Proef. in O'ln/n. in Ep. ad Rom.), which, as a Roman,
may very well have been, and yet that he made use of his Roman
name Paul first in connection with the conversion of the proconsul ;
Chrysostom says that it was doubtless changed at the command of
God, which is to be supposed, but still may have been at this time."
— E. B P.

8 "Satan makes choice oi persons of place and power. These
are either in the commonwealth or church. If he can, he will secure
the throne and the pulpit, as the two forts that command the whole
line. . . A prince or a ruler may stand for a thousand ; therefore
saith Paul to Elymas, when he would have turned the deputy from
the faith, ' O full of all subtiky, thou child of the devil ! ' (Acts. xiii.
ID). As if he had said, ' You have learned this of your father the
devil, — to haunt the courts of princes, wind into the favour of great
ones. There is a double policy Satan hath in gaining such to his
side : — {a) None have such advantage to draw others to their way.
Corrupt the captain, and it is hard if he bring not off his troop with
him. When the princes — men of renown in their tribes — stood up
with Korah, presently a multitude are drawn into the conspiracy
(Num. xvi. 2, 19). Let Jeroboam set up idolatr5^ and Israel is
soon in a snare. It is said [that] the people willingly walked after


much the more welcome, then, was the heart of
Victorinus esteemed, which the devil had held
as an unassailable retreat, and the tongue of
Victorinus, with which mighty and cutting
weapon he had slain many ; so much the more
abundantly should Thy sons rejoice, seeing that
our King hath bound the strong man,® and they
saw his vessels taken from him and cleansed,^"
and made meet for Thy honour, and become
serviceable for the Lord unto every good work.^^

CHAP. V. — OF THE CAUSES WHICH ALIENATE US
FROM GOD.

ID. But when that man of Thine, Sim-
plicianus, related this to me about Victorinus,
I burned to imitate him ; and it was for this
end he had related it. But when he had added
this also, that in the time of the Emperor Julian,
there was a law made by which Christians were
forbidden to teach grammar and oratory, ^'■^ and
he, in obedience to this law, chose rather to
abandon the wordy school than Thy word, by
which Thou makest eloquent the tongues of the
dumb^'*, — he appeared to me not more brave
than happy, in having thus discovered an op-
portunity of waiting on Thee only, which thing
I was sighing for, thus bound, not with the irons
of another, but my own iron will. My will was
the enemy master of, and thence had made a
chain for me and bound me. Because of a per-
verse will was lust made ; and lust indulged in
became custom ; and custom not resisted became
necessity. By which links, as it were, joined
together (whence I term it a "chain"), did a
hard bondage hold me enthralled.^* But that

his commandment (Hos. v. 11). (h) Should the sin stay at court,
and the infection go no further, yet the sin of such a one, though a
good man, may cost a whole kingdom dear. ' Satan stood up
against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel ' (i Chron.
xxi. i). He owed Israel a spite, and he pays them home in their
king's sin, which dropped in a fearful plague upon their heads." —
GuRNALL, The Christian in Complete Arviour, vol. i. part 2.
9 Matt. xii. 29.

1" Luke xi. 22, 25.

11 2 Tim. ii. 21.

'2 During the reign of Constantius, laws of a persecuting charac-
ter were enacted against Paganism, which led midtitudes nominally
to adopt the Christian faith. When Julian the Apostate came to
the throne, he took steps immediately to reinstate Paganism in all
its ancient splendour. His court was filled with Platonic philoso-
phers and diviners, and he sacrificed daily to the gods. But, instead
of imitating the example of his predecessor, and enacting laws
against the Christians, he endeavoured by subtlety to destroy their
faith. In addition to the measures mentioned by Augustin above,
he endeavoured to foment divisions in the Church by recalling the
banished Donatists, and stimulating them to disseminate their doc-
trines, and he himself wrote treatises against it. In order, if pos-
sible, to counteract the influence of Christianity, he instructed his
priests to imitate the Christians in their relief of the poor and care
for the sick. But while in every way enacting measures of dis-
ability against the Christians, he showed great favour to the Jews,
and with the view of confuting the predictions of Christ, went so
far as to encourage them to rebuild the Temple.

!•< Wisd. x. 21.

14 There would appear to be a law at work in the moral and spir-
itual worlds similar to that of gravitation in the natural, which
"acts inversely as the square of the distance." As we are more
affected, for example, by events that have taken place near us
either in time or place, than by those which are more remote, so in
spiritual things, the monitions of conscience would seem to become
feeble with far greater rapidity than the continuance of our resist-
ance would lead us to expect, while the power of sin, in like pro-
portion, becomes strong. When tempted, men see not the end from


i^


Chap. VI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


12 1


new will which had begun to develope in me,
freely to worship Thee, and to wish to enjoy
Thee, O God, the only sure enjoyment, was
not able as yet to overcome my former wilful-
ness, made strong by long indulgence. Thus
did my two wills, one old and the other new,
one carnal, the other spiritual, contend within
me ; and by their discord they unstrung my
soul.

11. Thus came I to understand, from my
own experience, what I had read, how that
"the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh. "^ I verily lusted both
ways ; ^ yet more in that which I approved in
myself, than in that which I disapproved in
myself. For in this last it was now rather not
" I," ^ because in much I rather suffered against
my will than did it willingly. And yet it was
through me that custom became more combat-
ive against me, because I had come willingly
whither I willed not. And who, then, can with
any justice speak against it, when just punish-
ment follows the sinner?* Nor had I now any
longer my wonted excuse, that as yet I hesi-
tated to be above the world and serve Thee,
because my perception of the truth was uncer-
tain ; for now it was certain. But I, still bound
to the earth, refused to be Thy soldier ; and was
as much afraid of being freed from all embar-
rassments, as we ought to fear to be embar-
rassed.

12. Thus with the baggage of the world was I
sweetly burdened, as when in slumber ; and the
thoughts wherein I meditated upon Thee were
like unto the efforts of those desiring to awake,
■who, still overpowered with a heavy drowsiness,
are again steeped therein. And as no one
desires to sleep always, and in the sober judg-
ment of all waking is better, yet does a man
generally defer to shake off drowsiness, when
there is a heavy lethargy in all his limbs, and,
though displeased, yet even after it is time to
rise with pleasure yields to it, so was I assured
that it were much better for me to give up my-
self to Thy charity, than to yield myself to my
own cupidity ; but the former course satisfied

the beginning. The allurement, however, which at first is but as a
gossamer thread, is soon felt to have the strength of a cable. " Evil
men and seducers wax worse and worse " (2 Tim. iii. 13), and when
it is too late they learn that the embrace of the siren is but the pre-
lude to destruction. " Thus," as Gurnall has it ( The Christian in
Complete Artnour, voi. i. part 2), "Satan leads poor creatures
down into the depths of sin by winding stairs, that let them not see
the bottom whither they are going. . . . Many who at this day lie
in open profaneness, never thought they should have rolled so far
from their modest beginnings. O Christians, give not place to
Satan, no, not an inch, in his first motions. He that is a beggar
and a modest one without doors, will command the house if let in.
Yield at first, and thou givest away thy strength to resist him in the
rest; when the hem is worn, the whole garment will ravel out, if it
be not mended by timely repentance."' See Miiller, Lehre von der
Siinde, book v., where the beginnings and alarming progress of evil
in the soul are graphically described. See ix. sec. 18, note, below.

' Gal. V. 17.

2 See iv. sec. 26, note, and v. sec. 18, above.

■* Rom. vii. 20.

* See v. sec. 2, note 6, above.


and vanquished me, the latter pleased me and
fettered me.^ Nor had I aught to answer Thee
calling to me, "Awake, thou that sleepest, and
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light."® And to Thee showing me on every
side, that what Thou saidst was true, I, con-
victed by the truth, had nothing at all to reply,
but the drawling and drowsy words: "Pre-
sently, lo, presently;" "Leave me a little
while." But "presently, presently," had no
present; and my "leave me a little while"
went on for a long while.'' In vain did I " de-
light in Thy law after the inner man," when
"another law in my members warred against
the law of my mind, and brought me into cap-
tivity to the law of sin which is in my mem-
bers." For the law of sin is the violence of
custom, whereby the mind is drawn and held,
even against its will ; deserving to be so held
in that it so willingly falls into it. " O
wretched man that I am ! who shall deliver me
from the body of this death ' ' but Thy grace
only, through Jesus Christ our Lord?®

CHAP. VI. PONTITIANUS' ACCOUNT OF ANTONY,

THE FOUNDER OF MONACHISM, AND OF SOME
WHO IMITATED HIM.

13. And how, then. Thou didst deliver me
out of the bonds of carnal desire, wherewith I
was most firmly fettered, and out of the drud-
gery of worldly business, will I now declare and
confess unto Thy name, " O Lord, my strength
and my Redeemer."^ Amid increasing anxi-
ety, I was transacting my usual affairs, and daily


5 Illud placebat et vincebat ; hoc libebat et vinciebat. Watts
renders freely, " But notwithstanding that former course pleased
and overcame my reason, yet did this latter tickle and enthrall my
senses."

6 Eph. V. 14.

' As Bishop Wilberforce, eloquently describing this condition of
mind, says, in his sermon on The Almost Christian, " New,
strange wishes were rising in his heart. The Mighty One was
brooding over its currents, was stirring up its tides, was fain to over-
rule their troubled flow — to arise in open splendour on his eyes ; to
glorify his life with His own blessed presence. And he himself was
evidently conscious of the struggle ; he was almost won ; he was
drawn towards that mysterious birth, and he well-nigh yielded.
He even knew what was passing within his soul ; he could appreci-
ate something of its importance, of the living value of that moment.
If that conflict was indeed visible to higher powers around him ; if
they who longed to keep him in the kingdom of darkness, and they
who were ready to rejoice at his repentance — if they could see the
inner waters of that troubled heart, as they surged and eddied
underneath these mighty influences, how must they have waited
for the doubtful choice ! how would they strain their obsers'ation to
see if that almost should turn into an altogether, or die away
again, and leave his heart harder than it had been before ! "

8 Rom. vii. 22-24. This difficilis et periculosus locus (Serin.
cliv. i) lie interprets differently at different periods of his life. In
this place, as elsewhere in his writings, he makes the passage refer
(according to the general interpretation in the Church up to that
time) to man convinced of sin under the influence of the law, but not
under grace. In his J?etractations, however (i. 23, sec. i), he points
out that he had found reason to interpret the passage not of man
convinced of sin, but of man renewed and regenerated in Christ
Jesus. This is the view constantly taken in his anti- Pelagian writ-
ings, which were published subsequently to the date of his Confes-
sions; and indeed this change in interpretation probably arose from
the pressure of the Pelagian controversy (see Con. Duas Ep. Pel.
i. 10, sees. 18 and 22), and the fear lest the old view should too
much favour the heretics, and their exaltation of the powers of the
natural man to the disparagement of the influence of the grace of
God.

9 Ps. xix. 14.


122


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VIII.


sighing unto Thee. I resorted as frequently to
Thy church as the business, under the burden
of which I groaned, left me free to do. Alypius
was with me, being after the third sitting dis-
engaged from his legal occupation, and await-
ing further opportunity of selling his counsel,
as I was wont to sell the power of speaking, if
it can be supplied by teaching. But Nebridius
had, on account of our friendship, consented to
teach under Verecundus, a citizen and a gram-
marian of Milan, and a very intimate friend
of us all ; who vehemently desired, and by
the right of friendship demanded from our
company, the faithful aid he greatly stood in
need of. Nebridius, then, was not drawn to
this by any desire of gain (for he could have
made much more of his learning had he been
so inclined), but, as a most sweet and kindly
friend, he would not be wanting in an office of
friendliness, and slight our request. But in
this he acted very discreetly, taking care not to
become known to those personages whom the
world esteems great ; thus avoiding distraction
of mind, which he desired to have free and at
leisure as many hours as possible, to search, or
read, or hear something concerning wisdom.

14. Upon a certain day, then, Nebridius be-
ing away (why, I do not remember), lo, there
came to the house to see Alypius and me, Pon-
titianus, a countryman of ours, in so far as he
was an African, who held high office in the
emperor's court. What he wanted with us I
know not, but we sat down to talk together,
and it fell out that upon a table before us, used
for games, he noticed a book ; he took it up,
opened it, and, contrary to his expectation,
found it to be the Apostle Paul, — for he imag-
ined it to be one of those books which I was
wearing myself out in teaching. At this he
looked up at me smilingly, and expressed his
delight and wonder that he had so unexpectedly
found this book, and this only, before my eyes.
For he was both a Christian and baptized, and
often prostrated himself before Thee our God in
the church, in constant and daily prayers. When,
then, I had told him that I bestowed much
pains upon these writings, a conversation ensued
on his speaking of Antony,^ the Egyptian

1 It may be well here to say a few words in regard to Monachism
and Antony's relation to it : — (i) There is much in the later Platon-
ism, with its austerities and bodily mortifications (see vii. sec. 13,
note 2, above), which is in common with the asceticism of the early
Church. The Therapeutae of Philo, indeed, of whom there were
numbers in the neighbourhood of Ale-xandria in the first century, may
be considered as the natural forerunners of the Egyptian monks. (2)
Monachism, according to Sozomen (i. 12), had its origin in a desire
to escape persecution by retirement into the wilderness. It is prob-
able, however, that, as in the case of Paul the hermit of Thebais,
the desire for freedom from the cares of life, so that by contempla-
tion and mortification of the body, the Abyo? or inner reason (which
was held to be an emanation of God) might be purified, had as
much to do with the hermit life as a fear of persecution. Mosheim,
indeed {Ecc. Hist. i. part 2, c. 3), supposes Paul to have been influ-
enced entirely by these Platonic notions. (3) Antony was born in
the district of Thebes, A. D. 251, and visited Paul in the Egyptian
desert a little before his death. To Antony is the world indebted


monk, whose name was in high repute among
Thy servants, though up to that time not famil-
iar to us. When he came to know this, he lin-
gered on that topic, imparting to us a knowl-
edge of this man so eminent, and marvelling at
our ignorance. But we were amazed, hearing
Thy wonderful works most fully manifested in
times so recent, and almost in our own, wrought
in the true faith and the Catholic Church. We
all wondered — we, that they were so great, and
he, that we had never heard of them.

15. From this his conversation turned to the
companies in the monasteries, and their man-
ners so fragrant unto Thee, and of the fruitful
deserts of the wilderness, of which we knew
nothing. And there was a monastery at Milan'''
full of good brethren, without the walls of the
city, under the fostering care of Ambrose, and
we were ignorant of it. He went on with his
relation, and we listened intently and in silence.
He then related to us how on a certain after-
noon, at Triers, when the emperor was taken
up with seeing the Circensian games, ^ he and
three others, his comrades, went out for a walk
in the gardens close to the city walls, and there,
as they chanced to walk two and two, one
strolled away with him, while the other two
went by themselves ; and these, in their ram-


for establishing communities of monks, as distingiushed from the
solitary asceticism of Paul ; he therefore is rightly viewed as the
founder of Monachism. He appears to have known little more
than how to speak his native Coptic, 5'et during his long life (said
to have been 100 years) he by his fervent enthusiasm made for him-
self a name little inferior to that of the " king of men," Athanasius,
whom in the time of the Arian troubles he stedfastly supported,
and by whom his life has been handed down to us. Augustin, in
his De Doctr. Christ. (Prol. sec. 4), speaks of him as " a just and
holy man, who, not being able to read himself, is said to have com-
mitted the Scriptures to memorj' through hearing them read by
others, and by dint of wise meditation to have arrived at a thor-
ough understanding of them." (4I According to Sozomen (iii. 14),
monasteries had not been established in Europe A. D. 340. They
were, Baronius tells us, introduced into Rome about that date by
Athanasius, during a visit to that city. Athanasius mentions
"ascetics" as dwelling at Rome A. D. 355. Ambrose, Bishop of
Milan, Martin, Bishop of Tours, and Jerome were enthusiastic sup-
porters of the system. (5) Monachism in Europe presented more
of its practical and less of its contemplative side, than in its cradle
in the East. An e.xample of how the monks of the East did work
for the good of others is seen in the instance of the monks of Pacho-
mius ; still in this respect, as in matters of doctrine, the West has
generally shown itself more practical than the East. Probably cli-
mate and the style of living consequent thereon have much to do
with this. Sulpicius Severus (dial. i. 2, De Vita Ma7-tini) niay be
taken to give a quaint illustration of this, when he makes one of his
characters say, as he hears of the mode of living of the Eastern
monks, that their diet was only suited to angels. However mis-
taken we may think the monkish systems to be, it cannot be con-
cealed that in the days of anarchy and semi-barbarism they were
oftentimes centres of civilisation. Certainly in its originating idea
of meditative seclusion, there is much that is worthy of commenda-
tion ; for, as Farindon has it {Works, iv. 130), " This has been the
practice not only of holy men, but of heathen men. Thus did
Tully, and Antony, and Crassus make way to that honour and re-
nown which they afterwards purchased in eloquence (Cicero, De
Officiis, ii. 13, viii. 7); thus did they pass a solitudine in scholas,
a scholis in forum, — ' from their secret retirement into the schools,
and from the schools into the pleading-place.' "

- Augustin, when comparing Christian with Manichaean asceti-
ci.sm, says in his De Mor. Eccl. Cath. (sec. 70), "I saw at Milan
a lodging-house of saints, in number not a few, presided over by
one presbyter, a man of great excellence and learning." In the
previous note we have giv£n the generally received opinion, that
the first monaster^' in Europe was established at Rome. It may be
mentioned here that Muratori maintains that the institution was
transplanted from the East first to Milan; others contend that the
first European society was at Aquileia.

3 See vi. sec. 12, note i, above.


Chap. VII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


123


bling, came upon a certain cottage inhabited
by some of Thy servants, " poor in spirit," of
whom "is the kingdom of heaven,"^ where
they found a book in which was written the hfe
of Antony. This one of them began to read,
marvel at, and be inflamed by it ; and in the
reading, to meditate on embracing such a Hfe,
and giving up his worldly employments to serve
Thee. And these were of the body called
"Agents for Public Affairs."^ Then, suddenly
being overwhelmed with a holy love and a sober
sense of shame, in anger with himself, he cast
his eyes upon his friend, exclaiming, " Tell
me, I entreat thee, what end we are striving for
by all these labours of ours. What is our aim ?
What is our motive in doing service ? Can our
hopes in court rise higher than to be ministers
of the emperor? And in such a position, what
is there not brittle, and fraught with danger,
and by how many dangers arrive we at greater
danger? And when arrive we thither? But
if I desire to become a friend of God, behold,
I am even now made it." Thus spake he, and
in the pangs of the travail of the new life, he
turned his eyes again upon the page and con-
tinued reading, and was inwardly changed
where Thou sawest, and his mind was divested
of the world, as soon became evident ; for as
he read, and the surging of his heart rolled
along, he raged awhile, discerned and resolved
on a better course, and now, having become
Thine, he said to his friend, "Now have I
broken loose from those hopes of ours, and am
determined to serve God ; and this, from this
hour, in this place, I enter upon. If thou art
reluctant to imitate me, hinder me not." The
other replied that he would cleave to him, to
share in so great a reward and so great a ser-
vice. Thus both of them, being now Thine,
were building a tower at the necessary cost,^ —
of forsaking all that they had and following

1 Matt. V. 3. Roman commentators are ever ready to use this
text of Scripture as an argument in favour of monastic poverty, and
some may feel disposed from its context to imagine such an inter-
pretation to be implied in this place. This, however, can hardly
be so. Augustin constantly points out in his sermons, etc. in
what the poverty that is pleasing to God consists. " Pauper Dei,"
he says (in Ps. cxxxi. 15J, "in animo est, non in sacculo ;" and
his interpretation of this passage in his Exposition of the Sertiion
on the Mount (\. 3) is entirely opposed to the Roman view. We
there read : "The poor in spirit are rightly understood here as
meaning the humble and God-fearing, i. e. those who have not a
spirit which puffeth up. Nor ought blessedness to begin at any
other point whatever, if indeed it is to reach the highest wisdom.
'The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom' (Ps. cxi. 10);
whereas, on the other hand also, ' pride ' is entitled ' the beginning
of all sin ' (Ecclus. x. 13). Let the proud, therefore, seek after and
love the kingdoms of the earth ; but ' blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.' "

'^ " Agentes in rebus. There was a society of them still about
the court. Their militia or employments were to gather in the em-
peror's tributes; to fetch in offenders; to do Palatini obseguia,
offices of court provide corn, etc., ride on errands like messengers
of the chamber, lie abroad as spies and intelligencers. They were
often preferred to places of magistracy in the provinces ; such were
called Princifies or Magistriani. St. Hierome upon Abdias, c. i,
calls them messengers. They succeeded the prumentarii, h)etween
which two and the Curiosi and the Speculatores there was not
much difference." — W. W.

" Luke xiv. 26-35.


Thee. Then Pontitianus, and he that had
walked with him through other parts of the gar-
den, came in search of them to the same place,
and having found them, reminded them to re-
turn as the day had declined. But they, mak-
ing known to him their resolution and purpose,
and how such a resolve had sprung up and be-
come confirmed in them, entreated them not to
molest them, if they refused to join themselves
unto them. But the others, no whit changed
from their former selves, did yet (as he said)
bewail themselves, and piously congratulated
them, recommending themselves to their
prayers ; and with their hearts inclining towards
earthly things, returned to the palace. But the
other two, setting their affections upon heavenly
things, remained in the cottage. And both of
them had affianced brides, who, when they
heard of this, dedicated also their virginity unto
God.

CHAP. Vn. HE DEPLORES HIS WRETCHEDNESS,

THAT HAVING BEEN BORN THIRTV-TWO YEARS,
HE HAD NOT YET FOUND OUT THE TRUTH.

16. Such was the story of Pontitianus. But
Thou, O Lord, whilst he was speaking, didst
turn me towards myself, taking me from behind
my back, where I had placed myself while
unwilling to exercise self-scrutiny ; and Thou
didst set me face to face with myself, that I
might behold how foul I was, and how crooked
and sordid, bespotted and ulcerous. And I
beheld and loathed myself; and whither to fly
from myself I discovered not. And if I sought
to turn my gaze away from myself, he con-
tinued his narrative, and Thou again opposedst
me unto myself, and thrustedst me before my
own eyes, that I might discover my iniquity,
and hate it.* I had known it, but acted as
though I knew it not, — winked at it, and forgot
it.

17. But now, the more ardently I loved
those whose healthful affections I heard tell of,
that they had given up themselves wholly to
Thee to be cured, the more did I abhor myself
when compared with them. For many of my
years (perhaps twelve) had passed away since
my nineteenth, when, on the reading of Cicero's
Hortensius ,^ I was roused to a desire for wis-
dom ; and still I was delaying to reject mere
worldly happiness, and to devote myself to
search out that whereof not the finding alone,
but the bare search,® ought to have been pre-

* Ps. xxxvi. 2.

6 See iii. sec. 7, above.

6 It is interesting to compare with this passage the views contained
in Augustin's three books. Con. Acadeviicos, — the earliest of his
extant works, and written about this time. Licentius there main-
tains that the " bare search " for truth renders a man happy, while
Trygetius contends that the "finding alone " can produce happi-
ness. Augustin does not agree with the doctrine of the former, and
points out that while the Academics held the probable to be attaiiv-


124


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VIII.


ferred before the treasures and kingdoms of this
world, though already found, and before the
pleasures of the body, though encompassing me
at my will. But I, miserable young man,
supremely miserable even in the very outset of
my youth, had entreated chastity of Thee, and
said, " Grant me chastity and continency, but
not yet." For I was afraid lest Thou shouldest
hear me soon, and soon deliver me from the
disease of concupiscence, which I desired to
have satisfied rather than extinguished. And I
had wandered through perverse ways in a sacri-
legious superstition ; not indeed assured thereof,
but preferring that to the others, which I did
not seek religiously, but opposed maliciously.

1 8. And I had thought that I delayed from
day to day to reject worldly hopes and follow
Thee only, because there did not appear any-
thing certain whereunto to direct my course.
And now had the day arrived in which I was to
be laid bare to myself, and my conscience was
to chide me. " Where art thou, O my tongue ?
Thou saidst, verily, that for an uncertain truth
thou wert not willing to cast off the baggage of
vanity. Behold, now it is certain, and yet doth
that burden still oppress thee ; whereas they who
neither have so worn themselves out with search-
ing after it, nor yet have spent ten years and
more in thinking thereon, have had their
shoulders unburdened, and gotten wings to fly
away." Thus was I inwardly consumed and
mightily confounded with an horrible shame,
while Pontitianus was relating these things.
And he, having finished his story, and the busi-
ness he came for, went his way. And unto my-
self, what said I not within myself? With what
scourges of rebuke lashed I not my soul to make


able, it could not be so without the true, by which the probable is
measured and known. And, in his De Vita Beata, he contends
that he who seeks truth and finds it not, has not attained happiness,
and that though the grace of God be indeed guiding him, he must
not expect complete happiness {Retractatians , i. 2) till after death.
Perhaps no sounder philosophy can be found than that evidenced
in the life of Victor Hugo's good Bishop Myriel, who rested in the
practice of love, and Was content to look for perfect happiness, and
a full unfolding of God's mysteries, to the future life :—" Aimez-
vous les uns les autres, il declarait cela complet, ne souhaitait rien
de plus et c'etait 14 toute sa doctrine. Un jour, cet homme qui se
croyait ' philosophe,' ce senateur, deji nomme, dit i I'eveque :
' Mais voyez done le .spectacle du monde ; guerre de tons centre
tous ; le plus fort a le plus d'esprit. Votre aimez-vous les uns les
autres est une betise.' — ' Eh bien,' repondit Monseigneur Bienvenu,
sans disputer, ' si c'est une betise. Tame doit s'y enfermer comme la
perle dans I'huitre.' II s'y enfermait done, il y vivait, il s'en satis-
faisait absolument, laissant de cote les questions prodigieuses qui
attirent et qui epouvantent, les perspectives insoudables de I'ab-
straction, les precipices de la metaphysique, toutes ces profondeurs
convergentes, pour I'apotre, k Dieu, pour I'athee, au neant : la des-
tinee, le bien et le mal, la guerre de I'etre centre I'etre, la con-
science de I'homme, le somnambulisme pensif de I'animal, la trans-
formation par la mort, la recapitulation d'existences qui contient le
tombeau, la greffe incomprehensible des amours successifs sur le
moi persistant, I'essence, la substance, le Nil et TEns, I'ame, la
nature, la liberte, la necessite ; problemes i pic, epaisseurs sinis-
tres, ou se penchent les gigantesques archanges de I'esprit humain;
formidables abimes que Lucrece, Manon, Saint Paul, et Dante con-
templent avec cet ceil fulgurant qui semble, en regardant fixement
I'infini, y faire eclore les etoiles.. Monseigneur Bienvenu elait sim-
plement un homme qui constatait du dehors les questions myste-
rieuses sans les scruter, sans les agiter, et sans en troubler son
propre esprit ; et qui avait dans Tame le grave respect de I'ombre."
— Les Miserables, c. xiv.


it follow me, struggling to go after Thee ! Yet
it drew back ; it refused, and exercised not it-
self. All its arguments were exhausted and
confuted. There remained a silent trembling ;
and it feared, as it would death, to be restrained
from the flow of that custom whereby it was
wasting away even to death.

CHAP. VIII. THE CONVERSATION WITH ALYPIUS

BEING ENDED, HE RETIRES TO THE GARDEN,
WHITHER HIS FRIEND FOLLOWS HIM.

19. In the midst, then, of this great strife of
my inner dwelling, which I had strongly raised
up against my soul in the chamber of my heart,^
troubled both in mind and countenance, I
seized upon Alypius, and exclaimed : " What is
wrong with us ? What is this ? What heardest
thou ? The unlearned start up and '■ take '
heaven,^ and we, with our learning, but wanting
heart, see where we wallow in flesh and blood !
Because others have preceded us, are we ashamed
to follow, and not rather ashamed at not follow-
ing ? ' ' Some such words I gave utterance to,
and in my excitement flung myself from him,
while he gazed upon me in silent astonishment.
For I spoke not in my wonted tone, and my
brow, cheeks, eyes, colour, tone of voice, all
expressed my emotion more than the words.
There was a little garden belonging to our lodg-
ing, of which we had the' use, as of the whole
house ; for the master, our landlord, did not
live there. Thither had the tempest within my
breast hurried me,, where no one might impede
the fiery struggle in which I was engaged with
myself, until it came to the issue that Thou
knewest, though I did not. But I was mad
that I might be whole, and dying that I might
have life, knowing what evil thing I was, but
not knowing what good thing I was shortly to
become. Into the garden, then, I retired, Aly-
pius following my steps. For his presence was
no bar to my solitude ; or how could he desert
me so troubled? We sat down at as great a
distance from the house as we could. I was
disquieted in spirit, being most impatient with
myself that I entered not into Thy will and
covenant, O my God, which all my bones cried
out unto me to enter, extolling it to the skies.
And we enter not therein by ships, or chariots,
or feet, no, nor by going so far as I had come
from the house to that place where we were sit-
ting. For not to go only, but to enter there,
was naught else but to will to go, but to will it
resolutely and thoroughly ; not to stagger and
sway about this way and that, a changeable and
half-wounded will, wrestling, with one part fall-
ing as another rose.


1 Isa. xxvi. 20, and Matt. vi. 6.

2 Matt. XI. 12.


i


Chap X.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


125


20. Finally, in the very fever of my irreso-
lution, I made many of those motions with my
body which men sometimes desire to do, but

, cannot, if either they have not the limbs, or if
IP their limbs be bound with fetters, weakened by
disease, or hindered in any other way. Thus,
if I tore my hair, struck my forehead, or if, en-
twining my fingers, I clasped my knee, this I
did because I willed it. But I might have willed
and not done it, if the power of motion in my
limbs had not responded. So many things,
I then, I did, when to have the will was not to
have the power, and I did not that which both
with an unequalled desire I longed more to do,
and which shortly when I should will I should
have the power to do ; because shortly when I
should will, I should will thoroughly. For in
such things the power was one with the will,
and to will was to do, and yet was it not done ;
and more readily did the body obey the slight-
est wish of the soul in the moving its limbs at
the order of the mind, than the soul obeyed
itself to accomplish in the will alone this its
great will.

CHAP. IX. THAT THE MIND COMMANDETH THE

MIND, BUT IT WILLETH NOT ENTIRELY.

21. Whence is this monstrous thing? And
why is it ? Let Thy mercy shine on me, that I
may inquire, if so be the hiding-places of man's
punishment, and the darkest contritions of the
sons of Adam, may perhaps answer me. Whence
is this monstrous thing ? and why is it ? The
mind commands the body, and it obeys forth-
with ; the mind commands itself, and is resisted.
The mind commands the hand to be moved,
and such readiness is there that the command is
scarce to be distinguished from the obedience.
Yet the mind is mind, and the hand is body.
The mind commands the mind to will, and yet,
though it be itself, it obeyeth not. Whence this
monstrous thing? and why is it? I repeat, it
commands itself to will, and would not give the
command unless it willed ; yet is not that done
which it commandeth. But it willeth not en-
tirely ; therefore it commandeth not entirely.
For so far forth it commandeth, as it willeth ;
and so far forth is the thing commanded not
done, as it willeth not. For the will command-
eth that there be a will ; — not another, but itself.
But it doth not command entirely, therefore
that is not which it commandeth. For were
it entire, it would not even command it to be,
because it would already be. It is, therefore,
no monstrous thing partly to will, partly to be
unwilling, but an infirmity of the mind, that it
doth not wholly rise, sustained by truth, pressed
down by custom. And so there are two wills,
because one of them is not entire ; and the one
is supplied with what the other needs.


CHAP. X. HE REFUTES THE OPINION OF THE

MANICH^ANS AS TO TWO KINDS OF MINDS,

ONE GOOD AND THE OTHER EVIL.

2 2. Let them perish from Thy presence,^ O
God, as "vain talkers and deceivers"^ of the
soul do perish, who, observing that there were two
wills in deliberating, affirm that there are two
kinds of minds in us, — one good, the other
evil.' They themselves verily are evil when
they hold these evil opinions ; and they shall
become good when they hold the truth, and
shall consent unto the truth, that Thy apostle
may say unto them, " Ye were sometimes dark-
ness, but now are ye light in the Lord."* But
they, desiring to be light, not " in the Lord,"
but in themselves, conceiving the nature of the
soul to be the same as that which God is,* are
made more gross darkness ; for that through a
shocking arrogancy they went farther from
Thee, "the true Light, which lighteth every
man that cometh into the world. "^ Take
heed what you say, and blush for shame ; draw
near unto Him and be "lightened," and your
faces shall not be "ashamed."' I, when I was
deliberating upon serving the Lord my God
now, as I had long purposed, — I it was who
willed, I who was unwilling. It was I, even I
myself. I neither willed entirely, nor was en-
tirely unwilling. Therefore was I at war with
myself, and destroyed by myself. And this
destruction overtook me against my will, and
yet showed not the presence of another mind,
but the punishment of mine own.* "Now,
then, it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwelleth in me,"^ — the punishment of a
more unconfined sin, in that I was a son of
Adam.

23. For if there be as many contrary natures
as there are conflicting wills, there will not now
be two natures only, but many. If any one
deliberate whether he should go to their con-
venticle, or to the theatre, those men^" at once
cry out, " Behold, here are two natures, — one
good, drawing this way, another bad, drawing
back that way ; for whence else is this indecision
between conflicting wills? " But I reply that
both are bad — that which draws to them, and
that which draws back to the theatre. But they
believe not that will to be other than good which
draws to them. Supposing, then, one of us


1 Ps. Ixviii. 2,

2 Titus i. 10.

3 And that therefore they were not responsible for their evil deeds,
it not being they that sinned, but the nature of evil in them. See
iv. sec. 26, and note, above, where the Manichsean doctrines in this
matter are fully treated.

4 Eph. V. 8.

6 See iv. sec. 26, note, above.

6 John i. 9.

7 Ps. xxxiv. 5.

8 See V. sec. 2, note 6, above, and x. sec. 5, note, below.

9 Rom. vii. 17.

w The Manichaeans.


126


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VIII,


should deliberate, and through the conflict of
his two wills should waver whether he should go
to the theatre or to our church, would not these
also waver what to answer? For either they
must confess, w^hich they are not willing to do,
that the will which leads to our church is good,
as well as that of those who have received and
are held by the mysteries of theirs, or they must
imagine that there are two evil natures and two
evil minds in one man, at war one with the
other ; and that will not be true which they say,
that there is one good and another bad ; or
they must be converted to the truth, and no
longer deny that where any one deliberates,
there is one soul fluctuating between conflicting
wills.

24. Let them no more say, then, when they
perceive two wills to be antagonistic to each other
in the same man, that the contest is between two
opposing minds, of two opposing substances, from
two opposing principles, the one good and the
other bad. For Thou, O true God, dost disprove,
check, and convince them ; like as when both wills
are bad, one deliberates whether he should kill a
man by poison, or by the sword ; whether he
should take possession of this or that estate of
another's, when he cannot both ; whether he
should purchase pleasure by prodigality, or re-
tain his money by covetousness ; whether he
should go to the circus or the theatre, if
both are open on the same day ; or, thirdly,
whether he should rob another man's house, if
he have the opportunity ; or, fourthly, whether
he should commit adultery, if at the same time
he have the means of doing so, — all these things
concurring in the same point of time, and all
being equally longed for, although impossible
to be enacted at one time. For they rend the
mind amid four, or even (among the vast variety
of things men desire) more antagonistic wills,
nor do they yet affirm that there are so many
different substances. Thus also is it in wills
which are good. For I ask them, is it a good
thing to have delight in reading the apostle, or
good to have delight in a sober psalm, or good
to discourse on the gospel ? To each of these
they will answer, "It is good." What, then,
if all equally delight us, and all at the same
time ? Do not different wills distract the mind,
when a man is deliberating which he should
rather choose? Yet are they all good, and are
at variance until one be fixed upon, whither the
whole united will may be borne, which before
was divided into many. Thus, also, when above
eternity delights us, and the pleasure of tem-
poral good holds us down below, it is the same
soul which willeth not that or this with an entire
will, and is therefore torn asunder with grievous
perplexities, while out of truth it prefers that,
but out of custom forbears not this.


CHAP. XI. IN WHAT MANNER THE SPIRIT STRUG-
GLED WITH THE FLESH, THAT IT MIGHT BE
FREED FROM THE BONDAGE OF VANITY.

25. Thus was I sick and tormented, accusing
myself far more severely than was my wont,
tossing and turning me in my chain till that was
utterly broken, whereby I now was but slightly,
but still was held. And Thou, O Lord, pressedst
upon me in my inward parts by a severe mercy,
redoubling the lashes of fear and shame, lest I
should again give way, and that same slender
remaining tie not being broken off, it should
recover strength, and enchain me the faster. For
I said mentally, " Lo, let it be done now, let it
be done now. ' ' And as I spoke, I all but came
to a resolve. I all but did it, yet I did it not.
Yet fell I not back to my old condition, but
took up my position hard by, and drew breath.
And I tried again, and wanted but very little of
reaching it, and somewhat less, and then all but
touched and grasped it ; and yet came not at it,
nor touched, nor grasped it, hesitating to die
unto death, and to live unto life ; and the worse,
whereto I had been habituated, prevailed more
with me than the better, which I had not tried.
And the very moment in which I was to become
another man, the nearer it approached me, the
greater horror did it strike into me ; but it did
not strike me back, nor turn me aside, but kept
me in suspense.

26. The very toys of toys, and vanities of
vanities, my old mistresses, still enthralled me ;
they shook my fleshly garment, and whispered
softly, "Dost thou part with us? And from
that moment shall we no more be with thee
for ever ? And from that moment shall not this
or that be lawful for thee for ever ? ' ' And
what did they suggest to me in the words " this
or that?" What is it that they suggested, O
my God ? Let Thy mercy avert it from the
soul of Thy servant. What impurities did they
suggest ! What shanie ! And now I far less
than half heard them, not openly showing
themselves and contradicting me, but mutter-
ing, as it were, behind my back, and furtively
plucking me as I was departing, to make me|
look back upon them. Yet they did delay me, j
so that I hesitated to burst and shake myself i
free from them, and to leap over whither I was|
called, — an unruly habit saying to me, " Dost
thou think thou canst live without them ? ' '

27. But now it said this very faintly; for on
that side towards which I had set my face, and
whither I trembled to go, did the chaste dignity
of Continence appear unto me, cheerful, but
not dissolutely gay, honestly alluring me to
come and doubt nothing, and extending her
holy hands, full of a multiplicity of good ex-
amples, to receive and embrace me. There


ri


Chap. XII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


127


were there so many young men and maidens, a
multitude of youth and every age, grave widows
and ancient virgins, and Continence herself in
all, not barren, but a fruitful mother of children
of joys, by Thee, O Lord, her Husband. And
she smiled on me with an encouraging mockery,
as if to say, " Canst not thou do what these
youths and maidens can ? Or can one or other
do it of themselves, and not rather in the Lord
their God ? The Lord their God gave me unto
them. Why standest thou in thine own strength,
and so standest not? Cast thyself upon Him;
fear not. He will not withdraw that thou should-
est fall ; cast thyself upon Him without fear,
He will receive thee, and heal thee." And I
blushed beyond measure, for I still heard the
muttering of those toys, and hung in suspense.
And she again seemed to say, " Shut up thine
ears against those unclean members of thine
upon the earth, that they may be mortified.^
They tell thee of delights, but not as doth the
law of the Lord thy God. ' ' ^ This controversy
in my heart was naught but self against self.
But Alypius, sitting close by my side, awaited
hi silence^ the result of my unwonted emotion.

CHAP. XII. HAVING PRAYED TO GOD, HE POURS

FORTH A SHOWER OF TEARS, AND, ADMONISHED
BY A VOICE, HE OPENS THE BOOK AND READS
THE WORDS IN ROM. XIII. I3 J BY WHICH,
BEING CHANGED IN HIS WHOLE SOUL, HE DIS-
CLOSES THE DIVINE FAVOUR TO HIS FRIEND
AND HIS MOTHER.

28. But when a profound reflection had, from
the secret depths of my soul, drawn together and
heaped up all my misery before the sight of my
heart, there arose a mighty storm, accompanied
by as mighty a shower of tears. Which, that I
might pour forth fully, with its natural expres-
sions, I stole away from Alypius ; for it sug-
gested itself to me that solitude was fitter for


1 Col. iii. 5.

2 Ps, cxix. 85, Oldver.

' As in nature, the men of science tell us, no two atoms touch, but
that, while an inner magnetism draws them together, a secret repul-
siori keeps them apart, so it is with human souls. Into our deepest
feelings our dearest friends cannot enter. In the throes of conversion,
for example, God's ministering servants may assist, but He alone
can bring the soul to the birth. So it was here in the case of Angus-
tin. He felt that now even the presence of his dear friend would be
a burden, — God alone could come near, so as to heal the sore wound
of his spirit, — and Alypius was a friend who knew how to keep silence,
and to await the issue of his friend's profound emotion. How com-
fortable a thing to find in those who would give consolation the spirit
that animated the friends of Job, when " they sat down with him
upon the ground seven days and sfeven nights, and none spake a
word unto him ; for they saw that his grief was verj- great" (Job
11. 13). Well has Rousseau said : " Les consolations indiscretes ne
font qu'aigrir les violentes afflictions. L'indifference et la froideur
trouvent aisement des paroles, mais la tristesse et ie silence sont
alors le vrai langage de I'amitie." A beautiful exemplification of this
fs found in Victor Hugo's portrait of Bishop Myriel, in Les Miser-
ables (c. iv.), from which we have quoted a few pages back : — " II
savait s'asseoir et se taire de loiigues heitres aupres de I'homme qui
avait perdu la femme qu'ii amiait, de la mere qui avait perdu son
enfant. Comme il savait le moment de se taire, il savait aussi le
moment de parler. O admirable consolateur ! il ne cherchait pas i
effacer la douleur par I'oubli, mais d I'agrandir et i la dignifier par
I'esperance.''


the business of weeping.* So I retired to such
a distance that even his presence could not be
oppressive to me. Thus was it with me at that
time, and he perceived it ; for something, I
believe, I had spoken, wherein the sound of my
voice appeared choked with weeping, and in
that state had I risen up. He then remained
where we had been sitting, most completely
astonished. I flung myself down, how, I know
not, under a certain fig-tree, giving free course
to my tears, and the streams of mine eyes
gushed out, an acceptable sacrifice unto Thee.*
And, not indeed in these words, yet to this
effect, spake I much unto Thee, — " But Thou,

0 Lord, how long?"® "How long. Lord?
Wilt Thou be angry for ever ? Oh, remember
not against us former iniquities;"^ for I felt
that I was enthralled by them. I sent up these
sorrowful cries, — " How long, how long? To-
morrow, and to-morrow ? Why not now ?
Why is there not this hour an end to my
uncleanness ? ' '

29. I was saying these things and weeping in
the most bitter contrition of my heart, when, lo,

1 heard the voice as of a boy or girl, I know
not which, coming from a neighbouring house,
chanting, and oft repeating, "Take up and
read ; take up and read. ' ' Immediately my
countenance was changed, and I began most
earnestly to consider whether it was usual for
children in any kind of game to sing such
words ; nor could I remember ever to have
heard the like. So, restraining the torrent of
my tears, I rose up, interpreting it no other way
than as a command to me from Heaven to open
the book, and to read the first chapter I should
hght upon. For I had heard of Antony,* that,
accidentally coming in whilst the gospel was
being read, he received the admonition as if
what was read were addressed to him, " Go and
sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and
thou shalt have treasure in heaven ; and come
and follow me. "^ And by such oracle was he
forthwith converted unto Thee. So quickly I
returned to the place where Alypius was sitting ;
for there had I put down the volume of the
apostles, when I rose thence. I grasped, opened,
and in silence read that paragraph on which my
eyes first fell, — " Not in rioting and drunken-
ness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying ; but put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof."^"' No further
would I read, nor did I need ; for instantly, as


* See note 3, page 71.
6 I Pet. ii. 5.

6 Ps. vi. 3.

1 Ps. Ixxix. 5, 8.

* See his Life by St. Athanasius, sees. 2, 3.
9 Matt. XIX. 21.

10 Rom. xiii. 13, 14.


128


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book VIII,


the sentence ended, — by a light, as it were, of
security infused into my heart, — all the gloom
of doubt vanished away.

30. Closing the book, then, and putting
either my finger between, or some other mark,
I now with a tranquil countenance made it
known to Alypius. And he thus disclosed to
me what was wrought in him, which 1 knew not.
He asked to look at what I had read. I showed
him ; and he looked even further than I had
read, and I knew not what followed. This it
was, verily, " Him that is weak in the faith,
receive ye ; " ' which he applied to himself, and
discovered to me. By this admonition was he
strengthened ; and by a good resolution and
purpose, very much in accord with his character
(wherein, for the better, he was always far dif-
ferent from me), without any restless delay he

1 Rom. xiv. I.


joined me. Thence we go in to my mother.
We make it known to her, — she rejoiceth. We
relate how it came to pass, — she leapeth for joy,
and triumpheth, and blesseth Thee, who art
"able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think ; ^ for she perceived Thee
to have given her more for me than she used to
ask by her pitiful and most doleful groanings.
For Thou didst so convert me unto Thyself,
that I sought neither a wife, nor any other of
this world's hopes, — standing in that rule of
faith' in which Thou, so many years before,
had showed me unto her in a vision. And
thou didst turn her grief into a gladness,* much
more plentiful than she had desired, and much
dearer and chaster than she used to crave, by
having grandchildren of my body.

2 Eph. iii. 20.

3 See book iii. sec. 19.

* Ps. XKX. II.


il


BOOK IX.


HE SPEAKS OF HIS DESIGN OF FORSAKING THE PROFESSION OF RHETORIC ; OF THE DEATH OF HIS
FRIENDS, NEBRIDIUS AND VERECUNDUS ; OF HAVING RECEIVED BAPTISM IN THE THIRTY-THIRD
YEAR OF HIS AGE ; AND OF THE VIRTUES AND DEATH OF HIS MOTHER, MONICA.


CHAP. I. HE PRAISES GOD, THE AUTHOR OF

SAFETY, AND JESUS CHRIST, THE REDEEMER,
ACKNOWLEDGING HIS OWN WICKEDNESS.

I. " O Lord, truly I am Thy servant ; I am
Thy servant, and the son of Thine handmaid :
Thou hast loosed my bonds. I will offer to
Thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving. ' ' ^ Let my
heart and my tongue praise Thee, and let all
my bones say, " Lord, who is like unto Thee ? " ^
Let them so say, and answer Thou me, and *' say
unto my soul, I am Thy salvation." * Who am
I, and what is my nature ? How evil have not
my deeds been ; or if not my deeds, my words ;
or if not my words, my will? But Thou, O
Lord, art good and merciful, and Thy right
hand had respect unto the profoundness of my
death, and removed from the bottom of my
heart that abyss of corruption. And this was
the result, that I willed not to do what I willed,
and willed to do what thou willedst.* But where,
during all those years, and out of what deep
and secret retreat was my free will summoned
forth in a moment, whereby I gave my neck to
Thy " easy yoke," and my shoulders to Thy
" light burden," ^ O Christ Jesus, " my strength
and my Redeemer " ?* How sweet did it sud-
denly become to me to be without the delights
of trifles ! And what at one time I feared to lose,
it was now a joy to me to put away.' For Thou
didst cast them away from me. Thou true and
highest sweetness. Thou didst cast them away,
and instead of them didst enter in Thyself,* —

* Ps. cxvi. i5, 17.

* Ibid. XXXV. 10.
" Ibid. XXXV. 3.

* Volebas, though a few Mss. have nolebas ; and Watts accord-
ingly renders " nillcdst. '

5 Matt. xi. 30.

•Ps. xix. 14.

' Archbishop Trench, in his exposition of the parable of the Hid
Treasure, which the man who found sold all that he had to buy,
remarks on this passage of the Confessions : " Augustin excellently
illustrates from his own experience this part of the parable. Describ-
ing the crisis of his own conversion, and how easy he found it,
through this joy, to give up all those pleasures of sin that he had
long dreaded to be obliged to renounce, which had long held him
fast bound in the chains of evil custom, and which if he re^unced,
it had seemed to him as though life itself would not be worth the liv-
ing, he exclaims, ' How sweet did it suddenly become to me," " etc.

'His love of earthly things was expelled by the indwelling love

of God, " for," as he says in his £>e Musica, vi. 52, " the love of

the things of time could only be expelled by some sweetness of

, things eternal." Compare also Dr. Chalmers' sermon on The Ex-


sweeter than all pleasure, though not to flesh
and blood ; brighter than all light, but more
veiled than all mysteries ; more exalted than all
honour, but not to the exalted in their own
conceits. Now was my soul free from the
gnawing cares of seeking and getting, and of
wallowing and exciting the itch of lust. And
I babbled unto Thee my brightness, my riches,
and my health, the Lord my God.

CHAP. II. AS HIS LUNGS WERE AFFECTED, HE

MEDITATES WITHDRAWING HIMSELF FROM PUB-
LIC FAVOUR.

2. And it seemed good to me, as before Thee,
not tumultuously to snatch away, but gently to
withdraw the service of my tongue from the
talker's trade ; that the young, who thought not
on Thy law, nor on Thy peace, but on menda-
cious follies and forensic strifes, might no longer
purchase at my mouth equipments for their
vehemence. And opportunely there wanted
but a few days unto the Vacation of the Vin-
tage ; ^ and I determined to endure them, in
order to leave in the usual way, and, being re-
deemed by Thee, no more to return for sale.
Our intention then was known to Thee ; but to
men — excepting our own friends — was it not
known. For we had determined among our-
selves not to let it get abroad to any ; although
Thou hadst given to us, ascending from the
valley of tears, ^^ and singing the song of degrees,
" sharp arrows," and destroying coals, against
the " deceitful tongue," " which in giving coun-


pulsive PoTxier of a New Affection (the ninth of his "Commercial
Discourses "), where this idea is expanded.

s " In harvest and vintage time had the lawyers their vacation.
So Minutius Felix. Scholars, their Non Terminus, as here ; yea,
divinity lectures and catechizings then ceased. So Cyprian, Ep. 2.
The law terms gave way also to the great festivals of the Church.
Theodosius forbade any process to go out from fifteen days before
Easter till the Sunday after. For the four Terms, see Caroli Calvi,
Capitula, Act viii. p. 90." — W. W.

I'J Ps. Ixxxiv. 6.

11 Ps. cxx. 3, 4, according to the Old Ver. This passage has
many difficulties we need not enter into. The Vulgate, however,
we may say, renders verse 3 : " Quid detur tibi aut quid apponatur
tibi ad linguam dolosam," — that is, shall be given as a defence
against the tongues of evil speakers. In this way Augustin under-
stands it, and in his commentary on this place makes the fourth
verse give the answer to the third. Thus, " sharp arrows " he in-
terprets to be the word of God, and " destroying coals " those who,
being converted to Him, have become examples to the ungodly.

129


I30


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IX.


sel opposes, and in showing love consumes, as
it is wont to do with its food.

3. Thou hadst penetrated our hearts with
Thy charity, and we carried Thy words fixed,
as it were, in our bowels ; and the examples of
Thy servant, whom of black Thou hadst made
bright, and of dead, alive, crowded in the
bosom of our thoughts, burned and consumed
our heavy torpor, that we might not topple into
the abyss ; and they enkindled us exceedingly,
that every breath of the deceitful tongue of the
gainsayer might inflame us the more, not extin-
guish us. Nevertheless, because for Thy name's
sake which Thou hast sanctified througliout the
earth, this, our vow and purpose, might also
find commenders, it looked like a vaunting of
oneself not to wait for the vacation, now so
near, but to leave beforehand a public profes-
sion, and one, too, under general observation ;
so that all who looked on this act of mine, and
saw how near was the vintage-time I desired to
anticipate, would talk of me a great deal as if
I were trying to appear to be a great person.
And what purpose would it serve that people
should consider and dispute about my intention,
and that our good should be evil spoken of ? ^

4. Furthermore, this very summer, from too
great literary labour, my lungs ^ began to be
weak, and with difficulty to draw deep breaths;
showing by the pains in my chest that they
were affected, and refusing too loud or pro-
longed speaking. This had at first been a trial
to me, for it compelled me almost of necessity
to lay down that burden of teaching ; or, if I
could be cured and become strong again, at
least to leave it off for a while. But when the
full desire for leisure, that I might see that Thou
art the Lord,^ arose, and was confirmed in me,
my God, Thou knowest I even began to rejoice
that I had this excuse ready, — and that not a
feigned one, — which might somewhat temper
the offence taken by those who for their sons'
good wished me never to have the freedom of
sons. Full, therefore, with such joy, I bore it
till that period of time had passed, — perhaps it
was some twenty days, — yet they were bravely
borne ; for the cupidity which was wont to sus-
tain part of this weighty business had departed,
and I had remained overwhelmed had not its
place been supplied by patience. Some of Thy
servants, my brethren, may perchance say that
I sinned in this, in that having once fully, and
from my heart, entered on Thy warfare, I per-
mitted myself to sit a single hour in the seat of
falsehood. I will not contend. But hast not

1 Rom. xiv. 16.

■•i In his De Vita Beata, sec. 4, and Con. Acad. i. 3, he also
alludes to this weakness of his chest. He was therefore led to give
up his professorship, partly from this cause, and partly from a desire
to devote himself more entirely to God's service. See also p. 115,
note.

* Ps. xivi. 10,


Thou, O most merciful Lord, pardoned and
remitted this sin also, with my others, so horri-
ble and deadly, in the holy water ?

CHAP. HI. — HE RETIRES TO THE VILLA OF HIS
FRIEND VERECUNDUS, WHO WAS NOT YET A
CHRISTIAN, AND REFERS TO HIS CONVERSION
AND DEATH, AS WELL AS THAT OF NEBRIDIUS.

5. Verecundus was wasted with anxiety at
that our happiness, since he, being most firmly
held by his bonds, saw that he would lose our
fellowship. For he was not yet a Christian,
though his wife was one of the faithful ; * and
yet hereby, being more firmly enchained than
by anything else, was he held back from that
journey which we had commenced. Nor, he
declared, did he wish to be a Christian on any
other terms than those that were impossible.
However, he invited us most courteously to
make use of his country house so long as we
should stay there. Thou, O Lord, wilt " rec-
ompense" him for this "at the resurrection of
the just,"* seeing that Thou hast already given
him "■ the lot of the righteous. ' ' ® For although,
when we were absent at Rome, he, being over-
taken with bodily sickness, and therein being
made a Christian, and one of the faithful, de-
parted this life, yet hadst Thou mercy on him,
and not on him only, but on us also ; ' lest,
thinking on the exceeding kindness of our
friend to us, and unable to count him in Thy
flock, we should be tortured with intolerable
grief. Thanks be unto Thee, our God, we are
Thine. Thy exhortations, consolations, and
faithful promises assure us that Thou now re-
payest Verecundus for that country house at
Cassiacum, where from the fever of the world
we found rest in Thee, with the perpetual fresh-
ness of Thy Paradise, in that Thou hast for-
given him his earthly sins, in that mountain I
flowing with nlilk,^ that fruitful mountain, —
Thine own.

6. He then was at that time full of grief; but
Nebridius was joyous. Although he also, not
being yet a Christian, had fallen into the pit of
that most pernicious error of believing Thy Son
to be a phantasm,' yet, coming out thence, he


* See vi. sec. i, note, above.

6 Luke xiv. 14.

^ Ps. cxxv. 2.

' Phil. ii. 27. ^ ^ „ ,

8 Literally, In tnonte incaseato, " the mountam of curds, from
the Oid Ver. of Ps. Ixviii. 16. The Vulgate renders coagulatus.
But the Authorized Version is nearer the true meaning, when it
renders D' J J3J, hunched, as " high." The LXX. renders it reru-
pwnefoy, condensed, as if from HJOJ, cheese. This divergence
arises from the unused root pj, to be curved, having derivatives

meaning (i) "hunch-backed," when applied to the body, and (2)
"cheese" or "curds," when applied to milk. Augustin, in his
exposition of this place, makes the " mountain " to be Christ, and
parallels it with Isa. ii. 2 ; and the "milk" he interprets of the
grace that comes from Him for Christ's little ones : Ipse est mom
incaseatus, propter parvulos gratia tanguam lacte nutriendos.
I * See v. 16, note, above.


Chap. IV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


131


A
.


held the same belief that we did ; not as yet
initiated in any of the sacraments of Thy
Church, but a most earnest inquirer after truth. ^
Whom, not long after our conversion and re-
generation by Thy baptism, he being also a
faithful member of the Catholic Church, and
serving Thee in perfect chastity and continency
amongst his own people in Africa, when his
whole household had been brought to Christi-
anity through him, didst Thou release from the
flesh; and now he lives in Abraham's bosom.
Whatever that may be which is signified by that
bosom,* there lives my Nebridius, my sweet
friend, Thy son, O Lord, adopted of a freed-
man ; there he liveth. For what other place
could there be for such a soul ? There liveth
he, concerning which he used to ask me much,
— me, an inexperienced, feeble one. Now he
puts not his ear unto my mouth, but his spiritual
mouth unto Thy fountain, and drinketh as
much as he is able, wisdom according to his
desire, — happy without end. Nor do I believe
that he is so inebriated with it as to forget me,^
seeing Thou, O Lord, whom he drinketh, art
mindful of us. Thus, then, were we comfort-
ing the sorrowing Verecundus (our friendship
being untouched, concerning our conversion,
and exhorting him to a faith according to his
condition, I mean, his married state. And
tarrying for Nebridius to follow us, which,
being so near, he was just about to do, when,
behold, those days passed over at last ; for long
and many they seemed, on account of my love
of easeful liberty, that I might sing unto. Thee
from my very marrow. My heart said unto
Thee, — I have sought Thy face; " Thy face,
Lord, will I seek."*

CHAP. IV. IN THE COUNTRY HE GIVES HIS ATTEN-
TION TO LITERATURE, AND EXPLAINS THE
FOURTH PSALM IN CONNECTION WITH THE
HAPPY CONVERSION OF ALYPIUS. HE IS TROU-
BLED WITH TOOTHACHE.

7. And the day arrived on which, in very
deed, I was to be released from the Professor-
ship of Rhetoric, from which in intention I had


I See vi. 17, note 6, above.

* Though Augustin, in his Qua-st. Evang. ii. qu. 38, makes
Abraham's bosom to represent the rest into which the Gentiles
entered after the Jews had put it from them, yet he, for the most
part, in common with the early Church (see Serin, xiv. 3 ; Con.
Faus(. xw'ni. 5; and £/>s. clxiv. 7, and clxxxvii. Compare also
Tertullian, De Aniina, Iviii ), takes it to mean the resting-place of
the souls of the righteous after death. Abraham's bosom, indeed,
is the same as the "Paradise" of Luke xxiii. 43. The souls of
the faithful after they are delivered from the flesh are in "joy and
felicity" (De Civ. Dei, i. 13, and xiii. 19); but they will not have
"their perfect consummation and bliss both in body and soul"
until the morning of the resurrection, when they shall be endowed
with "spiritual i^t>(/;V.f." See note p. iii ; and for the difference
between the aSr)5 of Luke xvi. 23, that is, the place of departed
spirits, — into which it is said in the Apostles' Creed Christ de-
scended,—and yiivva., or Hell, see Campbell on The Gospels, i.
253- In the A. V. both Greek words are rendered " Hell."

' See sec. 37, note, below.

♦ Ps. xxvii. 8.


i


been already released. And done it was ; and
Thou didst deliver my tongue whence Thou
hadst already delivered my heart ; and full of
joy I blessed Thee for it, and retired with all
mine to the villa.* What I accomplished here
in writing, which was now wholly devoted to
Thy service, though still, in this pause as it
were, panting from the school of pride, my
books testify,* — those in which I disputed with
my friends, and those with myself alone ^ before
Thee ; and what with the absent Nebridius, my
letters® testify. And when can I find time to
recount all Thy great benefits which Thou be-
stowedst upon us at that time, especially as I
am hasting on to still greater mercies? For
my memory calls upon me, and pleasant it is to
me, O Lord, to confess unto Thee, by what
inward goads Thou didst subdue me, and how
Thou didst make me low, bringing down the
mountains and hills of my imaginations, and
didst straighten my crookedness, and smooth
my rough ways ; ® and by what means Thou
also didst subdue that brother of my heart,
Alypius, unto the name of Thy only-begotten,
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, which he
at first refused to have inserted in our writings.
For he rather desired that they should savour
of the " cedars" of the schools, which the Lord
hath now broken down,^" than of the wholesome
herbs of the Church, hostile to serpents.

8. What utterances sent I up unto Thee, my
God, when I read the Psalms of David," those
faithful songs and sounds of devotion which ex-
clude all swelling of spirit, when new to Thy
true love, at rest in the villa with Alypius, a
catechumen like myself, my mother cleaving
unto us, — in woman's garb truly, but with a
man's faith, with the peacefulness of age, full
of motherly love and Christian piety ! What
utterances used I to send up unto Thee in those
Psalms, and how was I inflamed towards Thee
by them, and burned to rehearse them, if it


6 As Christ went into the wilderness after His baptism (Matt. iv.
i), and Paul into Arabia after his conversion (Gal. i. 17), so did
Augustin here find in his retirement a preparation for his future
work. He tells us of this time of his life (De Ordin. i. 6) that his
habit was to spend the begmning or end, and often almost half the
night, in watching and searching for truth, and says further (ibid.
29), that " he almost daily asked God with tears that his wounds
might be healed, and often proved to himself that he was unworthy
to be healed as soon as he wished."

s These books are ( Con. Acad. i. 4) his three disputations Against
the Academics ; his De Vita Beata, begun (ibid. 6) " Idibus
Novembris die ejus natali ;" and (Retract, i. 3) his two books De
Ordine.

' That is, his two books of Soliloquies. In his Retractations, i.
4, sec. I, he tells us that in these books he held an argument, —
me interrogans, mihique respcndens , tanquam duo essetnus , ratio
et ego.

8 Several of these letters to Nebridius will be found in the two
vols, of Letters in this series.

9 Luke iii. 5.
•0 Ps. xxix. 5.

'1 Reference may with advantage be made co Archbishop Trench's
Hulsean Lectures (1845), who in his third lect., on " The Mani-
foldness of Scripture," adverts to this very passage, and shows in
an interesting way how the Psalms have ever been to the saints of
God, as Luther said, " a Bible in little," affording satisfaction to
their needs in every kind of trial, emergency, and experience.


132


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IX.


were possible, throughout the whole world,
against the pride of the human race ! And yet
they are sung throughout the whole world, and
none can hide himself from Thy heat.^ With
what vehement and bitter sorrow was I indig-
nant at the Manichaeans; whom yet again I
pitied, for that they were ignorant of those
sacraments, those medicaments, and were mad
against the antidote which might have made
them sane ! I wished that they had been
somewhere near me then, and, without my be-
ing aware of their presence, could have beheld
my face, and heard my words, when I read the
fourth Psalm in that time of my leisure, — how
that Psalm wrought upon me. When I called
upon Thee, Thou didst hear me, O God of my
righteousness ; Thou hast enlarged me when I
was in distress ; have mercy upon me, and hear
my prayer. ■•' Oh that they might have heard
what I uttered on these words, without my
knowing whether they heard or no, lest they
should think that I spake it because of them !
For, of a truth, neither should I have said the
same things, nor in the way I said them, if I
had perceived that I was heard and seen by
them ; and had I spoken them, they would not
so have received them as when I spake by and
for myself before Thee, out of the private feel-
ings of my soul.

9. I alternately quaked with fear, and warmed
with hope, and with rejoicing in Thy mercy, O
Father. And all these passed forth, both by
mine eyes and voice, when Thy good Spirit,
turning unto us, said, O ye sons of men, how
long will ye be slow of heart? " How long
will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing ? " ^
For I had loved vanity, and sought after leas-
ing. And Thou, O Lord, hadst already magni-
fied Thy Holy One, raising Him from the dead,
and setting Him at Thy right hand,* whence
from on high He should send His promise,^ the
Paraclete, "the Spirit of Truth. "^ And He
had already sent Him,' but I knew it not ; He
had sent Him, because He was now magnified,
rising again from the dead, and ascending into
heaven. For till then "the Holy Ghost was
not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified."^ And the prophet cries out. How
long will ye be slow of heart ? How long will
ye love vanity, and seek after leasing ? Know
this, that the Lord hath magnified His Holy
One. He cries out, " How long ? " He cries
out, "Know this," and I, so long ignorant,
" loved vanity, and sought after leasing." And


1 Ps. xix. 6.

2 Ps. iv. I.

' IHd ver. 23.

* Eph. i. 20.

s Luke xxiv. 49.

* John xiv. 16, 17.
' Acts ii. 1-4.

* John vii. 39.


therefore I heard and trembled, because these
words were spoken unto such as I remembered
that I myself had been. For in those phan-
tasms which I once held for truths was there
" vanity " and " leasing." And I spake many
things loudly and earnestly, in the sorrow of
my remembrance, which, would that they who
yet " love vanity and seek after leasing" had
heard ! They would perchance have been
troubled, and have vomited it forth, and Thou
wouldest hear them when they cried unto Thee ; ®
for by a true^° death in the flesh He died for us,
who now maketh intercessicm for us" with
Thee.

10. I read further, "Be ye angry, and sin
not." ^^ And how was I moved, O my God, who
had now learned to " be angry " with myself
for the things past, so that in the future I might
not sin ! Yea, to be justly angry ; for that it
was not another nature of the race of darkness^'
which sinned for me, as they affirm it to be who
are not angry with themselves, and who trea-
sure up to themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, and of the revelation of Thy righteous
judgment." Nor were my good things ^^ now
without, nor were they sought after with eyes
of flesh in that sun ; ^^ for they that would have
joy from without easily sink into oblivion, and
are wasted upon those things which are seen
and temporal, and in their starving thoughts do
lick their very shadows. Oh, if only they were
wearied out with their fasting, and said, " Who
will show us any good?"" And we would
answer, and they hear, O Lord. The light of
Thy countenance is lifted up upon us.^* For
we are not that Light, which lighteth every
man,^^ but we are enlightened by Thee, that we,
who were sometimes darkness, may be light in
Thee."'"' Oh that they could behold the internal
Eternal,'^^ which having tasted I gnashed my
teeth that I could not show It to them, while
they brought me their heart in their eyes,
roaming abroad from Thee, and said, "Who
will show. us any good?" But there, where I
was angry with myself in my chamber, where I
was inwardly pricked, where I had offered my
"sacrifice," slaying my old man, and begin-
ning the resolution of a new life, putting my
trust in Thee,^^ — there hadst Thou begun to '
grow sweet unto me, and to "put gladness in


9 Ps. iv. I.
w See V. 16, note, above.

11 Rom. viii. 34.

12 Eph. iv. 26.

••i See iv. 26, note, above.

n Rom. ii. 5.

16 Ps. iv. 6.

16 See V. 12, note, above.

" Ps. iv. 6.

18 Ibid.

19 John i. 9.
«> Eph. V. 8.

21 Internum ceternum, but some MSS. read internum
aternian.
«3Ps. iv.5.


lumen\


Chap. VI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


^33


my heart. "^ And I cried out as I read this
outwardly, and felt it inwardly. Nor would I
be increased'' with worldly goods, wasting time
and being wasted by time ; whereas I possessed
in Thy eternal simplicity other corn, and wine,
and oil.^

11. And with a loud cry from my heart, I
called out in the following verse, "Oh, in
peace ! " and " the self-same ! " * Oh, what said
he, "I will lay me down and sleep!"* For
who shall hinder us, when " shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written, Death is swal-
lowed up in victory? "® And Thou art in the
highest degree "the self-same," who changest
not ; and in Thee is the rest which forgetteth
all labour, for there is no other beside Thee,
nor ought we to seek after those many other
things which are not what Thou art ; but Thou,
Lord, only makest me to dwell in hope.'
These things I read, and was inflamed ; but
discovered not what to do with those deaf and
dead, of whom I had been a pestilent member,
— a bitter and a blind declaimer against the writ-
ings be-honied with the honey of heaven and
luminous with Thine own light ; and I was
consumed on account of the enemies of this
Scripture.

12. When shall I call to>mind all that took
place in those holidays ? Yet neither have I for-
gotten, nor will I be silent about the severity of
Thy scourge, and the amazing quickness of
Thy mercy.* Thou didst at that time torture
me with toothache;^ and when it had become
so exceeding great that I was not able to speak,
it came into my heart to urge all my friends
who were present to pray for me to Thee, the
God of all manner of health. And I wrote it
down on wax,^" and gave it to them to read.


1 Ps. iv. 7.

2 That is, lest they should distract him from the true riches. For,
as he says in his exposition of the fourth Psalm, " Cum dedita tem-
poralibus voluptatibus anima semper exardescit cupiditate, nee
satiari potest." He knew that the prosperity of the soul (3 John 2)
might be injuriously affected by the prosperity of the body ; and
disregarding the lower life Oio?) and its " worldly goods," he
pressed on to increase the treasure he had within,^the true life
(^oiTJ) which he had received from God. See also Enarr. in Ps.
xxxviii. 6.

* Ps. iv. 7.

^ Ibid. ver. 8, Vulg.

' Ps. iv. 8; in his comment whereon, Augustin applies this pas-
sage as above.

* I Cor. XV. 54.

' Ps. iv. 9, Vulg.

* Compare the beautiful Talmudical legend quoted by Jeremy
ITaylor {Works, viii. 397, Eden's ed.), that of the two archangels,
iGabriel and Michael, Gabriel has two wings that he may " fly
^wiftly " (Dan. ix. 21) to bring the message of peace, while Michael

i but one, that he may labour in his flight when he comes forth
Ion his ministries of justice.

T » In his Soliloquies (see note, sec. 7, above), he refers in i. 21 to
khis period. He there tells us that his pain was so great that it
prevented his learning anything afresh, and only permitted him to
«volve in his mind what he had already learnt. Compare De
Juincey's description of the agonies he had to endure from tooth-
nche in his Confessions of an Opiuin Eater.

I'^That is, on the waxen tablet used by the ancients. The iron
VUus, or pencil, used for writing, was pointed at one end and flat-
jened at the other — the flattened circular end being used to erase
||ie writing by smoothing down the wax. Hence vertere stilutn
itifies to put out or correct. See sec. 19, below.


Presently, as with submissive desfre we bowed
our knees, that pain departed. But what pain ?
Or how did it depart ? I confess to being
much afraid, my Lord my God, seeing that
from my earliest years I had not experienced
such pain. And Thy purposes were profoundly
impressed upon me ; and, rejoicing in faith, I
praised Thy name. And that faith suffered me
not to be at rest in regard to my past sins,
which were not yet forgiven me by Thy bap-
tism.

CHAP. V. — AT THE RECOMMENDATION OF AMBROSE,
HE READS THE PROPHECIES OF ISAIAH, BUT
DOES NOT UNDERSTAND THEM.

13. The vintage vacation being ended, I gave
the citizens of Milan notice that they might
provide their scholars with another seller of
words ; because both of my election to serve
Thee, and my inability, by reason of the diffi-
culty of breathing and the pain in my chest, to
continue the Professorship. And by letters I
notified to Thy bishop," the holy man Ambrose,
my former errors and present resolutions, with
a view to his advising me which of Thy books
it was best for me to read, so that I might be
readier and fitter for the reception of such
great grace. He recommended Isaiah the
Prophet ; ^^ I believe, because he foreshows more
clearly than others the gospel, and the calling
of the Gentiles. But I, not understanding the
first portion of the book, and imagining the
whole to be like it, laid it aside, intending to
take it up hereafter, when better practised in
our Lord's words.

CHAP. VI. HE IS BAPTIZED AT MILAN WITH

ALYPIUS AND HIS SON ADEODATUS. THE BOOK
"DE MAGISTRO."

14. Thence, when the time had arrived at
which I was to give in my name,^^ having left
the country, we returned to Milan. Alypins-
also was pleased to be born again with me in
Thee, being now clothed with the humility
appropriate to Thy sacraments, and being so
brave a tamer of the body, as with unusual for-
titude to tread the frozen soil of Italy with his
naked feet. We took into our company the
boy Adeodatus, born of me carnally, of my sin.
Well hadst Thou made him. He was barely


11 Antistiti.

12 In his De Civ. Dei, xviii. 20, he likewise alludes to the evangel-
ical character of the writings of Isaiah.

13 " They were baptized at Easter, and gave up their names before
the second Sunday in Lent, the rest of which they were to spend in
fasting, humility, prayer, and being examined in the scrutinies
(TertuU. Lib. de Bapt. c. 20). Therefore went they to Milan, that
the bishop might see their preparation. Adjoining to the cathedrals
were there certain lower houses for them to lodge and be exercised
in, tili the day of baptism " (Euseb. x. 4). — W. W. See also Bing-
ham, X. 2, sec. 6; and above, note 4, p. 89; note 4, p. 118, and
note 8, p. 118.


134


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IX.


fifteen years, yet in wit excelled many grave
and learned men.^ I confess unto Thee Thy
gifts, O Lord my God, Creator of all, and of
exceeding power to reform our deformities ; for
of me was there naught in that boy but the sin.
For that we fostered him in Thy discipline.
Thou inspiredst us, none other, — Thy gifts I
confess unto Thee. There is a book of ours,
which is entitled TJie Master} It is a dialogue
between him and me. Thou knowest that all
things there put into the mouth of the person
in argument with me were his thoughts in his
sixteenth year. Many others more wonderful
did I find in him. That talent was a source of
awe to me. And who but Thou could be the
worker of such marvels ? Quickly didst Thou
remove his life from the earth ; and now I re-
call him to mind with a sense of security, in
that I fear nothing for his childhood or youth,
or for his whole self. We took him coeval with
us in Thy grace, to be educated in Thy disci-
pline ; and we were baptized,^ and solicitude
about our past life left us. Nor was I satiated
in those days with the wondrous sweetness of
considering the depth of Thy counsels concern-
ing the salvation of the human race. How
greatly did I weep in Thy hymns and canticles,
deeply moved by the voices of Thy sweet-
speaking Church ! The voices flowed into
mine ears, and the truth was poured forth into
my heart, whence the agitation of my piety
overflowed, and my tears ran over, and blessed
was I therein.


?>c


HAP. VII. OF THE CHURCH HYMNS INSTITUTED

AT MILAN ; OF THE AMBROSIAN PERSECUTION
RAISED BY JUSTINA ; AND OF THE DISCOVERY
OF THE BODIES OF TWO MARTYRS.

15. Not long had the Church of Milan be-
gun to employ this kind of consolation and
exhortation, the brethren singing together with
great earnestness of voice and heart. For it
was about a year, or not much more, since Jus-
tina, the mother of the boy-Emperor Valenti-
nian, persecuted* Thy servant Ambrose in the

1 In his De Vita Beata, sec. 6, he makes a similar illusion to the
genius of Adeodatus.

2 This book, in which he and his son are the interlocutors, will
be found in vol. i. of the Benedictine edition, and is by the editors
assumed to be written about A. D. 389. Augustin briefly gives its
argument in his Retractntions, i. 12. He says: "There it is dis-
puted, sought, and discovered that there is no master who teaches
man knowledge save God, as it is written in the gospel (Matt, xxiii.
10), ' One is your Master, even Christ.' "

« He was baptized by Ambrose, and tradition says, as he came
out of the water, they sang alternate verses of the Te Deum
(ascribed by some to Ambrose), which, in the old offices of the
English Church is called " The Song of Ambrose and Augustin."
In his Can. Julian. Pehig. i. 10, he speaks of Ambrose as being one
whose devoted labours and perils were known throughout the whole
Roman world, and says : " In Christo enim Jesu per evangelium
ipse me genuit, et eo Christi viinistro lavacru»i regenerationis
accepi." See also the last sec. of his De Nupt. et Conciip., and
Ep. cxlvii. 23. In notes 3, p. 50, and 4, p. 89, will be found refer-
ences to the usages of the early Church as to baptism.

^ The Bisho)) of Milan who preceded Ambrose was an Arian, and
though Valentinian the First approved the choice of Ambrose as


interest of her heresy, to which she had been
seduced by the Arians. The pious people kept
guard in the church, prepared to die with their
bishop. Thy servant. There my mother. Thy
handmaid, bearing a chief part of those cares
and watchings, lived in prayer. We, still
unmelted by the heat of Thy Spirit, were yet
moved by the astonished and disturbed city.
At this time it was instituted that, after the
manner of the Eastern Church, hymns and
psalms should be sung, lest the people should
pine away in the tediousness of sorrow ; which
custom, retained from then till now, is imitated
by many, yea, by almost all of Thy congrega-
tions throughout the rest of the world.

16. Then didst Thou by a vision make
known to Thy renowned bishop* the spot
where lay the bodies of Gervasius and Pro-
tasius, the martyrs (whom Thou hadst in Thy
secret storehouse preserved uncorrupted for so
many years), whence Thou mightest at the fit-
ting time produce them to repress the feminine
but royal fury. For when they were revealed
and dug up and with due honour transferred to
the Ambrosian Basilica, not only they who were
troubled with unclean spirits (the devils con-
fessing themselves) were healed, but a certain
man also, who had been blind® many years,
a well-known citizen of that city, having
asked and been told the reason of the people's
tumultuous joy, rushed forth, asking his guide
to lead him thither. Arrived there, he begged
to be permitted to touch with his handkerchief
the bier of Thy saints, whose death is precious
in Thy sight.' When he had done this, and
put it to his eyes, they were forthwith opened.
Thence did the fame spread ; thence did Thy
praises burn, — shine ; thence was the mind of
that enemy, though not yet enlarged to the
wholeness of believing, restrained from the fury
of persecuting. Thanks be to Thee, O my
God. Whence and whither hast Thou thus led
my remembrance, that I should confess these


bishop, Justina, on his death, greatly troubled the Church. Am-
brose subsequently had great influence over both Valentinian the
Second and his brother Gratian. The persecution referred to
aboa'e, says Pusey, was " to induce him to give up to the Arians a
church, — the Portian Basilica without the walls; afterwards she
asked for the new Basilica within the walls, which was larger."
See Ambrose, Epp. 20-22; Serin, c. Aii-xeiititttn de Basilicis Tra-
dendis, pp. 852-880, ed. Bened. ; cf. Tillemont, Hist. Eccl. St.
Ainbroise, art. 44-48, pp. 76-82. Valentinian was then at Milan.
See next sec, the beginning of note.

5 Antistiti.

* Augustin alludes to this, amongst other supposed miracles, in
his De Ciii. Dei, xxii. 8; and again in Serin. ccLxxxvi. sec. 4,
where he tells us that the man, after being cured, made a vow that
he would for the remainder of his life serve in that Basilica where
the bodies of the martyrs lay. St. Ambrose also examines the
miracle at great length in one of his sermons. We have already
referred in note 5, p. 69 to the origin of these false miracles in
the early Church. Lecture vi. series 2, of Blunt's Lectures on the
Right i'se of the Early Fathers, is devoted to an examination of
the various passages in the Ante-Nicene Fathers where the continu-
ance of miracles in the Church is either expressed or implied. The
reader should also refer to the note on p. 485 of vol. ii. of the City
0/ God, in this series.

' Ps. cxvi. 15.


Chap. VIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


135


things also unto Thee, — great, though I, forget-
ful, had passed them over? And yet then,
when the "savour" of Thy "ointments" was
so fragrant, did we not "run after Thee."^
And so I did the more abundantly weep at the
singing of Thy hymns, formerly panting for
Thee, and at last breathing in Thee, as far as
the air can play in this house of grass.

CHAP. VIII. — OF THE CONVERSION OF EVODIUS,
AND THE DEATH OF HIS MOTHER WHEN RE-
TURNING WITH HIM TO AFRICA ) AND WHOSE
EDUCATION HE TENDERLY RELATES.

17. Thou, who makest men to dwell of one
mind in a house, ^ didst associate with us Evo-
dius also, a young man of our city, who, when
serving as an agent for Public Affairs,^ was con-
verted unto Thee and baptized prior to us ; and
relinquishing his secular service, prepared him-
self for Thine. We were together,* and together
were we about to dwell with a holy purpose.
We sought for some place where we might be
most useful in our service to Thee, and were
going back together to Africa. And when we
were at the Tiberine Ostia my mother died.
Much I omit, having much to hasten. Receive
my confessions and thanksgivings, O my God,
for innumerable things concerning which I am
silent. But I will not omit aught that my soul
has brought forth as to that Thy handmaid who
brought me forth, — in her flesh, that I might be
born to this temporal light, and in her heart,
that I might be born to life eternal.* I will
speak not of her gifts, but Thine in her ; for
she neither made herself nor educated herself.
Thou createdst her, nor did her father nor her
mother know what a being was to proceed from
them. And it was the rod of Thy Christ, the
discipline of Thine only Son, that trained her
in Thy fear, in the house of one of Thy faith-
ful ones, who was a sound member of Thy
Church. Yet this good discipline did she not
so much attribute to the diligence of her mother,
as that of a certain decrepid maid-servant, who
had carried about her father when an infant, as
little ones are wont to be carried on the backs
of elder girls. For which reason, and on ac-
count of her extreme age and very good char-
acter, was she much respected by the heads
of that Christian house. Whence also was
committed to her the care of her master's
daughters, which she with diligence performed,


* Cant. i. 3, 4.
« Ps. Ixviii. 6.

* See viii. sec. 15, note, above.

* We find from his Retractations (i. 7, sec. i), that at this time he
wrote his De Moribus Ecclesiee Catholicce and his De Moribus
Manichteorum. He also wrote (ibid. 8, sec. i) his De Aninne
Quantitate , and {ibid. 9, sec. i) his three books De Libera
Arbitrio.

6 In his De Vita Beata and in his De Dono Persev. he attributes
all that he was to his mother's tears and prayers.


and was earnest in restraining them when nec-
essary, with a holy severity, and instructing
them with a sober sagacity. For, excepting at
the hours in which they were very temperately fed
at their parents' table, she used not to permit
them, though parched with thirst, to drink even
water ; thereby taking precautions against an
evil custom, and adding the wholesome advice,
" You drink water only because you have not
control of wine ; but when you have come to
be married, and made mistresses of storeroom
and cellar, you will despise water, but the habit
of drinking will remain." By this method of
instruction, and power of command, she re-
strained the longing of their tender age, and
regulated the very thirst of the girls to such a
becoming limit, as that what was not seemly
they did not long for.

18. And yet — as Thine handmaid related to
me, her son — there had stolen upon her a love
of wine. For when she, as being a sober
maiden, was as usual bidden by her parents to
draw wine from the cask, the vessel being held
under the opening, before she poured the wine
into the bottle, she would wet the tips of her
lips with a little, for more than that her inclina-
tion refused. For this she did not from any
craving for drink, but out of the overflowing
buoyancy of her time of life, which bubbles up
with sportiveness, and is, in youthful spirits,
wont to be repressed by the gravity of elders.
And so unto that little, adding daily littles (for
" he that contemneth small things shall fall by
little and little ")," she contracted such a habit as
to drink off eagerly her little cup nearly full of
wine. Where, then, was the sagacious old
woman with her earnest restraint ? Could any-
thing prevail against a secret disease if Thy
medicine, O Lord, did not watch over us ?'
Father, mother, and nurturers absent. Thou:
present, who hast created, who callest, who also,
by those who are set over us workest some good,
for the salvation of our souls, what didst Thou
at that time, O my God? How didst Thou:


* Ecclus. xix. I. Augustin frequently alludes to the subtle power-
of little things. As when he says, — illustrating {Semi, cclxxviii.) by
the plagues of Egypt, — tiny insects, if they be numerous enough,,
will be as harmful as the bite of great beasts ; and (Semi. Ivi.) a
hill of sand, though composed of tiny grains, will crush a man as
surely as the same weight of lead. Little drops (Serm Iviii.) make
the river, and little leaks sink the ship ; wherefore, he urges, little
things must not be despised. " Men have usually," says Sedgwick
in h\s Anatomy of Secret Sins, "been first wading in lesser sins
who are now swimming in great transgressions." It is in the little
things of evil that temptation has its greatest strength. The snow-
flake is little and not to be accounted of, but from its multitudinous
accumulation results the dread power of the avalanche. Satan
often seems to act as it is said Pompey did, when he could not gain
entrance to a city. He persuaded the citizens to admit a few of his
weak and wounded soldiers, who, when they had become strong,
opened the gates to his whole army. But if little things have such
subtlety in temptation, they have likewise higher ministries. The
Jews, in their Talmudical writings, have many parables illustrating
how God by little things tries and proves men to see if they are
fitted for greater things. They say, for example, that He tried
David when keeping sheep in the wilderness, to see whether he
would be worthy to rule over Israel, the sheep of his inheritance.
See Ch. Schoettgen, Hor. Heb. et Talmud, i. 300.


136


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IX,


heal her? How didst Thou make her whole?
Didst Thou not out of another woman's soul
evoke a hard and bitter insult, as a surgeon's
knife from Thy secret store, and with one thrust
remove all that putrefaction ? ^ For the maid-
servant who used to accompany her to the cellar,
falling out, as it happens, with her little mis-
tress, when she was alone with her, cast in her
teeth this vice, with very bitter insult, calling
her a " wine-bibber." Stung by this taunt, she
perceived her foulness, and immediately con-
demned and renounced it. Even as friends by
their flattery pervert, so do enemies by their
taunts often correct us. Yet Thou renderest
not unto them what Thou dost by them, but
what was proposed by them. For she, being
angry, desired to irritate her young mistress,
not to cure her ; and did it in secret, either
because the time and place of the dispute found
them thus, or perhaps lest she herself should be
exposed to danger for disclosing it so late.
But Thou, Lord, Governor of heavenly and
earthly things, who convertest to Thy purposes
the deepest torrents, and disposest the turbulent
current of the ages,'' healest one soul by the
unsoundness of another; lest any man, when
he remarks this, should attribute it unto his own
power if another, whom he wishes to be re-
formed, is so through a word of his.

CHAP. IX. HE DESCRIBES THE PRAISEWORTHY

HABITS OF HIS MOTHER ; HER KINDNESS TO-
WARDS HER HUSBAND AND HER SONS.

19. Being thus modestly and soberly trained,
and rather made subject by Thee to her parents,
than by her parents to Thee, when she had ar-
rived at a marriageable age, she was given to a
husband whom she served as her lord. And
she busied herself to gain him to Thee, preach-
ing Thee unto him by her behaviour ; by which
Thou madest her fair, and reverently amiable,
and admirable unto her husband. For she so
bore the wronging of her bed as never to have
any dissension with her husband on account of
it. For she waited for Thy mercy upon him,
that by believing in Thee he might become
chaste. And besides this, as he was earnest in
friendship, so was he violent in anger ; but she


1 '"Animam oportet assiduis saliri tentationibus,' says St. Am-
brose. Some errors and offences do rub salt upon a good man's
integrity, that it may not putrefy with presumption." — Bishop
Hacket's Sermons, p. 210.

2 Not only is this true in private, but in public concerns. Even
in the crucifi.xion of our Lord, the wicked rulers did (Acts. iv. 26)
what God's hand and God's counsel had before determined to be
done. Perhaps by reason of His infinite knowledge it is that God,
who knows our thoughts long before (Ps. cxxxi.x. 2, 4), weaves
man's self-willed purposes into the pattern which His inscrutable
Providence has before ordained. Or, to use Augustin's own words
(De Civ. Dei, xxii. 2), " It is true that wicked men do many things
contrary to God's will ; but so great is His wisdom and power, that
all things which seem adverse to His purpose do still tend towards
those just and good ends and issues which He Himself has fore-
known."


had learned that an angry husband should not
be resisted, neither in deed, nor even in word.
But so soon as he was grown calm and tranquil,
and she saw a fitting moment, she would give
him a reason for her conduct, should he have
been excited without cause. In short, while
many matrons, whose husbands were more gen-
tle, carried the marks of blows on their dis-
honoured faces, and would in private conversa-
tion blame the lives of their husbands, she would
blame their tongues, monishing them gravely,
as if in jest : " That from the hour they heard
what are called the matrimonial tablets' read to
them, they should think of them as instruments
whereby they were made servants ; so, being
always mindful of their condition, they ought
not to set themselves in opposition to their
lords." And when they, knowing what a
furious husband she endured, marvelled that it
had never been reported, nor appeared by any
indication, that Patricius had beaten his wife,
or that there had been any domestic strife be-
tween them, even for a day, and asked her in
confidence the reason of this, she taught them
her rule, which I have mentioned above. They
who observed it experienced the wisdom of it,
and rejoiced ; those who observed it not were
kept in subjection, and suffered.

20. Her mother-in-law, also, being at first
prejudiced against her by the whisperings of
evil-disposed servants, she so conquered by sub-
mission, persevering in it with patience and
meekness, that she voluntarily disclosed to her
son the tongues of the meddling servants,
whereby the domestic peace between herself
and her daughter-in-law had been agitated,
begging him to punish them for it. When,
therefore, he had — in conformity, with his
mother's wish, and with a view to the discipline
of his family, and to ensure the future harmony
of its members — corrected with stripes those
discovered, according to the will of her who
had discovered them, she promised a similar
reward to any who, to please her, should say
anything evil to her of her daughter-in-law.
And, none now daring to do so, they lived
together with a wonderful sweetness of mutual
good-will. '

21. This great gift Thou bestowedst also, my
God, my mercy, upon that good handmaid of
Thine, out of whose womb Thou createdst me,


3 That is, not only from the time of actual marriage, but from thet
time of betrothal, when the contract was written upon tablets (see
note lo, p. 133), and signed by the contracting parties. The future
wife was then called sponsa sperata or pacta. Augustin alludes to
this above (viii. sec. 7), when he says, " It is also the custom that
the affianced bride (pactie sponsce) should not immediately be given
up, that the husband may not less esteem her whom, as betrothed,
he longed not for " (non suspirar'erit sponsus). It should be re-
membered, in reading this section, that women amongst the Romans
were not confined after the Eastern fashion of the Greeks to sepa-
rate apartments, but had charge of the domestic arrangements and
the training of the children.


Chap. X.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


137


even that, whenever she could, she showed her-
self such a peacemaker between any differing
and discordant spirits, that when she had heard
on both sides most bitter things, such as swell-
ing and undigested discord is wont to give vent
to, when the crudities of enmities are breathed
out in bitter speeches to a present friend against
an absent enemy, she would disclose nothing
about the one unto the other, save what might
avail to their reconcilement. A small good this
might seem to me, did I not know to my sor-
row countless persons, who, through some hor-
rible and far-spreading infection of sin, not only
disclose to enemies mutually enraged the things
said in passion against each other, but add some
things that were never spoken at all ; whereas,
to a generous man, it ought to seem a small
thing not to incite or increase the enmities of
men by ill-speaking, unless he endeavour like-
wise by kind words to extinguish them. Such
a one was she, — Thou, her most intimate In-
structor, teaching her in the school of her heart.

22. Finally, her own husband, now towards
the end of his earthly existence, did she gain
over unto Thee ; and she had not to complain
of that in him, as one of the faithful, which,
before he became so, she had endured. She
was also the servant of Thy servants. Whoso-
ever of them knew her, did in her much mag-
nify, honour, and love Thee ; for that through
the testimony of the fruits of a holy conv^ersa-
tion, they perceived Thee to be present in her
heart. For she had " been the wife of one
man," had requited her parents, had guided
her house piously, was " well-reported of for
good works," had "brought up children,"^ as
often travailing in birth of them^ as she saw
them swerving from Thee. Lastly, to all of us,
0 Lord (since of Thy favour Thou sufiferest Thy
servants to speak), who, before her sleeping in
Thee,^ lived associated together, having re-
ceived the grace of Thy baptism, did she devote
care such as she might if she had been mother
of us all ; served us as if she had been child of
all.

CHAP. X. A CONVERSATION HE HAD WITH HIS

MOTHER CONCERNING THE KINGDOM OF
HEAVEN.

23. As the day now approached on which she
was to depart this life (which day Thou knewest,
we did not), it fell out — Thou, as I believe, by
Thy secret ways arranging it — that she and I
stood alone, leaning in a certain window, from
which the garden of the house we occupied at
Ostia could be seen ; at which place, removed


»i Tim. V. 4,9, lo, 14.
" Ijal. IV. 19.
• 1 Thess. IV. 14.


from the crowd, we were resting ourselves for
the voyage, after the fatigues of a long journey.
We then were conversing alone very plea.santly ;
and, "forgetting those things which are behind,
and reaching forth unto those things which are
before,"* we were seeking between ourselves in
the presence of the Truth, which Thou art, of
what nature the eternal life of the saints would
be, which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither hath entered into the heart of man.^
But yet we opened wide the mouth of our heart,
after those supernal streams of Thy fountain,
" the fountain of life," which is " with Thee ; " ^
that being sprinkled with it according to our
capacity, we might in some measure weigh so
high a mystery.

24. And when our conversation had arrived
at that point, that the very highest pleasure of
the carnal senses, and that in the very brightest
material light, seemed by reason of the sweetness
of that life not only not worthy of comparison,
but not even of mention, we, lifting ourselves
with a more ardent affection towards " the Self-
same, ' ' ' did gradually pass through all corpo-
real things, and even the heaven itself, whence
sun, and moon, and stars shine upon the earth ;
yea, we soared higher yet by inward musing, and
discoursing, and admiring Thy works ; and we
came to our own minds, and went beyond them,
that we might advance as high as that region of
unfailing plenty, where Thou feedest Israel* for
ever with the food of truth, and where life is
that Wisdom by whom all these things are made,
both which have been, and which are to come ;
and she is not made, but is as she hath been,
and so shall ever be; yea, rather, to "have
been," and "to be hereafter," are not in her,
but only " to be," seeing she is eternal, for to
" iKive been" and " to be hereafter" are not
eternal. And while we were thus speaking,
and straining after her, we slightly touched her
with the whole effort of our heart ; and we
sighed, and there left bound " the first-fruits of
the Spirit ; " ® and returned to the noise of our
own mouth, where the word uttered has both
beginning and end. And what is like unto
Thy Word, our Lord, who remaineth in Him-
self without becoming old, and " maketh all
things new " ? ^^

25. We were saying, then. If to any man the
tumult of the flesh were silenced, — silenced the
phantasies of earth, waters, and air, —silenced,
too, the poles ; yea, the very soul be silenced
to herself, and go beyond herself by not think-


* Phil. iii. 13.

6 I Cor. ii. 9 ; Isa. Ixiv. 4.

6 Ps. xxxvi. 9.

1 Ps. iv. 8, K«/^.

8 Ps. Ixxx. 5.

9 Rom. viii. 23.
10 Wisd. vii. 27.


138


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IX.


ing of herself, — silenced fancies and imaginary
revelations, every tongue, and every sign, and
whatsoever exists by passing away, since, if any
could hearken, all these say, "We created not
ourselves, but were created by Him who abideth
for ever : " If, having uttered this, they now
should be silenced, having only quickened our
ears to Him who created them, and He alone
speak not by them, but by Himself, that we may
hear His word, not by fleshly tongue, nor an-
gelic voice, nor sound of thunder, nor the ob-
scurity of a similitude, but might hear Him —
Him whom in these we love — without these,
like as we two now strained ourselves, and with
rapid thought touched on that Eternal Wisdom
which remaineth over all. If this could be sus-
tained, and other visions of a far different kind
be withdrawn, and this one ravish, and absorb,
and envelope its beholder amid these inward
joys, so that his life might be eternally like that
one moment of knowledge which we now sighed
after, were not this " Enter thou into the joy of
ThyLord"?^ And when shall that be ? When
we shall all rise again ; but all shall not be
changed.^

26. Such things was I saying ; and if not after
this manner, and in these words, yet. Lord, Thou
knowest, that in that day when we were talking
thus, this world with all its delights grew con-
temptible to us, even while we spake. Then
said my mother, " Son, for myself, I have no
longer any pleasure in aught in this life. What
I want here further, and why I am here, I know
not, now that my hopes in this world are satis-
fied. There was indeed one thing for which I
wished to tarry a little in this life, and that was
that I might see thee a Catholic Christian before
I died.* My God has exceeded this abundantly,
so that I see thee despising all earthly felioity,
made His servant, — what do I here ? ' '

CHAP. XI. HIS MOTHER, ATTACKED BY FEVER,

DIES AT OSTIA.

27. What reply I made unto her to these
things I do not well remember. However,
scarcely five days after, or not much more, she
was prostrated by fever; and while she was
sick, she one day sank into a swoon, and was


1 Matt. XXV. 21.

2 I Cor. XV. 51, however, is, "we j/z^i// all be changed."

s Dean Stanley (Canterbury Servians, serm. 10) draws the fol-
lowing, amongst other lessons, from God's dealings with Augustin.
" It is an example," he says, " like the conversion of St. Paul, of
the fact that from time to time God calls His servants not by gradual,
but by sudden changes. These conversions are, it is true, the ex-
ceptions and not the rule of Providence, but such examples as Augus-
tin show us that we must acknowledge the truth of the exceptions
when they do occur. It is also an instance how, even in such sud-
den conversions, previous good influences have their weight. The
prayers of his mother, the silent influence of his friend, the high
character of Ambrose, the preparation for Christian truth in the
writings of heathen philosophers, were all laid up, as it were,
waiting for the spark, and, when it came, the fire flashed at once
through every corner of his soul."


for a short time unconscious of visible things.
We hurried up to her ; but she soon regained
her senses, and gazing on me and my brother
as we stood by her, she said to us inquiringly,
"Where was I?" Then looking intently at
us stupefied with grief, "Here," saith she,
"shall you bury your mother." I was silent,
and refrained from weeping ; but my brother
said something, wishing her, as the happier lot,
to die in her own country and not abroad.
She, when she heard this, with anxious counte-
nance arrested him with her eye, as savouring
of such things, and then gazing at me, "Be-
hold," saith she, "what he saith;" and soonj
after to us both she saith, " Lay this body any-
where, let not the care for it trouble you at all.
This only I ask, that you will remember me at
the Lord's altar, wherever you be." And
when she had given forth this opinion in such
words as she could, she was silent, being in paini
with her increasing sickness.

28. But, as I reflected on Thy gifts, O thou
invisible God, which Thou instillest into the
hearts of Thy faithful ones, whence such mar-
vellous fruits do spring, I did rejoice and givej!
thanks unto Thee, calling to mind what I knew;;
before, how she had ever burned with anxietyi'
respecting her burial-place, which she had pro-
vided and prepared for herself by the body of
her husband. For as they had lived v^y
peacefully together, her desire had also bee
(so little is the human mind capable of graspin
things divine) that this should be added to tha:
happiness, and be talked of among men, tha
after her wandering beyond the sea, it had bee
granted her that they both, so united on earth
should lie in the same grave. But when thii
uselessness had, through the bounty of Th)
goodness, begun to be no longer in her heart
I knew not, and I was full of joy admiring;
what she had thus disclosed to me ; though in
deed in that our conversation in the windov
also, when she said, "What do I here an]
longer ? " she appeared not to desire to die in he:
own country. I heard afterwards, too, that al
the time we were at Ostia, with a maternal con|
fidence she one day, when I was absent, wa|
speaking with certain of my friends on the con!
temning of this life, and the blessing of death
and when they — amazed at the courage whicl
Thou hadst given to her, a woman — asked he
whether she did not dread leaving her body a
such a distance from her own city, she replied
"Nothing is far to God; nor need I fear les
He should be ignorant at the end of the worl(|
of the place whence He is to raise me up.'
On the ninth day, then, of her sickness, thl
fifty-sixth year of her age, and the thirty-thin
of mine, was that religious and devout soul se
free from the body.


Chap. XII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


139


HIS DEAD


CHAP. XII. HOW HE MOURNED

MOTHER.

29. I closed her eyes; and there flowed a
great sadness into my heart, and it was passing
into tears, when mine eyes at the same time, by
the violent control of my mind, sucked back
the fountain dry, and woe was me in such a
struggle ! But, as soon as she breathed her last,
the boy Adeodatus burst out into wailing, but,
being checked by us all, he became quiet. In
like manner also my own childish feeling, which
was, through the youthful voice of my heart,
finding escape in tears, was restrained and
silenced. For we did not consider it fitting to
celebrate that funeral with tearful plaints and
groanings ; ^ for on such wise are they who die
unhappy, or are altogether dead, wont to be
mourned. But she neither died unhappy, nor
did she altogether die. For of this were we
assured by the witness of her good conversation,
her "faith unfeigned,"^ and other sufficient
grounds.

30. What, then, was that which did griev-
ously pain me within, but the newly-made
wound, from having that most sweet and dear
habit of living together suddenly broken off ?
I was full of joy indeed in her testimony, when,
in that her last illness, flattering my dutifulness,'
she called me "kind," and recalled, with great
affection of love, that she had never heard any
harsh or reproachful sound come out of my
mouth against her. But yet, O my God, who
madest us, how can the honour which I paid to
her be compared with her slavery for me ? As,
then, I was left destitute of so great comfort in
her, my soul was stricken, and that life torn
apart as it were, which, of hers and mine to-
gether, had been made but one.

31. The boy then being restrained from
weepmg, Evodius took up the Psalter, and be-
gan to sing — the whole house responding the'

Psalm, "I will sing of mercy and judgment-
unto Thee, OLord."^ But when they heard


» For this would be to sorrow as those that have no hone
Chrysostom accordingly frequently rebukes the Roman custom of
hiring persons to wail for the dead (see e. g. Horn, x.xxfi .>"')/j?n
and Augustin in Serm. 2 of his De Contol. Mor. makes the sam^
objection, and also reproves those Christians who imitated the iTo^
mans m wearing black as the sign of mourning. But sull (as in hk
athe';.' ""/'^'^ "^r^'^ of his mother) he admig that the e s a grfef
at the departure of friends that is both natural and seemlv In a
beautifu passage in his De Civ. Dei (x\x. 8), he says " Vhat he
who will have none of this sadness' must/'if possible have no
Wlitv hiTTT ■ ■ \- Let him burst with ruthless i^^ensi"

■J p .*%''•
TJ,;o ■ '^'' I' "■ 5"PP°se they continued to the end of Psalm rii
sTsterT^r'^" P -'"l'"^" ^^'^'°V ^^-i-n^en says that hi speechless
Sister Gorgonia s hps muttered the fourth Psalm : ' I will lie down

gf%kr^u^e^-d'LS.:^t-ian.- .^^^^

Cssarms was carried from hymns to hymns, lif^riests were


what we were doing, many brethren and reli-
gious women came together ; and whilst they
whose office it was were, according to custom,
making ready for the funeral, I, in a part of the
house where I conveniently could, together
with those who thought that I ought not to be
left alone, discoursed on what was suited to the
occasion ; and by this alleviation of truth miti-
gated the anguish known unto Thee — they be-
ing unconscious of it, listened intently, and
thought me to be devoid of any sense of sorrow.
But m Thine ears, where none of them heard,
did I blame the softness of my feelings, and re-
strained the flow of my grief, which yielded a
httle unto me; but the paroxysm returned
again, though not so as to burst forth into tears,
nor to a change of countenance, though I knew
what I repressed in my heart. And as I Avas
exceedingly annoyed that these human things
had such power over me,* which in the due
order and destiny of our natural condition must
of necessity come to pass, with a new sorrow I
sorrowed for my sorrow, and was wasted by a
twofold sadness.

32. So, when the body was carried forth, we
both went and returned without tears. For
neither in those prayers which we poured forth
unto Thee when thesacrificeof our redemption ^
was off'ered up unto Thee for her,— the dead
body being now placed by the side of the grave,
as the custom there is, prior to its being laid
therein,— neither in their prayers did I shed
tears ; yet was I most grievously sad in secret
all the day, and with a troubled mind entreated
Thee, as I was able, to heal my sorrow, but
Thou didst not ; fixing, I believe, in my mem-
ory by this one lesson the power of the bonds
of all habit, even upon a mind which now feeds
not upon a fallacious word. It appeared to me
also a good thing to go and bathe, I having
heard that the bath Iba/newti] took its name
from the Greek [iaXw^eTov, becau.se it drives
trouble from the mind. Lo, this also I confess
unto Thy mercy, " Father of the fatherless, " «
that I bathed, and felt the same as before I had
done so. For the bitterness of my grief exuded
not from my heart. Then I slept, and on
awaking found my grief not a little mitigated ;
and as I lay alone upon my bed, there came


".flt^" f'"° ^Chrysost. //^,«. 70, ad Antiocli). They sang the
1. 6th Psalm usually (see Chrj-sost. Ho7n. 4, in c. 2, adHebr^os).-
— w. VV. bee also note 13, p. 141, below.

* In addition to the remarks quoted in note i, see Augustin's
recognition of the naturalness and necessity of exercising human
affections, such as sorrow, in his De Civ. Dei xiv g

" ff ^'"''j'"/ ^."P'?*' f^nslator says, that the sacrifice of the mass
was offered for the dead. That the ancients had communion with
n/hA" ' ^."^""^r; I^"' for what? (i) To testify their dying

m the communion of the Church. (2) To give thanks for their de-
parture. (3) To pray God to give them place in His Paradise (4)
and a part in the hrst resurrection ; but not as a propitiatory sacri-/

meln"? fn^r ""w^ W°" Q°^ purgatorJ^ which the mass is now only'
meant tor. — w. W. See also note 13, p. 141
° Ps. Ixviii. 5. j> r t


140


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book IX.


into my mind tliose true verses of Thy Am-
brose, for Tliou art —

" Deus creator omnium,
Polique rector, vestiens
Diem decora lumiiie,
Noctem sopora gratia ; ,

Artus solutos ut quies
Reddat laboris usui,
Mentesque fessas allevet,
Luctusque solvat anxios."*

33. And then little by httle did I bring back
my former thoughts of Thine handmaid, her
devout conversation towards Thee, her holy
tenderness and attentiveness towards us, which
was suddenly taken away from me ; and it was
pleasant to me to weep in Thy sight, for her
and for me, concerning her and concerning
myself. And I set free the tears which before
I repressed, that they might flow at their will,
spreading them beneath my heart ; and it rested
in them, for Thy ears were nigh me, — not those
of man, who would have put a scornful inter-
pretation on my weeping. But now in writing
I confess it unto Thee, O Lord ! Read it who
will, and interpret how he will ; and if he finds
me to have sinned in weeping for my mother
during so small a part of an hour, — that mother
who was for a while dead to mine eyes, who
had for many years wept for me, that I might
live in Thine eyes, — let him not laugh at me,
but rather, if he be a man of a noble charity, let
him weep for my sins against Thee, the Father
of all the brethren of Thy Christ.

CHAP. XIII. HE ENTREATS GOD FOR HER SINS,

AND ADMONISHES HIS READERS TO REMEMBER
HER PIOUSLY.

34. But, — my heart being now healed of that
wound, in so far as it could be convicted of a
carnaP affection, — I pour out unto Thee, O our
God, on behalf of that Thine handmaid, tears
of a far different sort, even that which flows
from a spirit broken by the thoughts of the dan-
gers of every soul that dieth in Adam. And
although she, having been "made alive" in
Christ^ even before she was freed from the flesh,

1 Rendered as follows in a translation of the first ten books of the
Confessions, described on the title-page as " Printed by J. C, for
John Crook, and are to be sold at the sign of the ' Ship,' in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1660": —

" O God, the world's great Architect,
Who dost heaven's rowling orbs direct;
Cloathing the day with beauteous light.
And with sweet slumbers silent night;
When wearied limbs new vigour gain
From rest, new labours to sustain ;
When hearts oppressed do meet relief.
And anxious minds forget their grief."

See X. sec. 52, below, where this hymn is referred to.

2 Rom. viii. 7.

3 I Cor. XV. 22. The universalists of every age have interpreted
the word "all" here so as to make salvation by Christ Jesus
extend to every child of Adam. If their interpretation were true,
Monica's spirit need not have been troubled at the thought of the
danger of unregenerate souls. But Augustin in his De Civ. Dei,
xiii. 23, gives the import of the word: " Not that all who die in
Adam shall be members of Christ, — for the great majority shall be
punished in eternal death,— but he uses the word ' all ' in both


had SO lived as to praise Thy name both by her
faith and conversation, yet dare I not say* that
from the time Thou didst regenerate her by
baptism, no word went forth from her mouth
against Thy precepts.^ And it hath been de-
clared by Thy Son, the Truth, that "Whoso-
ever shall say to his brother, Thou fool, shall
be in danger of hell fire."* And woe even
unto the praiseworthy life of man, if, putting
away mercy. Thou shouldest investigate it. But
because Thou dost not narrowly inquire after
sins, we hope with confidence to find some
place of indulgence with Thee. But whosoever
recounts his true merits' to Thee, what is it
that he recounts to Thee but Thine own gifts ?
Oh, if men would know themselves to be men ;
and that "he that glorieth " would "glory in
the Lord!"«

35. I then, O my Praise and my Life, Thou
God of my heart, putting aside for a little her
good deeds, for which I joyfully give thanks to
Thee, do now beseech Thee for the sins of my
mother. Hearken unto me, through that Med-
icine of our wounds who hung upon the tree,
and who, sitting at Thy right hand, " raaketh
intercession for us."* I know that she acted
mercifully, and from the heart" forgave her
debtors their debts ; do Thou also forgive her
debts," whatever she contracted during so many


clauses because, as no one dies in an animal body except in Adam,
so no one is quickened a spiritual body save in Christ." See x.
sec. 68, note i, below.

< For to have done so would have been to go perilously near to
the heresy of the Pelagians, who laid claim to the possibility of at-
taining perfection in this life by the power of free-will, and without
the assistance of divine grace ; and went even so far, he tells us
(Ep. clxxvi. 2), as to say that those who had so attained need not
utter the petition for forgiveness in the Lord's Prayer, — ttt ei non
sit ja>n necessariuvi dicere " Dimitte nobis debita nostra."
Those in our own day who enunciate perfectionist theories, —
though, it is true, not denying the grace of God as did these, — may
well ponder Augustin's forcible words in his De Pecc. I\ler. et Retn.
iii. 13 : " Optandum est ut fiat, conandum est ut fiat, supplicandum
est ut fiat ; non tamen quasi factum fuerit, confitendum." We are
indeed commanded to be perfect (INIatt. v. 48) : and the philosophy
underlying the command is embalmed in the words of the proverb,
"Aim high, and you will strike high." But he who lives nearest
to God will have the humility of heart which will make him ready
to confess that in His sight he is a " miserable sinner." Some inter-
esting remarks on this subject will be found in Augustin's De Civ. Dei,
xiv. 9, on the text, " If we say we have no sin," etc. (i John i. 8.)
On sins after baptism, see note on next section.

5 Matt. xii. 36.

6 Matt. V. 22.

' There is a passage parallel to this in his Ep. to Sextus (cxciv.
19). "Merits" therefore would appear to be used simply in the
sense of good actions. Compare sec. 17, above, xiii. sec. i, below,
and Ep. cv. That righteousness is not by merit, appears from Ep.
cxciv. ; Ep. clxxvii., to Innocent; and Serm. ccxciii.
" 2 Cor. x. 17.
9 Rom. viii. 34.

W Matt, xviii. 35.

'1 Matt, vi, 12. Augustin here as elsewhere applies this petition
in the Lord's Prayer to the forgiveness of sins after baptism. He
does so constantly. For example, in his Ep. cclxv. he says : " We
do not ask for those to be forgiven which we doubt not were for-
given in baptism ; but those which, though small, are frequent, and
spring from the frailty of human nature." Again, in his Con. Ep.
Parmen. ii. 10, after using almost the same words, he points out
that it is a prayer against daily sins ; and in his De Cizi. £)ci, xxi. 27,
where he examines the passage in relation to various erroneous be-
liefs, he says it " was a daily prayer He [Christ] was teaching, and
it was certainly to disciples already justified He was speaking.
What, then, does He mean by ' your sins ' (Matt. vi. 14), but those
sins from which not even you ivlio are justified and sanctijied can
be free?" See note on the previous section ; and also for the feel-
ing in the early Church as to sins after baptism, the note on i. sec.
17, above.


Chap. XIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


141


years since the water of salvation. Forgive
her, O Lord, forgive her, I beseech Thee ;
"enter not into judgment" with her.^ Let
Thy mercy be exalted above Thy justice,^ be-
cause Thy words are true, and Thou hast pro-
mised mercy unto "the merciful;"^ which
Thou gavest them to be who wilt '' have mercy ' '
on whom Thou wilt "have mercy," and wilt
" have compassion " on whom Thou hast had
compassion.*

36. And I believe Thou hast already done
that which I ask Thee; but " accept the free-
will offerings of my mouth, O Lord."* For
she, when the day of her dissolution was near
at hand, took no thought to have her body
sumptuously covered, or embalmed with spices;
nor did she covet a choice monument, or desire
her paternal burial-place. These things she
entrusted not to us, but only desired to have
her name remembered at Thy altar, which she
had served without the omission of a single
day ; ^ whence she knew that the holy sacrifice
was dispensed, by which the handwriting that
was against us is blotted out ; ' by which the
enemy was triumphed over,* who, summing up
our offences, and searching for something to
bring against us, found nothing in Him* in
whom we conquer. Who will restore to Him
the innocent blood ? Who will repay Him the
price with which He bought us, so as to take us
from Him? Unto the sacrament of which our
ransom did Thy handmaid bind her soul by the
bond of faith. Let none separate her from Thy
protection. Let not the "lion" and the
" dragon " ^^ introduce himself by force or fraud.
For she will not reply that she owes nothing,
lest she be convicted and got the better of by
the wily deceiver ; but she will answer that her


1 Ps. cxliii. 2.

8 las. ii. 13.

8 Matt. V. 7.
^ * Rom. ix. 15.

S Ps. cxix. 108.

* See V. sec. 17, above.

' Col. ii. 14.

8 See his I)e Trin. xiii. 18, the passage beginning, " What then
is the righteousness by which the devil was conquered ? "

"• John xiv. 30.
' Ps. xci. 13.


10]


" sins are forgiven " " by Him to whom no one
is able to repay that price which He, owing
nothing, laid down for us.

37. May she therefore rest in peace with her
husband, before or after whom she married
none ; whom she obeyed, with patience bringing
forth fruit ^^ unto Thee, that she might gain him
also for Thee. And inspire, O my Lord my
God, inspire Thy servants my brethren. Thy
sons my masters, who with voice and heart and
writings I serve, that so many of them as shall
read these confessions may at Thy altar remem-
ber Monica, Thy handmaid, together with
Patricius, her sometime husband, by whose
flesh Thou introducedst me into this life, in
what manner I know not. May they with pious
affection be mindful of my parents in this trans-
itory light, of my brethren that are under Thee
our Father in our Catholic mother, and of my
fellow-citizens in the eternal Jerusalem, which
the wandering of Thy people sigheth for from
their departure until their return. That so my
mother's last entreaty to me may, through my
confessions more than through my prayers, be
more abundantly fulfilled to her through the
prayers of many. ^*

" Matt. ix. 2.

12 Luke viii. 15.

13 The origin of prayers for the dead dates back probably to the
close of the second century. In note i, p. 90, we have quoted
from Tertullian's De Corona S\Iilitis, where he says, " Oblationes
pro defunctis pro tiata/iiiis annua die facimus." In his De
JMonogamia, he speaks of a widow praying for her departed hus-
band, that " he might have rest, and be a partaker in the first re-
surrection." From this time a catena of quotations from the
Fathers might be given, if space permitted, showing how, beginning
with early expressions of hope for the dead, there, in process of
time, arose prayers even for the unregenerate, until at last there
was developed purgatory on the one side, and creature-worship on
the other. That Augustin did not entertain the idea of creature-
worship will be seen from his Ep. to Maximus, xvii. 5. In his De
Dulcit. Qiicest. 2 (where he discusses the whole question), he con-
cludes that prayer must not be made for all, because all have not
led the same life in the flesh. Still, in his Enarr. in Ps. cviii. 17,
he argues from the case of the rich man in the parable, that the de-
parted do certainly " have a care for us." Aerius, towards the close
of the fourth century, objected to prayers for the dead, chiefly on
the ground (see Usher's Ans-wer to a Jesuit, iii. 258) of their use-
lessness. In the Church of England, as will be seen by reference
to Keeling's Liturgicce Britannicce, pp. 210, 335, 339, and 341,
prayers for the dead were eliminated from the second Prayer Book;
and to the prudence of this step Palmer bears testimony in his
Origines Liturgicte, iv. 10, justifying it on the ground that the re-
taining of these prayers implied a belief in her holding the doctrine
of purgatory. Reference may be made to Epiphanius, Adv. Hcer.
75 ; Bishop Bull, Sermon 3; and Bingham, xv. 3, sees. 15, 16, and
xxiii. 3, sec. 13.


BOOK X.


HAVING MANIFESTED WHAT HE WAS AND WHAT HE IS, HE SHOWS THE GREAT FRUIT OF HIS CON-
FESSION; AND BEING ABOUT TO EXAMINE BY WHAT METHOD GOD AND THE HAPPY LIFE MAY
BE FOUND, HE ENLARGES ON THE NATURE AND POWER OF MEMORY. THEN HE EXAMINES HIS
OWN ACTS, THOUGHTS AND AFFECTIONS, VIEWED UNDER THE THREEFOLD DIVISION OF TEMP-
TATION ; AND COMMEMORATES THE LORD, THE ONE MEDIATOR OF GOD AND MEN,


CHAP. I. IN GOD ALONE IS THE HOPE AND JOY

OF MAN.

1. Let me know Thee, O Thou who knowest
me; let me know Thee, as I am known. ^ O
Thou Strength of my soul, enter into it, and
prepare it for Thyself, that Thou mayest have
and hold it without " spot or wrinkle. '"^ This
is my hope, " therefore have I spoken ; " ^ and
in this hope do I rejoice, when I rejoice soberly.
Other things of this life ought the less to be
sorrowed for, the more they are sorrowed for ;
and ought the more to be sorrowed for, the
less men do sorrow for them. For behold,
"Thou desirest truth,"* seeing that he who
does it " cometh to the light."* This wish I
to do in confession in my heart before Thee,
and in my writing before many witnesses.

CHAP. II. THAT ALL THINGS ARE MANIFEST TO

GOD. THAT CONFESSION UNTO HIM IS NOT
MADE BY THE WORDS OF THE FLESH, BUT OF
THE SOUL, AND THE CRY OF REFLECTION.

2. And from Thee, O Lord, unto whose eyes
the depths of man's conscience are naked,® what
in me could be hidden though I were unwilling
to confess to Thee ? For so should I hide Thee
from myself, not myself from Thee. But now,
because my groaning witnesseth that I am dis-
satisfied with myself. Thou shinest forth, and
satisfiest, and art beloved and desired ; that I
may blush for myself, and renounce myself, and
choose Thee, and may neither please Thee nor
myself, except in Thee. To Thee, then, O
Lord, am I manifest, whatever I am, and with
what fruit I may confess unto Thee I have
spoken. Nor do I it with words and sounds
of the flesh, but with the words of the soul, and
that cry of reflection which Thine ear knoweth.


1 I Cor. xiii. 12.

2 Eph. V. 27.

8 Ps. cxvi. 10.
< Ps. h. 6.
* John iii. 20.
•> Heb. iv. 13.

142


For when I am wicked, to confess to Thee is
naught but to be dissatisfied with myself; but
when I am truly devout, it is naught but not to
attribute it to myself, becau.se Thou, O Lord,
dost "bless the righteous;"' but first Thou
justifiest him "ungodly."^ My confession,
therefore, O my God, in Thy sight, is made
unto Thee silently, and yet not silently. For
in noise it is silent, in affection it cries aloud.
For neither do I give utterance to anything
that is right unto men which Thou hast not
heard from me before, nor dost Thou hear any-
thing of the kind from me which Thyself saidst
not first unto me.

CHAP. III. HE WHO CONFESSETH RIGHTLY UNTO

GOD BEST KNOWETH HIMSELF.

3. What then have I to do with men, that
they should hear my confessions, as if they were
going to cure all my diseases ? ^ A people curious
to know the lives of others, but slow to correct
their own. Why do they desire to hear from
me what I am, who are unwilling to hear from
Thee what they are ? And how can they tell,
when they hear from me of myself, whether I
speak the truth, seeing that no man knoweth
what is in man, "save the spirit of man which
is in him " ? '" But if they hear from Thee aught
concerning themselves, they will not be able to
say, " The Lord lieth." For what is it to hear
from Thee of themselves, but to know them-
selves? And who is he that knoweth himself
and saith, "It is false," unless he himself lieth?
But because "charity believeth all things""
(amongst those at all events whom by union
with itself it maketh one), I too, O Lord, also
so confess unto Thee that men may hear, to
whom I cannot prove whether I confess the
truth, yet do they believe me whose ears charity
openeth unto me.


' Ps. V. 12.

* Rom. iv. 5.

* Ps. ciii. 3.
If I Cor. ii. II.
11 I Cor. xiii. 7.


i


Chap. V.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


143


4. But yet do Thou, my most secret Physi-
cian, make clear to me what fruit I may reap
by doing it. For the confessions of my past
sins, — wliich Thou hast " forgiven " and " cov-
ered," ^ that Thou mightest make me happy in
Thee, changing my soul by faith and Thy sac-
rament,— when they are read and heard, stir up
the heart, that it sleep not in despair and say,
" I cannot ;" but that it may awake in the love
of Thy mercy and the sweetness of Thy grace,
by which he that is weak is strong,'-* if by it he
is made conscious of his own weakness. As for
the good, they take delight in hearing of the
past errors of such as are now freed from them ;
and they delight, not because they are errors,
but because they have been and are so no
longer. For what fruit, then, O Lord my God,
to whom my conscience maketh her daily con-
fession, more confident in the hope of Thy
mercy than in her own innocency, — for what
fruit, I beseech Thee, do I confess even to men
in Thy presence by this book what I am at this
time, not what I have been ? For that fruit I
have both seen and spoken of, but what I am
at this time, at the very moment of making my
confessions, divers people desire to know, both
who knew me and who knew me not, — who
have heard of or from me, — but their ear is not
at my heart, where I am whatsoever I am. They
are desirous, then, of hearing me confess what
I am within, where they can neither stretch eye,
nor ear, nor mind ; they desire it as those
willing to believe, — but will they understand ?
For charity, by which they are good, says unto
them that I do not lie in my confessions, and
she in them believes me.

CHAP. IV. THAT IN HIS CONFESSIONS HE :MAY

DO GOOD, HE CONSIDERS OTHERS.

5. But for what fruit do they desire this ? Do
they wish me happiness when they learn how
near, by Thy gift, I come unto Thee ; and to
pray for me, when they learn how much I am
kept back by my own weight ? To such will I
declare myself. For it is no small fruit, O Lord
my God, that by many thanks should be given
to Thee on our behalf,^ and that by many Jhou
shouldest be entreated for us. Let the fraternal
soul love that in me which Thou teachest should
be loved, and lament that in me which Thou
teachest should be lamented. Let a fraternal
and not an alien soul do this, nor that "of
strange children, whose mouth speaketh vanity,
and their right hand is a right hand of false-
hood,"* but that fraternal one which, when it
approves me, rejoices for me, but when it disap-


* Ps. xxxii. 1.

* 2 Cor. xii. 10.
*2 Cor. i. II.

* Ps. cxliv. II.


proves me, is sorry for me ; because whether it
approves or disapproves it loves me. To such
will I declare myself; let them breathe freely at
my good deeds, and sigh over my evil ones.. My
good deeds are Thy institutions and Thy gifts,
my evil ones are my delinquencies and Thy
judgments.^ Let them breathe freely at the
one, and sigh over the other ; and let hymns
and tears ascend into Thy sight out of the fra-
ternal hearts — Thy censers.® And do Thou, O
Lord, who takest delight in the incense of Thy
holy temple, have mercy upon me according to
Thy great mercy,'' " for Thy name's sake ;" * and
on no account leaving what Thou hast begun in
me, do Thou complete what is imperfect in me.
6. This is the fruit of my confessions, not of
what I was, but of what I am, that I may con-
fess this not before Thee only, in a secret exul-
tation with trembling,^ and a secret sorrow with
hope, but in the ears also of the believing sons
of men, — partakers of my joy, and sharers of
my mortality, my fellow-citizens and the com-
panions of my pilgrimage, those who are gone
before, and those that are to follow after, and
the comrades of my way. These are Thy
servants, my brethren, those whom Thou wish-
est to be Thy sons ; my masters, whom Thou
hast commanded me to serve, if I desire to live
with and of Thee. But this Thy word were
little to me did it command in speaking, without
going before in acting. This then do I both in
deed and word, this I do under Thy wings, in
too great danger, were it not that my soul, under
Thy wings, is subject unto Thee, and my weak-
ness known unto Thee. I am a little one, but
my Father liveth for ever, and my Defender is
" sufficient ' ' '" for me. For He is the same who
begat me and who defends me ; and Thou Thy-
self art all my good ; even Thou, the Omnipo-
tent, who art with me, and that before I am with
Thee. To such, therefore, whom Thou com-
mandest me to serve will I declare, not what I
was, but what I now am, and what I still am.
But neither do I judge myself.^^ Thus then
I would be heard.


CHAP. V. THAT


MAN KNOWETH
WHOLLY.


NOT HBISELF


7. For it is Thou, Lord, that judgest me ; ^"^
for although no " man knoweth the things of a


s In note 9, p. 79, we have seen how God makes man's sin its own
punishment. Reference may also be made to Augustin's Can, Ad-
vers. Leg. et Proph. i. 14, where he argues that " the punishment
of a man's disobedience is found in himself, when he in his turn
cannot get obedience even trom himself." And again, in his De
Lib. Arb. V. 18, he says, God punishes by taking from him that
which he does not use well, " et qui recte facere cum possit noluit
amittat posse cum velit." See also Sernt. clxxi. 4, and Ep. cliii.

6 Rev viii. 3.

■I Ps. li. I.

8 Ps. xlcv. II.

9 Ps. ii. II.

1* 2 Cor. xii. 9.
'1 I Cor. iv. 3.
13 I Cor. iv. 4.


144


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X.


man, save the spirit of man which is in him,"^
yet is there something of man which " the spirit
of man which is in him" itself knoweth not.
But Thou, Lord, who hast made him, knowest
him wholly. I indeed, though in Thy sight I
despise myself, and reckon "myself but dust
and ashes,"* yet know something concerning
Thee, which I know not concerning myself.
And assuredly "now we see through a glass
darkly," not yet "face to face."* So long,
therefore, as I be "absent" from Thee, I am
more "present" with myself than with Thee;*
and yet know I that Thou canst not suffer vio-
lence ; ^ but for myself I know not what tempta-
tions I am able to resist, and what I am not
able.® But there is hope, because Thou art
faithful, who wilt not suffer us to be tempted
above that we are able, but wilt with the temp-
tation also make a way to escape, that we may
be able to bear it.'' I would therefore confess
what I know concerning myself; I will confess
also what I know not concerning myself. And
because what I do know of myself, I know by
Thee enlightening me ; and what I know not of
myself, so long I know not until the time when
my "darkness be as the noonday"* in Thy
sight.

CHAP. VI. THE LOVE OF GOD, IN HIS NATURE

SUPERIOR TO ALL CREATURES, IS ACQUIRED BY
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE SENSES AND THE
EXERCISE OF REASON.

8. Not with uncertain, but with assured con-
sciousness do I love Thee, O Lord. Thou hast
stricken my heart with Thy word, and I loved
Thee. And also the heaven, and earth, and all
that is therein, behold, on every side they say
that I should love Thee ; nor do they cease to
speak unto all, "so that they are without ex-
cuse."^ But more profoundly wilt Thou have
mercy on whom Thou wilt have mercy, and
compassion on whom Thou wilt have compas-
sion,^" otherwise do both heaven and earth tell
forth Thy praises to deaf ears. But what is it
that I love in loving Thee? Not corporeal
beauty, nor the splendour of time, nor the ra-
diance of the light, so pleasant to our eyes, nor
the sweet melodies of songs of all kinds, nor
the fragrant smell of flowers, and ointments,
and spices, not manna and honey, not limbs

* I Cor. ii. II.

* Gen. xviii. 27.
' I Cor. xiii. 12.

* 2 Cor. V 6.

6 See Nebridius' argument against the Manichseans, as to God's
not being violable, in vii. sec. 3, above, and the note thereon.

6 See his Enarr. in Ps. Iv. 8 and xciii. 19, where he beautifully
describes how the winds and waves of temptation will be stilled if
Christ be present in the ship. See also Serm. Ixiii. ; and Eps. cxxx.
' 22, and clxxvii. 4.

' I Cor. X. 13.

* Isa. Iviii. 10.

* Rom. i. 20.
10 Rom. ix. 15.


pleasant to the embracements of flesh. I love
not these things when I love my God ; and yet
I love a certain kind of light, and sound, and
fragrance, and food, and embracement in lov-
ing my God, who is the light, sound, fragrance,
food, and embracement of my inner man —
where that light shineth unto my soul which no
place can contain, where that soundeth which
time snatcheth not away, where there is a fra-
grance which no breeze disperseth, where there
is a food which no eating can diminish, and
where that clingeth which no satiety can sunder.
This is what I love, when I love my God.

9. And what is this? I asked the earth;
and it answered, " I am not He; " and what-
soever are therein made the same confession.
I asked the sea and the deeps, and the creeping
things that lived, and they replied, "We are
not thy God, seek higher than we." I asked
the breezy air, and the universal air with its in-
habitants answered, "Anaximenes" was deceived,
I am not God." I asked the heavens, the sun,
moon, and stars: "Neither," say they, "are
we the God whom thou seekest." And I an-
swered unto all these things which stand about
the door of my flesh, "Ye have told me con-
cerning my God, that ye are not He ; tell me
something about Him. ' ' And with a loud voice
they exclaimed, " He made us." My question-
ing was my observing of them ; and their beauty
was their reply.^* And I directed my thonghts
to myself, and said, "Who art thou? " And I
answered, ^'A man." And lo, in me there
appear both body and soul, the one without,
the other within. By which of these should
I seek my God, whom I had sought through
the body from earth to heaven, as far as I was
able to send messengers — the beams of mine
eyes? But the better part is that which is inner ;
for to it, as both president and judge, did all
these my corporeal messengers render the an-,
swers of heaven and earth and all things therein,
who said, " We are not God, but He made us."
These things was my inner man cognizant of byj
the ministry of the outer; I, the inner man,|
knew all this — I, the soul, through the senses of
my body. I asked the vast bulk of the earth
of my God, and it answered me, "I am not!
He, but He made me."

ID. Is not this beauty visible to all whosef
senses are unimpaired ? Why then doth it nol
speak the same things unto all? Animals, the


11 Anaximenes of Miletus was born about 520 B. c. According to
his philosophy the air was animate, and from it, as from a first prin4
ciple, all things in heaven, earth, and sea sprung, first by condensa^l
tion (jTii/ci'io(Ti?), and after that by a process of rarefaction (apaia)cris)jr
See Efi. cxviii. 23 ; and Aristotle, Phys. iii. 4. Compare this theor
and that of Epicurus (p. 100, above) with those of modern physi4
cists ; and see thereon The Unseen Universe, arts. 85, etc., and 117J
etc. f

12 /« Ps. cxliv. 13, the earth he describes as "dumb," but as
speaking to us while we meditate upon its beauty — IJ>sa inquisitio^
interrogatio est.


I


Chap. VIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


147


very small and the great, see it, but they are un-
able to question it, because their senses are not
endowed with reason to enable them to judge on
what they report. But men can question it, so
that " the invisible things of Him . . . are
clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made ; " ^ but by loving them, they are
brought into subjection to them ; and subjects
are not able to judge. Neither do the creatures
reply to such as question them, unless they can
judge ; nor will they alter their voice (that is,
their beauty),^ if so be one man only sees, an-
other both sees and questions, so as to appear
one way to this man, and another to that ; but
appearing the same way to both, it is mute to
this, it speaks to that — yea, verily, it speaks
unto all ; but they only understand it who com-
pare that voice received from without with the
truth v/ithin. For the truth declareth unto me,
" Neither heaven, nor earth, nor any body is
thy God." This, their nature declareth unto
him that beholdeth them. " They are a mass;
a mass is less in part than in the whole." Now,
O my soul, thou art my better part, unto thee I
speak ; for thou animatest the mass of thy body,
giving it life, which no body furnishes to a body ;
but thy God is even unto thee the Life of life.

CHAP. VII. THAT GOD IS TO BE FOUND NEITHER

FROM THE POWERS OF THE BODY NOR OF THE
SOUL.

II. What then is it that I love when I love
my God ? Who is He that is above the head
of my soul ? By my soul itself will I mount
up unto Him. I will soar beyond that power of
mine whereby I cling to the body, and fill the
whole structure of it with life. Not by that
power do I find my God ; for then the horse
and the mule, "which have no understanding," '
might find Him, since it is the same power by
which their bodies also live. But there is an-
other power, not that only by which I quicken,
but that also by which I endow with sense my
flesh, which the Lord hath made for me ; bid-
ding the eye not to hear, and the ear not to see ;
but that, for me to see by, and this, for me to
hear by ; and to each of the other senses its own
proper seat and office, which being different, I,
the single mind, do through them govern. I
will soar also beyond this power of mine ; for
this the horse and mule possess, for they too
[discern through the body.

CHAP. VIII. OF THE NATURE AND THE AMAZING

i6fil?li ■ POWER OF MEMORY.

'?SB 12. I will soar, then, beyond this power of
iin-^Dtty nature also, ascending by degrees unto Him

* Rom. i. 20.
' See note 2 to previous section.

* Ps. xxxii. 9.


who made me.
roomy chambers


F THINGS


And I enter the
of memory, where'
treasures of countless images, imported
from all manner of things by the senses, reasons
is treasured up whatsoever likewise we vHTien-
either by enlarging or diminishing, or by ^ the
ing in any way whatever those things whiclpur,
sense hath arrived at; yea, and whatever t^f
hath been entrusted to it and stored up, whicJs
oblivion hath not yet engulfed and buried.'
When I am in this storehou|^, I demand that
what I wish should be brought forth, and some
things immediately appear; others require to
be longer sought after, and are dragged, as it
were, out of some hidden receptacle ; others,
again, hurry forth in crowds, and while another
thing is sought and inquired for, they leap into
view, as if to say, " Is it not we, perchance? "
These I drive away with the hand of my heart
from before the face of my remembrance, until
what I wish be discovered making its appear-
ance out of its secret cell. Other things sug-
gest themselves without effort, and in continuous
order, just as they are called for, — those in front
giving place to those that follow, and in giving
place are treasured up again to be forthcoming
when I wish it. All of which takes place when
I repeat a thing from memory.

13. All these things, each of which entered
by its own avenue, are distinctly and under
general heads there laid up : as, for example,
light, and all colours and forms of bodies, by
the eyes; sounds of all kinds by the ears; all
smells by the passage of the nostrils ; all flavours
by that of the mouth ; and by the sensation of
the whole body is brought in what is hard or
soft, hot or cold, smooth or rough, heavy or
light, whether external or internal to the body.
All these doth that great receptacle of memory,,
with its many and indescribable departments,,
receive, to be recalled and brought forth when
required ; each, entering by its own door, is laidi
up in it. And yet the things themselves do not
enter it, but only the images of the things per-
ceived are there ready at hand for thought ta
recall. And who can tell how these images are
formed, notwithstanding that it is evident by
which of the senses each has been fetched in
and treasured up? For even while I live in
darkness and silence, I can bring out colours in
memory if I wish, and discern between black
and white, and what others I wish ; nor yet do
sounds break in and disturb what is drawn in by
mine eyes, and which I am considering, seeing
that they also are there, and are concealed, —
laid up, as it were, apart. For these too I can
summon if I please, and immediately they ap-
pear. And though my tongue be at rest, and
my throat silent, yet can I sing as much as I
will; and those images of colours, which not-


144


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X.


man, save^^g ^^^ there, do not interpose them-
yet IS thf^ interrupt when another treasure is
ot ii''anQj-^gj^gj.^j.jQj^ which flowed in through
,. s. So the remaining things carried in
mm v^g^pg^ yp ^y ^j^g other senses, I recall at

*^^"^Pleasure. And I discern the scent of lilies
^n that of violets while smelling nothing; and
^ prefer honey to grape-syrup, a smooth thing
J a rough, though then I neither taste nor han-
ile, but only remember.

14. These thii'jgs do I within, in that vast
chamber of my memory. For there are nigh
me heaven, earth, sea, and whatever I can think
upon in them, besides those which I have for-
gotten. There also do I meet with myself, and
recall myself, — what, when, or where I did a
thing, and how I was affected when I did it.
There are all which I remember, either by per-
sonal experience or on the faith of others. Out
of the same supply do I myself with the past
construct now this, now that likeness of things,
which either I have experienced, or, from hav-
ing experienced, have believed ; and thence
again future actions, events, and hopes, and
upon all these again do I meditate as if they
were present. " I will do this or that," say I
to myself in that vast womb of my mind, filled
with the images of things so many and so great,
"and this or that shall follow upon it." "Oh
that this or that might come to pass ! " "God
avert this or that ! " Thus speak I to myself;
and when I speak, the images of all I speak
about are present, out of the same treasury of
memory; nor could I say anything at all about
them were the images absent.

15. Great is this power of memory, exceed-
ing great, O my God, — an inner chamber large
and boundless ! Who has plumbed the depths
thereof? Yet it is a power of mine, and apper-
tains unto my nature ; nor do I myself grasp
all that I am. Therefore is the mind too nar-
row to contain itself. And where should that
be which it doth not contain of itself? Is it
outside and not in itself? How is it, then, that
it doth not grasp itself? A great admiration
rises upon me ; astonishment seizes me. And
men go forth to wonder at the heights of moun-
tains, the huge waves of the sea, the broad flow
of the rivers, the extent of the ocean, and the
courses of the stars, and omit to wonder at
themselves; nor do they marvel that when I
spoke of all these things, I was not looking on
them with my eyes, and yet could not speak of
them unless those mountains, and waves, and
rivers, and stars which I saw, and that ocean
which I believe in, I saw inwardly in my mem-
ory, and with the same vast spaces between as
when I saw them abroad. But I did not by
seeing appropriate them when I looked on them
with my eyes ; nor are the things themselves with


me, but their images. And I knew by what
corporeal sense each made impression on me.

CHAP. IX. NOT ONLY THINGS, BUT ALSO LITERA-
TURE AND BtAGES, ARE TAKEN FROM THE
MEMORY, AND ARE BROUGHT FORTH BY THE
ACT OF REMEMBERING.

16. And yet are not these all that the illimit-
able capacity of my memory retains. Here
also is all that is apprehended of the liberal sci-
ences, and not yet forgotten — removed as it
were into an inner place, which is not a place ;
nor are they the images which are retained, but
the things themselves. For what is literature,
what skill in disputation, whatsoever I know of
all the many kinds of questions there are, is so
in my memory, as that I have not taken in
the image and left the thing without, or that it
should have sounded and passed away like a
voice imprinted on the ear by that trace, where-
by it might be recorded, as though it sounded
when it no longer did so ; or as an odour while
it passes away, and vanishes into wind, affects
the sense of smell, whence it conveys the image '/s(
of itself into the memory, which we realize in '^
recollecting ; or like food, which assuredly in
the belly hath now no taste, and yet hath a
kind of taste in the memory, or like anything
that is by touching felt by the body, and whicF
even when removed from us is imagined by thf
memory. For these things themselves are no
put into it, but the images of them only ar
caught up, with a marvellous quickness, an
laid up, as it were, in most wonderful garnei
and wonderfully brought forth when we reme'
ber.

CHAP. X. LITERATURE IS NOT INTRODUCED TO

• THE MEMORY THROUGH THE SENSES, BUT IS

BROUGHT FORTH FROM ITS MORE SECRET

PLACES.

17. But truly when I hear that there are three
kinds of questions, "Whether a thing is? —
what it is? — of what kind it is?" I do indeed
hold fast the images of the sounds of which
these words are composed, and I know that
those sounds passed through the air with a noise,
and now are not. But the things themselves
which are signified by these sounds I never
arrived at by any sense of the body, nor ever
perceived them otherwise than by my mind;
and in my memory have I laid up not their
images, but themselves, which, how they en-
tered into me, let them tell if they are able.
For I examine all the gates of my flesh, but
find not by which of them they entered. For
the eyes say, " If they were coloured, we an-
nounced them." The ears say, "If they
sounded, we gave notice of them." The nos-


H'


Chap. XIV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


147


'^S


trils say, " If they smell, they passed in by us."
The sense of taste says, "If they have no
flavour, ask not me." The touch says, "If it
have not body, I handled it not, and if I never
handled it, I gave no notice of it." Whence
and how did these things enter into my mem-
ory ? I know not how. For when I learned
them, I gave not credit to the heart of another
" man, but perceived them in my own ; and I
-proved them as true, and committed them to
■■■>? them up, as it were, whence I might
when I willed. There, then, they
^ore I learned them, but were
y. Where were they, then,
,en they Avere spoken, did I
em, and say, "So it is, it is
. being already in the memory,
c back and concealed, as it were,
et caverns, that had they not been
.1 by the advice of another I would
lance, have been able to conceive of


XI. — WHAT IT IS TO LEARN AND TO THINK.

8. Wherefore we find that to learn these
ings, whose images we drink not in by our
^enses, but perceive within as they are by them-
selves, without images, is nothing else but by
meditation as it were to concentrate, and by
observing to take care that those notions which
the memory did before contain scattered and
confused, be laid up at hand, as it were, in that
same memory, where before they lay concealed,
scattered and neglected, and so the more easily
present themselves to the mind well accustomed
to observe them. And how many things of this
sort does my memory retain which have been
found out already, and, as I said, are, as it
were, laid up ready to hand, which we are said
to have learned and to have known ; which,
should we for small intervals of time cease to
recall, they are again so submerged and slide
back, as it were, into the more remote cham-
bers, that they must be evolved thence again as
if new (for other sphere they have none), and
must be marshalled \_cogem/a] again that they
may become known ; that is to say, they must
be collected [_co//igenda], as it were, from their
dispersion ; whence we have the word cogitare.
For cogo [/ collect] and cogito [I re-collect] have
the same relation to each other as ago and agito,
facio and factito. But the mind has appropri-
ated to itself this word [cogitation], so that not
hat which is collected anywhere, but what is
collected, ^ that is marshalled,^ in the mind, is
)roperly said to be "cogitated."*


1 Colligitur.
-^_, * Cogitur.
elv JH ■ Cogitari.


CHAP. XII. — ON THE RECOLLECTION OF THINGS
MATHEMATICAL.

19. The memory containeth also the reasons
and innumerable laws of numbers and dimen-
sions, none of which hath any sense of the
body impressed, seeing they have neither colour,
nor sound, nor taste, nor smell, nor sense of
touch. I have heard the sound of the words
by which these things are signified when they
are discussed; but the sounds are one thing,
the things another. For the sounds are one
thing in Greek, another in Latin ; but the
things themselves are neither Greek, nor Latin,
nor any other language. I have seen the lines
of the craftsmen, even the finest, like a spider's
web ; but these are of another kind, they are
not the images of those which the eye of my
flesh showed me ; he knoweth them who, with-
out any idea whatsoever of a body, perceives
them within himself. I have also observed the
numbers of the things with which we number
all the senses of the body ; but those by which
we number are of another kind, nor are they
the images of these, and therefore they cer-
tainly are. Let him who sees not these things
mock me for saying them ; and I will pity him,
whilst he mocks me.

CHAP. XIII. — MEMORY RETAINS ALL THINGS.

20. All these things I retain in my memory,
and how I learnt them I retain. I retain also
many things which I have heard most falsely
objected against them, which though they be
false, yet is it not false that I have remembered
them ; and I remember, too, that I have
distinguished between those truths and these
falsehoods uttered against them ; and I now see
that it is one thing to distinguish these things,
another to remember that I often distinguished
them, when I often reflected upon them. I
both remember, then, that I have often under-
stood these things, and what I now distinguish
and comprehend I store away in my memory,
that hereafter I may remember that I understood
it now. Therefore also I remember that I have
remembered ; so that if afterwards I shall call
to mind that I have been able to remember these
things, it will be through the power of memory
that I shall call it to mind.

CHAP. XIV. CONCERNING THE MANNER IN WHICH

JOY AND SADNESS MAY BE BROUGHT BACK TO
THE MIND AND MEMORY.

2 1 . This same memory contains also the affec-
tions of my mind ; not in the manner in Avhich
the mind itself contains them when it suffers
them, but very differently according to a power
peculiar to memory. For without being joyous,
I remember myself to have had joy ; and with-


148


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X.


out being sad, I call to mind my past sadness ;
and that of which I was once afraid, I remember
without fear ; and without desire recall a former
desire. Again, on the contrary, I at times re-
member when joyous my past sadness, and when
sad my joy. Which is not to be wondered at
as regards the body ; for the mind is one thing,
the body another. If I, therefore, when happy,
recall some past bodily pain, it is not so strange
a thing. But now, as this very memory itself is
mind (for when we give orders to have a thing
kept in memory, we say, "See that you bear
this in mind ; " and when we forget a thing, we
say, "It did not enter my mind," and, "It
slipped from my mind," thus calhng the mem-
ory itself mind), as this is so, how comes it to
pass that when being joyful I remember my past
sorrow, the mind has joy, the memory sorrow,
— the mind, from the joy than is in it, is joyful,
yet the memory, from the sadness that is in it,
is not sad ? Does not the memory perchance
belong unto the mind ? Who will say so ? The
memory doubtless is, so to say, the belly of the
mind, and joy and sadness like sweet and bitter
food, which, when entrusted to the memory, are,
as it were, passed into the belly, where they can
be reposited, but cannot taste. It is ridiculous
to imagine these to be alike ; and yet they are
not utterly unlike.

22. But behold, out of my memory I educe
it, when I affirm that there be four perturbations
of the mind, — desire, joy, fear, sorrow ; and
whatsoever I shall be able to dispute on these,
by dividing each into its peculiar species, and
by defining it, there I find what I may say, and
thence I educe it ; yet am I not disturbed by
any of these perturbations when by remember-
ing them I call them to mind ; and before I
recollected and reviewed them, they were there ;
wherefore by remembrance could they be brought
thence. Perchance, then, even as meat is in
ruminating brought up out of the belly, so by
calling to mind are these educed from the mem-
ory. Why, then, does not the disputant, thus
recollecting, perceive in the mouth of his medi-
tation the sweetness of joy or the bitterness of
sorrow ? Is the comparison unlike in this be-
cause not like in all points ? For who would
willingly discourse on these subjects, if, as often
as we name sorrow or fear, we should be com-
pelled to be sorrowful or fearful ? And yet we
could never speak of them, did we not find in
our memory not merely the sounds of the names
according to the images imprinted on it by the
senses of the body, but the notions of the things
themselves, which we never received by any door
of the flesh, but which the mind itself, recognising
by the experience of its own passions, entrusted
to the memory, or else which the memory itself
retained without their being entrusted to it.


CHAP. XV. IN MEMORY THERE ARE ALSO IMAGES

OF THINGS WHICH ARE ABSENT.

23. But whether by images or no, who can
well affirm ? For I name a stone, I name the
sun, and the things themselves are not present
to my senses, but their images are near to my
memory. I name some pain of the body, yet
it is not present when there is no pain ; yet if
its image were not in my memory, I should be
ignorant what to say concerning it, nor in ar-
guing be able to distinguish it from pleasure.
I name bodily health when sound in body ; the
thing itself is indeed present with me, but un-
less its image also were in my memory, I could
by no means call to mind what the sound of this
name signified. Nor would sick people know,
when health was named, what was said, unless
the same image were retained by the power of
memory, although the thing itself were absent
from the body. I name numbers whereby we
enumerate ; and not their images, but they
themselves are in my memory. I name the
image of the sun, and this, too, is in my mem-
ory. For I do not recall the image of that im-
age, but itself, for the image itself is present
when I remember it. I name memory, and I
know what I name. But where do I know it,
except in the memory itself? Is it also present
to itself by its image, and not by itself?

CHAP. XVI. — THE PRIVATION OF MEMORY IS FOR-
GETFULNESS.

24. When I name forgetfulness, and know,
too, what I name, whence should I know it
if I did not remember it ? I do not say the
sound of the name, but the thing which it sig-
nifies; which, had I forgotten, I could not know
what that sound signified. When, therefore, I
remember memory, then is memory present
with itself, through itself. But when I remem-
ber forgetfulness, there are present both memory
and forgetfulness, — memory, whereby I remem-
ber, forgetfulness, which I remember. But what
is forgetfulness but the privation of memory ?
How, then, is that present for me to remember,
since, when it is so, I cannot remember ? But
if what we remember we retain in memory, yet,
unless we remembered forgetfulness, we could
never at the hearing of the name know the thing
meant by it, then is forgetfulness retained by
memory. Present, therefore, it is, lest we
should forget it ; and being so, we do forget.
Is it to be inferred from this that forgetfulness,
when we remember it, is not present to the
memory through itself, but through its image;
because, were forgetfulness present through it-i
self, it would not lead us to remember, but to 1
forget ? Who will now investigate this ? Who
shall understand how it is ? Z


Chap. XVIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


149


25. Truly, O Lord, I labour therein, and
labour in myself. I am become a troublesome
soil that requires overmuch labour. For we are
not now searching out the tracts of heaven, or
measuring the distances of the stars, or inquir-
ing about the weight of the earth. It is I my-
self— I, the mind — who remember. It is not
much to be wondered at, if what I myself am
not be far from me. But what is nearer to me
than myself? And, behold, I am not able to
comprehend the force of my own memory,
though I cannot name myself without it. For
what shall I say when it is plain to me that I
remember forgetfulness ? Shall I affirm that
that which I remember is not in my memory?
Or shall I say that forgetfulness is in my mem-
ory with the view of my not forgetting ? Both
of these are most absurd. What third view is
there ? How can I assert that the image of for-
getfulness is retained by my memory, and not
forgetfulness itself, when I remember it ? And
how can I assert this, seeing that when the image
of anything is imprinted on the memory, the
thing itself must of necessity be present first by
which that image may be imprinted ? For thus
do I remember Carthage ; thus, all the places to
which I have been ; thus, the faces of men whom
I have seen, and things reported by the other
senses ; thus, the health or sickness of the body.
For when these objects were present, my mem-
ory received images from them, which, when
they were present, I might gaze on and recon-
sider in my mind, as I remembered them when
they were absent. If, therefore, forgetfulness is
retained in the memory through its image, and
not through itself, then itself was once present,
that its image might be taken. But when it was
present, how did it write its image on the mem-
ory, seeing that forgetfulness by its presence
blots out even what it finds already noted ?
And yet, in whatever way, though it be incom-
prehensible and inexplicable, yet most certain I
am that I remember also forgetfulness itself,
whereby what we do remember is blotted out.

CHAP. XVII. GOD CANNOT BE ATTAINED UNTO

BY THE POWER OF MEMORY, WHICH BEASTS AND
BIRDS POSSESS.

26. Great is the power of memory; very
wonderful is it, O my God, a profound and in-
finite manifoldness ; and this thing is the mind,
md this I myself am. What then am I, O my
C^od ? Of what nature am I ? A life various
md manifold, and exceeding vast. Behold, in
he numberless fields, and caves, and caverns
)f my memory, full without number of num-
;)erless kinds of things, either through images, as
1.11 bodies are ; or by the presence of the things
hemselves, as are the arts; or by some notion


or observation, as the affections of the mind
are, which, even though the mind doth not
suffer, the memory retains, while whatsoever is
in the memory is also in the mind : through all
these do I run to and fro, and fly ; I pene-
trate on this side and that, as far as I am able,
and nowhere is there an end. So great is the
power of memory, so great the power of life in
man, whose life is mortal. What then sliall I
do, O Thou my true life, my God ? I will pass
even beyond this power of mine which is called
memory — I will pass beyond it, that I may
proceed to Thee, O Thou sweet Light. What
sayest Thou to me ? Behold, I am soaring by
my mind towards Thee who remainest above
me. I will also pass beyond this power of
mine which is called memory, wishful to reach
Thee whence Thou canst be reached, and to
cleave unto Thee whence it is possible to cleave
unto Thee. For even beasts and birds possess
memory, else could they never find their lairs
and nests again, nor many other things to
which they are used ; neither indeed could they
become used to anything, but by their mem-
ory. I will pass, then, beyond memory also,
that I may reach Him who has separated me
from the four-footed beasts and the fowls of
the air, making me wiser than they. I will
pass beyond memory also, but where shall I
find Thee, O Thou truly good and assured
sweetness ? But where shall I find Thee ? If
I find Thee without memory, then am I un-
mindful of Thee. And how now shall I find
Thee, if I do not remember Thee ? \

CHAP. XVIII. — A THING WHEN LOST COULD NOT
BE FOUND UNLESS IT WERE RETAINED IN THE
MEMORY.

27. For the woman who lost her drachma,
and searched for it with a lamp,^ unless she had
remembered it, would never have found it. For
when it was found, whence could she know
whether it were the same, had she not remembered
it ? I remember to have lost and found many
things; and this I know thereby, that when I was
searching for any of them, and was asked, " Is
this it?" "Is that it?" I answered "No,"
until such time as that which I sought were
offered to me. Which had I not remembered,
— whatever it were, — though it were offered me,
yet would I not find it, because I could not re-
cognise it. And thus it is always, when we
search for and find anything that is lost. Not-
withstanding, if anything be by accident lost
from the sight, not from the memory, — as any
visible body, — the image of it is retained with-
in, and is searched for until it be restored to
sight; and when it is found, it is recognised by


1 Luke XV. 8.


I50


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X.


the image which is within. Nor do we say that
we have found what we had lost unless we re-


cognise


it ; nor can we recognise it unless we


remember it. But this, though lost to the sight,
was retained in the memory.

CHAP. XIX. WHAT IT IS TO REMEMBER.

28. But how is it when the memory itself
loses anything, as it happens when we forget
anything and try to recall it ? Where finally
do we search, but in the memory itself? And
there, if perchance one thing be offered for
another, we refuse it, until we meet with what
we seek ; and when we do, we exclaim, " This is
it ! " which we should not do unless we knew it
again, nor should we recognise it unless we re-
membered it. Assuredly, therefore, we had
forgotten it. Or, had not the whole of it
slipped our memory, but by the part by which
we had hold was the other part sought for ;
since the memory perceived that it did not re-
volve together as much as it was accustomed to
do, and halting, as if from the mutilation of its
old habit, demanded the restoration of that
which was wanting. For example, if we see or
think of some man known to us, and, having
forgotten his name, endeavour to recover it,
whatsoever other thing presents itself is not
connected with it ; because it was not used to
be thought of in connection with him, and is
consequently rejected, until that is present
whereon the knowledge reposes fittingly as its
accustomed object. And whence, save from
the memory itself, does that present itself?
For even when we recognise it as put in mind
of it by another, it is thence it comes. For we
do not believe it as something new, but, as we
recall it, admit what was said to be correct.
But if it were entirely blotted out of the mind,
we should not, even when put in mind of it,
recollect it. For we have not as yet entirely
forgotten what we remember that we have for-
gotten. A lost notion, then, which we have
entirely forgotten, we cannot even search for.

CHAP. XX. — WE SHOULD NOT SEEK FOR GOD AND
THE HAPPY LIFE UNLESS WE HAD KNOWN IT.

29. How, then, do I seek Thee, O Lord?
For when I seek Thee, my God, I seek a happy
life.^ I will seek Thee, that my soul may live.^
For my body liveth by my soul, and my soul liv-
eth by Thee. How, then, do I seek a happy life,
seeing that it is not mine till I can say, "It is
enough! " in that place where I ought to say
it ? How do I seek it ? Is it by remembrance,
as though I had forgotten it, knowing too that
I had forgotten it ? or, longing to learn it as a

1 See note, p. 75, above.
* Amos V. 4.


thing unknown, which either I had never
known, or had so forgotten it as not even to re-
member that I had forgotten it ? Is not a
happy life the thing that all desire, and is there
any one who altogether desires it not ? But
where did they acquire the knowledge of it,
that they so desire it ? Where have they seen
it, that they so love it ? Truly we have it, but
how I know not. Yea, there is another way in
which, when any one hath it, he is happy ; and
some there be that are happy in hope. These
have it in an inferior kind to those that are
happy in fact ; and yet are they better off than
they who are happy neither in fact nor in hope.
And even these, had they it not in some way,
would not so much desire to be happy, which
that they do desire is most certain. How they
come to know it, I cannot tell, but they have
it by some kind of knowledge unknown to
me, who am in much doubt as to whether it be
in the memory ; for if it be there, then have
we been happy once ; whether all individually,
or as in that man who first sinned, in whom
also we all died,''* and from whom we are all born
with misery, I do not now ask ; but I ask
whether the happy life be in the memory ? For
did we not know it, we should not love it. We
hear the name, and we all acknowledge that we
desire the thing ; for we are not delighted with
the sound only. For when a Greek hears it
spoken in Latin, he does not feel delighted, for
he knows not what is spoken ; but we are de-
lighted,* as he too would be if he heard it in
Greek ; because the thing itself is neither Greek
nor Latin, which Greeks and Latins, and men
of all other tongues, long so earnestly to obtain.
It is then known unto all, and could they with
one voice be asked whether they wished to be
happy, without doubt they would all answer that
they would. And this could not be unless the
thing itself, of which it is the name, were re-
tained in their memory.

CHAP. XXI. HOW A HAPPY LIFE MAY BE RE-
TAINED IN THE MEMORY.

30. But is it so as one who has seen Carthage
remembers it? No. For a happy life is not
visible to the eye, because it is not a body. Is
it, then, as we remember numbers? No. For
he that hath these in his knowledge strives not
to attain further ; but a happy life we have in
our knowledge, and, therefore, do we love it,
while yet we wish further to attain it that we
may be happy. Is it, then, as we remember
eloquence? No. For although some, when
they hear this name, call the thing to mind,
who, indeed, are not yet eloquent, and many


3 I Cor. XV. 22 ; see p. 140, note 3, and note p. 73, above.
* That is, as knowing Latin.


I


Chap. XXIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


151


who wish to be so, whence it appears to be in
their knowledge ; yet have these by their bod-
ily perceptions noticed that others are eloquent,
and been delighted with it, and long to be so,
— although they would not be delighted save
for some interior knowledge, nor desire to be so
unless they were delighted, — but a happy life
we can by no bodily perception make experi-
ence of in others. Is it, then, as we remember
joy ? It may be so ; for my joy I remember,
even when sad, like as I do a happy life when I
am miserable. Nor did I ever with perception
of the body either see, hear, smell, taste, or
touch my joy ; but I experienced it in my mind
when I rejoiced ; and the knowledge of it clung
to my memory, so that I can call it to mind,
sometimes with disdain and at others with de-
sire, according to the difference of the things
wherein I now remember that I rejoiced. For
even from unclean things have I been bathed
with a certain joy, which now calling to mind,
I detest and execrate ; at other times, from
good and honest things, which, with longing,
I call to mind, though perchance they be not
nigh at hand, and then with sadness do I call
to mind a former joy.

31. Where and when, then, did I experience
my happy life, that I should call it to mind,
and love and long for it ? Nor is it I alone or
a few others who wish to be happy, but truly
all ; which, unless by certain knowledge we
knew, we should not wish with so certain a will.
But how is this, that if two men be asked
whether they would wish to serve as soldiers,
one, it may be, would reply that he would, the
other that he would not ; but if they were asked
whether they would wish to be happy, both of
them would unhesitatingly say that they would ;
and this one would wish to serve, and the other
not, from no other motive but to be happy ? Is
it, perchance, that as one joys in this, and an-
other in that, so do all men agree in their wish
for happiness, as they would agree, were they
asked, in wishing to have joy, — and this joy
they call a happy life? Although, then, one
pursues joy in this way, and another in that, all
have one goal, which they strive to attain,
namely, to have joy. This life, being a thing
which no one can say he has not experienced,
it is on that account found in the memory, and
recognised whenever the name of a happy life
is heard.


CHAP. XXII. — A HAPPY LIFE IS TO REJOICE IN
GOD, AND FOR GOD.

32. Let it be far, O Lord, — let it be far from
the heart of Thy servant who confesseth unto
Thee ; let it be far from me to think myself
happy, be the joy what it may. For there is a


joy which is not granted to the "wicked,"*
but to those who worship Thee thankfully,
whose joy Thou Thyself art. And the happy
life is this, — to rejoice unto Thee, in Thee, and
for Thee ; this it is, and there is no other. ^
But those who think there is another follow
after another joy, and that not the true one.
Their will, however, is not turned away from
some shadow of joy.

CHAP. XXIII. ALL WISH TO REJOICE IN THE

TRUTH.

33. It is not, then, certain that all men wish
to be happy, since those who wish not to rejoice
in Thee, which is the only happy life, do not
verily desire the happy life. Or do all desire
this, but because " the flesh lusteth against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh," so that
they ' ' cannot do the things that they would, ' ' *
they fall upon that which they are able to do,
and with that are content ; because that which
they are not able to do, they do not so will as
to make them able ?* For I ask of every man,
whether he would rather rejoice in truth or in
falsehood. They will no more hesitate to say,
"in truth," than to say, " that they wish to be
happy." For a happy life is joy in the truth.
For this is joy in Thee, who art " the truth,"*
O God, " my light,"* " the health of my coun-
tenance, and my God."' All wish for this
happy life ; this life do all wish for, which is
the only happy one ; joy in the truth do all
wish for.^ I have had experience of many
who wished to deceive, but not one who wished
to be deceived. Where, then, did they know
this happy life, save where they knew also the
truth? For they love it, too, since they would
not be deceived. And when they love a happy
life, which is naught else but joy in the truth,
assuredly they love also the truth ; which yet
they would not love were there not some know-
ledge of it in the memory. Wherefore, then,
do they not rejoice in it ? Why are they not
happy ? Because they are more entirely occu-
pied with other things which rather make them
miserable, than that which would make them
happy, which they remember so little of. For
there is yet a little light in men ; let them walk
— let them "walk," that the "darkness" seize
them not.*


1 Isa. xlviii. 22.

2 Since " life eternal is the supreme good," as he remarks in his
De Civ, Dei, xix. 4. Compare also ibid. viii. sec. 8, where he
argues that the highest good is God, and that he who loves Him is
in the enjoyment of that good. See also note on the chief good, p.
75, above.

<* Gal. V. 17.

* See viii. sec. 20, above.
^ John xiv. 6.

* Ps. xxvii. I,
' Ps. xlii. II.

8 See sec. 29, above.

9 John xii. 35.


152


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X.


34. Why, then, doth truth beget hatred,^
and that man of thine, ^ preaching the truth,
become an enemy unto them, whereas a happy
life is loved, which is naught else but joy in
the truth ; unless that truth is loved in such
a sort as that those who love aught else wish
that to be the truth which they love, and, as
they are willing to be deceived, are unwilling
to be convinced that they are so ? Therefore
do they hate the truth for the sake of that
thing which they love instead of the truth.
They love truth when she shines on them, and
hate her when she rebukes them. For, because
they are not willing to be deceived, and wish to
deceive, they love her when she reveals herself,
and hate her when she reveals them. On that
account shall she so requite them, that those
who were unwilling to be discovered by her
she both discovers against their will, and dis-
covers not herself unto them. Thus, thus, truly
thus doth the human mind, so blind and sick,
so base and unseemly, desire to lie concealed,
but wishes not that anything should be con-
cealed from it. But the opposite is rendered
unto it, — that itself is not concealed from the
truth, but the truth is concealed from it. Yet,
even while thus wretched, it prefers to rejoice
in truth rather than in falsehood. Happy then
will it be, when, no trouble intervening, it shall
rejoice in that only truth by whom all things
else are true.

CHAP. XXIV. — HE WHO FINDS TRUTH, FINDS

GOD.

35. Behold how I have enlarged in my mem-
ory seeking Thee, O Lord ; and out of it have
I not found Thee. Nor have I found aught
concerning Thee, but what I have retained in
memory from the time I learned Thee. For
from the time I learned Thee have I never for-
gotten Thee. For where I found truth, there
found I my God, who is the Truth itself,^ which
from the time I learned it have I not forgotten.
And thus since the time I learned Thee, Thou
abidest in my memory ; and there do I find
Thee whensoever I call Thee to remembrance,
and delight in Thee. These are my holy de-
lights, which Thou hast bestowed upon me in
Thy mercy, having respect unto my poverty.

CHAP. XXV. — HE IS GLAD THAT GOD DWELLS IN
HIS MEMORY.

36. But where in my memory abidest Thou,
O Lord, where dost Thou there abide? What
manner of chamber hast Thou there formed for
Thyself? What sort of sanctuary hast Thou

1 *' Veritas parit odium." Compare Terence, Andria, i. i, 41 :
" Obsequiiim amicos, Veritas odium parit."
* John viii. 40.
8 See iv. c. 12, and vii. c. 10, above.


erected for Thyself? Thou hast granted this
honour to my memory, to take up Thy abode
in it ; but in what quarter of it Tliou abidest, I
am considering. For in calling Thee to mind,*
I soared beyond those parts of it which the
beasts also possess, since I found Thee not there
amongst the images of corporeal things ; and I
arrived at those parts where I had committed
the affections of my mind, nor there did I find
Thee. And I entered into the very seat of my
mind, which it has in my memory, since the
mind remembers itself also — nor wert Thou
there. For as Thou art not a bodily image,
nor the affection of a living creature, as when
we rejoice, condole, desire, fear, remember,
forget, or aught of the kind ; so neither art
Thou the mind itself, because Thou art the
Lord God of the mind ; and all these things
are changed, but Thou remainest unchangeable
over all, yet vouchsafest to dwell in my mem-
ory, from the time I learned Thee. But why
do I now seek in what part of it Thou dwellest,
as if truly there were places in it ? Thou dost
dwell in it assuredly, since I have remembered
Thee from the time I learned Thee, and I find
Thee in it when I call Thee to mind.

CHAP. XXVI. GOD EVERYWHERE ANSWERS THOSE

WHO TAKET COUNSEL OF HIM.

37. Where, then, did I find Thee, so as to
be able to learn Thee ? For Thou wert not in
my memory before I learned Thee. Where,
then, did I find Thee, so as to be able to learn
Thee, but in Thee above me ? Place there is
none; we go both "backward" and "for-
ward,"^ and there is no place. Everywhere, O
Truth, dost Thou direct all who consult Thee,
and dost at once answer all, though they con-
sult Thee on divers things. Clearly dost Thou
answer, though all do not with clearness hear.
All consult Thee upon whatever they wish,
though they hear not always that which they
wish. He is Thy best servant who does not so
much look to hear that from Thee which he
himself wisheth, as to wish that which he
heareth from Thee.

CHAP. XXVII. — HE GRIEVES THAT HE WAS SO
LONG WITHOUT GOD.

38. Too late did I love Thee, O Fairness, so
ancient, and yet so new ! Too late did I love
Thee ! For behold, Thou wert within, and I
without, and there did I seek Thee ; I, unlovely,
rushed heedlessly among the things of beauty
Thou madest.® Thou wert with me, but I was


* In connection with Augustin's views as to memory, Locke's
Essay on the Hzivtan Understanding , ii. 10, and Stewart's Pkiloi-
ophy of the Human Mind, c. 6, may be profitably consulted.

6 Job xxiii. 8.

6 See p. 74, note i, above.


Chap. XXX.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


153


not with Thee. Those things kept me far from
Thee, which, unless they were in Thee, were
not. Thou calledst, and criedst aloud, and
forcedst open my deafness. Thou didst gleam
and shine, and chase away my blindness. Thou
didst exhale odours, and I drew in my breath
and do pant after Thee. I tasted, and do hun-
ger and thirst. Thou didst touch me, and I
burned for Thy peace.

CHAP. XXVIII. — ON THE MISERY OF HUMAN LIFE.

39. When I shall cleave unto Thee with all
my being, then shall I in nothing have pain
and labour ; and my life shall be a real life, be-
ing wholly full of Thee. But now since he
whom Thou fiUest is the one Thou liftest up, I
am a burden to myself, as not being full of
Thee. Joys of sorrow contend with sorrows
of joy ; and on which side the victory may be
I know not. Woe is me ! Lord, have pity on
me. My evil sorrows contend with my good
joys ; and on which side the victory may be I
know not. Woe is me ! Lord, have pity on
me. Woe is me ! Lo, I hide not my wounds ;
Thou art the Physician, I the sick ; Thou mer-
ciful, I miserable. Is not the life of man upon
earth a temptation ? ' Who is he that wishes
for vexations and difficulties? Thou com-
mandest them to be endured, not to be loved.
For no man loves what he endures, though he
may love to endure. For notwithstanding he
rejoices to endure, he would rather there were
naught for him to endure.* Li adversity, I de-
sire prosperity ; in prosperity, I fear adversity.
What middle place, then, is there between these,
where human life is not a temptation ? Woe
unto the prosperity of this world, once and
again, from fear of misfortune and a corruption
of joy ! Woe unto the adversities of this world,
once and again, and for the third time, from
the desire of prosperity ; and because adversity
itself is a hard thing, and makes shipwreck of
[endurance ! Is not the life of man upon earth
a temptation, and that without intermission?'


1 Job vii. I. The O^d Ver. rendering XD!f by tentatio, after the

ILXX. TreipaTiJpioi'. The ^«i^. has ?«//?Vza, which =" warfare "
|in margin of A. V.

* " It will not be safe," says Anthony Farindon (vol. iv. Christ's
yremptation, serm. 107), " for us to challenge and provoke a temp-
Itation, but to arm and prepare ourselves against it ; to stand upon
lour guard, and neither to offer battle nor yet refuse it. Sapiens
\feret ista, non eliget : ' It is the part of a wise man not to seek for

pvil, but to endure it.' And to this end it concerneth every man to
Exercise Tt);/ ti vtv^La■T^K^\v avv^aiv, 'his spiritual wisdom,' that he
laiay discover Spiritus ductiones etdiaboli seductiones, ' the Spirit's
leadings and the devil's seducements.' " See also Augustin's
Kerm. Ixxvi. 4, and p. 79, note 9, above.

* We have ever to endure temptation, either in the sense of a
testing', as when it is said, " God did tempt Abraham " (Gen. xxii.
I); or with the additional idea of vie/ding- to the temptation, and
lo committing sin, as in the use of the word in the Lord's Prayer
■Matt. vi. 13) ; for, as Dyke says in his Michael and the Dragon
IWorks, i. 203, 204) : " No sooner have we bathed and washed our
louls in the waters of Repentance, but we must presently expect
l{ie fiery darts of Satan's temptations to be driving at us. What we
let and gain from Satan by Repentance , he seeks to regain and re-


CHAP. XXIX. ^ALL HOPE IS IN THE MERCY OF

GOD.

40. And my whole hope is only in Thy ex-
ceeding great mercy. Give what Thou com-
mandest, and command what Thou wilt. Thou
imposest continency upon us,* " nevertheless,
when I perceived," saith one, " that I could
not otherwise obtain her, except God gave her
me ; . . . that was a point of wisdom also to
know whose gift she was. ' ' * For by continency
are we bound up and brought into one, whence
we were scattered abroad into many. For he
loves Thee too little who loves aught with Thee,
which he loves not for Thee,® O love, who ever
burnest, and art never quenched ! O charity,
my God, kindle me ! Thou commandest con-
tinency ; give what Thou commandest, and
command what Thou wilt.

CHAP. XXX. OF THE PERVERSE IMAGES OF

DREAMS, WHICH HE WISHES TO HAVE TAKEN
AWAY.

41. Verily, Thou commandest that I should
be continent from the "lust of the flesh, and
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. ' ' ''
Thou hast commanded me to abstain from con-
cubinage ; and as to marriage itself. Thou hast
advised something better than Thou hast
allowed. And because Thou didst give it, it
was done ; and that before I became a dispenser
of Thy sacrament. But there still exist in my
memory — of which I have spoken much — the
images of such things as my habits had fixed
there ; and these rush into my thoughts, though
strengthless, when I am awake ; but in sleep
they do so not only so as to give pleasure, but
even to obtain consent, and what very nearly
resembles reality.^ Yea, to such an extent pre-
vails the illusion of the image, both in my soul
and in my flesh, that the false persuade me,

cover by his Tetnptations . We must not think to pass quietly out
of Egypt without Pharaoh's pursuit, nor to travel the wilderness of
this world without the opposition of the Amalekites." Compare
Augustin, In Ev. Joann. Tract, xhii. 6, and Serm. Ivii. 9. See
also p. 70, note 3, above.

* In his 38th Sermon, he distinguishes between continentia and
sustinentia ; the first guarding us from the allurements of worldli-
ness and sin, while the second enables us to endure the troubles of
life.

5 Wisd. viii. 21.

6 In his De Trin. ix. 13 ("/« what desire and love differ"), he
says, that when the creature is loved for itself, and the love of it is
not referred to its Creator, it is desire (cupiditas) and not true love.
See also p. 129, note 8, above.

' I John ii. 16. Dilating on Ps. viii. he makes these three roots
of sin to correspond to the threefold nature of our Lord's tempta-
tion in the wilderness. See also p. 80, note 5, above.

8 In Augustin's view, then, dreams appear to result from our
thoughts and feelings when%wake. In this he has the support of
Aristotle {Ethics, i. 13), as also that of Solomon, who says (Eccles.
v. 3), " A dream cometh through the multitude of business." An
apt illustration of this is found in the life of the great Danish sculp-
tor, Thorwaldsen. It is said that he could not satisfy himself with
his models for The Christ, in the Frauenkirche at Copenhagen, —
as Da Vinci before him was never able to paint the face of the
Christ in His noble fresco of the Last Supper, — and that it was only
in consequence of a dream (that dream doubtless the result of his
stedfast search for an ideal) that this great work was accomplished.
But see Ep. clix.


154


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X,


when sleeping, unto that which the true are not
able when waking. Am I not myself at that
time, O Lord my God ? And there is yet so
much difference between myself and myself, in
that instant wherein I pass back from waking
to sleeping, or return from sleeping to waking !
Where, then, is the reason which when waking
resists such suggestions? And if the things
themselves be forced on it, I remain unmoved.
Is it shut up with the eyes ? Or is it put to
sleep with the bodily senses? But whence,
then, comes it to pass, that even in slumber we
often resist, and, bearing our purpose in mind,
and continuing most chastely in it, yield no
assent to such allurements? And there is yet
so much difference that, when it happeneth
otherwise, upon awaking we return to peace of
conscience ; and by this same diversity do we
discover that it was not we that did it, while we
still feel sorry that in some way it was done in us.

42. Is not Thy hand able, O Almighty God,
to heal all the diseases of my soul,^ and by Thy
more abundant grace to quench even the las-
civious motions of my sleep? Thou wilt in-
crease in me, O Lord, Thy gifts more and more,
that my soul may follow me to Thee, disengaged
from the bird-lime of concupiscence ; that it
may not be in rebellion against itself, and even
in dreams not simply not, through sensual im-
ages, commit those deformities of corruption,
even to the pollution of the flesh, but that it
may not even consent unto them. For it is no
great thing for the Almighty, who is "able to
do . . . above all that we ask or think," ^ to
bring it about that no such influence — not even
so slight a one as a sign might restrain — ^should
afford gratification to the chaste affection even
of one sleeping ; and that not only in this life,
but at my present age. But what I still am
in this species of my ill, have I confessed unto
my good Lord ; rejoicing with trembling^ in
that which Thou hast given me, and bewailing
myself for that wherein I am still imperfect ;
trusting that Thou wilt perfect Thy mercies
in me, even to the fulness of peace, which both
that which is within and that which is without*
shall have with Thee, when death is swallowed
up in victory.^

CHAP. XXXI. ABOUT TO SPEAK OF THE TEMPTA-
TIONS OF THE LUST OF THE FLESH, HE FIRST
COMPLAINS OF THE LUST OF EATING AND
DRINKING.

43. There is another evil of the day that I
would were " sufficient " unto it.^ For by eat-

1 Ps. ciii. 3.

* Eph. iii. 20.

* Ps. ii. II.

* See note 4, p. 140, above.
^ I Cor. XV. 54.

* Matt. vi. 34.


ing and drinking we repair the daily decays of
the body, until Thou destroyest both food and
stomach, when Thou shalt destroy my want with
an amazing satiety, and shalt clothe this cor-
ruptible with an eternal incorruption.' But now
is necessity sweet unto me, and against this
sweetness do I fight, lest I be enthralled ; and I
carry on a daily war by fastings,® oftentimes
" bringing my body into subjection,"* and my
pains are expelled by pleasure. For hunger and
thirst are in some sort pains ; they consume and
destroy like unto a fever, unless the medicine of
nourishment relieve us. The which, since it is
at hand through the comfort we receive of Thy
gifts, with which land and water and air serve
our infirmity, our calamity is called pleasure.

44. This much hast Thou taught me, that I
should bring myself to take food as medicine.
But during the time that I am passing from the
uneasiness of want to the calmness of satiety,
even in the very passage doth that snare of con-
cupiscence lie in wait for me. For the passage
itself is pleasure, nor is there any other way of
passing thither, whither necessity compels us to
pass. And whereas health is the reason of eat-
ing and drinking, there joineth itself as an hand-
maid a perilous delight, which mostly tries to
precede it, in order that I may do for her sake
what I say I do, or desire to do, for health's
sake. Nor have both the same limit ; for what
is sufficient for health is too little for pleasure.
And oftentimes it is doubtful whether it be the
necessary care of the body which still asks nour-
ishment, or whether a sensual snare of desire
offers its ministry. In this uncertainty does my
unhappy soul rejoice, and therein prepares an
excuse as a defence, glad that it doth not appear
what may be sufficient for the moderation of
health, that so under the pretence of health it
may conceal the business of pleasure. These
temptations do I daily endeavour to resist, and
I summon Thy right hand to my help, and re-
fer my excitements to Thee, because as yet I
have no resolve in this matter.

45. I hear the voice of my God command-
ing, let not "your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness."^" "Drunken-
ness," it is far from me; Thou wilt have mercy,
that it approach not near unto me. But " sur-
feiting " sometimes creepeth upon Thy servant ;
Thou wilt have mercy, that it may be far from
me. For no man can be continent unless Thou
give it." Many things which we pray for dost


' I Cor. XV. 54.

8 In Augustin's time, and indeed till the Council of Orleans, A. D.
538, fasting appears to have been left pretty much to the individual
conscience. We find TertuUian in his De Jejunio lamenting the slight
observance it received during his day. We learn, however, from the
passage in Justin Martyr, quoted in note 4, on p. 118, above, that
in his time it was enjoined as a preparation for Baptism.

8 I Cor. ix. 27.

10 Luke xxi. 34.
U Wisd. viii. 21.


Chap. XXXI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


155


Thou give us ; and what good soever we re-
ceive before we prayed for it, do we receive
from Thee, and that we might afterwards know
this did we receive it from Thee. Drunkard
was I never, but I have known drunkards to be
made sober men by Thee. Thy doing, then,
was it, that they who never were such might
not be so, as from Thee it was that they who
have been so heretofore might not remain so
always ; and from Thee, too, was it, that both
might know from whom it was. I heard an-
other voice of Thine, " Go not after thy lusts,
but refrain thyself from thine appetites." ^ And
by Thy favour have I heard this saying likewise,
which I have much delighted in, " Neither if
we eat, are we the better ; neither if we eat not,
are we the worse ;" ^ which is to say, that neither
shall the one make me to abound, nor the other
to be wretched. I heard also another voice,
" For I have learned, in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content, I know both how to be
abased, and I know how to abound. ... I can
do all things through Christ which strengtheneth
me."^ Lo ! a soldier of the celestial camp —
not dust as we are. But remember, O Lord,
"that we are dust,"* and that of dust Thou
hast created man;^ and he "was lost, and is
found."® Nor could h^e do this of his own
power, seeing that he whom I so loved, saying
these things through the afflatus of Thy inspira-
tion, was of that same dust. "I can," saith
he, "do all things through Him which strength-
eneth me."' Strengthen me, that I may be
able. Give what Thou commandest, and com-
mand what Thou wilt.® He confesses to have
received, and when he glorieth, he glorieth in
the Lord.® Another have I heard entreating
that he might receive, — " Take from me," saith
he, " the greediness of the belly ; " ^^ by which
it appeareth, O my holy God, that Thou givest
when what Thou commandest to be done is done.
46. Thou hast taught me, good Father, that
" unto the pure all things are pure ; " " but " it
is evil for that man who eateth with offence ; " ^^
"and that every creature of Thine is good, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with
thanksgiving ; " '* and that " meat commendeth
us not to God ; " " and that no man should


1 Ecclus. xviii. 30.

* I Cor. viii. 8. 1
8 Phil. iv. 11-14.

* Ps. ciii. 14.

* Gen. iii. 19.

* Luke XV. 32.
t Phil. iv. 13.

8 In his De Dono Persev. sec. 53, he tells us that these words
I were quoted to Pelagius, when at Rome, by a certain bishop, and
that they excited him to contradict them so warmly as nearly to re-
sult in a rupture between Pelagius and the bishop.

* I Cor. i. 31.

•" Ecclus. xxiii. 6.
*l Titus i. 15.
1* Rom. xiv. 20.
1' I Tim. iv. 4.
^* I Cor. viii. 8.


"judge us in meat or in drink ; " ^* and that he
that eateth, let him not despise him that eateth
not ; and let not him that eateth not judge him
that eateth.^® These things have I learned,
thanks and praise be unto Thee, O my God
and Master, who dost knock at my ears and
enlighten my heart ; deliver me out of all temp-
tation. It is not the uncleanness of meat that
I fear, but the uncleanness of lusting. I know
that permission was granted unto Noah to eat
every kind of flesh " that was good for food ; ^*
that Elias was fed with flesh ; ^^ that John, en-
dued with a wonderful abstinence, was not pol-
luted by the living creatures (that is, the
locusts^") which he fed on. I know, too, that
Esau was deceived by a longing for lentiles,''^
and that David took blame to himself for de-
siring water,^^ and that our King was tempted
not by flesh but bread. ^^ And the people in
the wilderness, therefore, also deserved reproof,
not because they desired flesh, but because, in
their desire for food, they murmured against
the Lord.'*

47. Placed, then, in the midst of these temp-
tations, I strive daily against longing for food
and drink. For it is not of such a nature as
that I am able to resolve to cut it off once for
all, and not touch it afterwards, as I was able
to do with concubinage. The bridle of the
throat, therefore, is to be held in the mean of
slackness and tightness.'^ And who, O Lord,
is he who is not in some degree carried away
beyond the bounds of necessity ? Whoever he
is, he is great ; let him magnify Thy name.
But I am not such a one, "for I am a sinful
man."'® Yet do I also magnify Thy name;
and He who hath "overcome the world"''
maketh intercession to Thee for my sins,'^ ac-
counting me among the "feeble members" of
His body,'* because Thine eyes saw that of him
which was imperfect ; and in Thy book all
shall be written.™


15 Col. ii. 16.

'6 Rom. xiii. 23.

'' He here refers to the doctrine of the Manichseans in the matter
of eating flesh. In his De Mor. ISlanich. sees. 36, 37, he discusses
the prohibition of flesh to the " Elect." From Ep. ccxxxvi. we
find that the " Hearers" had not to practise abstinence from mar-
riage and from eating flesh. For other information on this subject,
see notes, pp. 66 and 83.

1' Gen. ix. 3.

1' I Kings xvii. 6.

•* jNIatt. iii. 4.

*i Gen. XXV. 34.

— 2 Sam xxiii. 15-17.

23 Matt. iv. 3.

« Num. xi.

^ So all God's gifts are to be used, but not abused ; and those
who deny the right use of any, do so by virtually accepting the
principle of asceticism. As Augustin, in his De Mor. Ecc. Cath.
sec. 39, says of all transient things, we "should use them as far as
is required for the purposes and duties of life, with the moderation
of an employer instead of the ardour of a lover."

so Luke V. 8.

2" John xvi. 33.

28 Rom. viii. 34.

29 I Cor. xii. 22.

^ Ps. cx.xxix. 16; he similarly applies this passage when com-
menting on it in Ps. cxxxviii. 21, and also in Serin, cxxxv.


156


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X.


CHAP. XXXII. OF THE CHARMS OF PERFUMES

WHICH ARE MORE EASILY OVERCOME.

48. With the attractions of odours I am not
much troubled. When absent I do not seek
them ; when present I do not refuse them ; and
am prepared ever to be without them. At any
rate thus I appear to myself; perchance I am
deceived. For that also is a lamentable dark-
ness wherein my capacity that is in me is con-
cealed, so tliat my mind, making inquiry into
herself concerning her own powers, ventures
not readily to credit herself; because that which
is already in it is, for the most part, concealed,
unless experience reveal it. And no man ought
to feel secure^ in this life, the whole of which
called a temptation,^ that he, who could be
made better from worse, may not also from
better be made worse. Our sole hope, -our sole


ifi


confidence,
mercy.


our sole assured promise, is Thy


CHAP. XXXIII. — HE OVERCAME THE PLEASURES
OF THE EAR, ALTHOUGH IN THE CHURCH HE
FREQUENTLY DELIGHTED IN THE SONG, NOT
IN THE THING SUNG,


49

fully
didst


The delights of the ear had more power-
inveigled and conquered me, but Thou
unbind and liberate me. Now, in those
airs which Thy words breathe soul into, when
sung with a sweet and trained voice, do I some-
what repose ; yet not so as to cling to them,
but so as to free myself when I wish. But with
the words which are their life do they, that they
may gain admission into me, strive after a
place of some honour in my heart ; and I can
hardly assign them a fitting one. Sometimes I
appear to myself to give them more respect than
is fitting, as I perceive that our minds are more
devoutly and earnestly elevated into a flame of
piety by the holy words themselves when they
are thus sung, than when they are not ; and
that all affections of our spirit, by their own
diversity, have their appropriate measures in
the voice and singing, wherewith by I know not
what secret relationship they are stimulated.
But the gratification of my flesh, to which the
mind ought never to be given over to be ener-
vated, often beguiles me, while the sense does

'" For some," says Thomas Taylor (Works, vol. i. " Christ's
Temptation," p. 11), "through vain prefidence of God's protec-
tion, run in times of contagion into infected houses, which upon just
calling a man may : but for one to run out of his calling in the way
of an ordinary visitation, he shall find that God"s angels have com-
mission to protect him no longer than he is in his way (Ps. xci. 11),
and that being out of it, this arrow of the Lord shall sooner hit him
than another that is not half so confident." We should not, as
Fuller quaintly says, " hollo in the ears of a sleeping temptation ; "
and when we are tempted, let us remember that if (Hibbert, Syn-
tagiiia Theologicutn, p. 342) " a giant knock while the door is shut,
he may with ease be still kept out ; but if once open, that he gets in
but a limb of himself, then there is no course left to keep out the
remaining bulk." See also Augustin on Peter's case, De Cor-
rect, et Grat. c. 9.

2 Job vii. I, Old Vers. See p. 153, note i.


not so attend on reason as to follow her
patiently ; but having gained admission merely
for her sake, it strives even to run on before
her, and be her leader. Thus in these things
do I sin unknowing, but afterwards do I know it.
50. Sometimes, again, avoiding very earn-
estly this same deception, I err out of too great
preciseness; and sometimes so much as to de-
sire that every air of the pleasant songs to which
David's Psalter is often used, be banished both
from my ears and those of the Church itself;
and that way seemed unto me safer which I re-
membered to have been often related to me of
thanasius. Bishop of Alexandria, who obliged
ae reader of the psalm to give utterance to it
with so slight an inflection of voice, that it was
more like speaking than singing. Notwith-
standing, when I call to mind the tears I shed
at the songs of Thy Church, at the outset of my
recovered faith, and how even now I am moved
not by the singing but by what is sung, when
they are sung with a clear and skilfully modu-
lated voice, I then acknowledge the great util-
ity of this custom. Thus vacillate I between
dangerous pleasure and tried soundness ; being
inclined rather (though I pronounce no irrevo-
cable opinion upon the subject) to approve of
the use of singing in the church, that so by the
delights of the ear the weaker minds may be
stimulated to a devotional frame. Yet when it
happens to me to be more moved by the sing-
ing than by what is sung, I confess myself to
have sinned criminally, and then I would rather
not have heard the singing. See now the con-
dition I am in ! Weep with me, and weep for
me, you who so control your inward feelings as
that good results ensue. As for you who do
not thus act, these things concern you not.
But Thou, O Lord my God, give ear, behold
and see, and have mercy upon me, and heal
i-ne,^ — Thou, in whose sight I am become a
puzzle to myself; and " this is my infirmity."*

CHAP. XXXIV. OF THE VERY DANGEROUS ALLURE-
MENTS OF THE EYES ; ON ACCOUNT OF BEAUTY
OF FORM, GOD, THE CREATOR, IS TO BE
PRAISED.

51. There remain the delights of these eyes
of my flesh, concerning which to make my con-
fessions in the hearing of the ears of Thy tem-
ple, those fraternal and devout ears ; and so to
conclude the temptations of "the lust of the
flesh"* which still assail me, groaning and de-
siring to be clothed upon with my house from
heaven.® The eyes delight in fair and varied
forms, and bright and pleasing colours. Suffer


3 Ps. vi. 2.
< Ps. Ixxvii. 10.
6 I John ii. 16.
6 2 Cor. v. 2.


Chap. XXXV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


157


not these to take possession of my soul ; let
God rather possess it, He who made these things
"very good " ^ indeed; yet is He my good,
not these. And these move me while awake,
during the day ; nor is rest from them granted
me, as there is from the voices of melody, some-
times, in silence, from them all. For that
queen of colours, the light, flooding all that we
look upon, wherever I be during the day, glid-
ing past me in manifold forms, doth soothe me
when busied about other things, and not notic-
ing it. And so strongly doth it insinuate itself,
that if it be suddenly withdrawn it is looked for
longingly, and if long absent doth sadden the
mind.

52. O Thou Light, which Tobias saw,'' when,
his eyes being closed, he taught his son the way
of life ; himself going before with the feet of
charity, never going astray. Or that which
Isaac saw, when his fleshly "eyes were dim, so
that he could not see " ^ by reason of old age ;
it was permitted him, not knowingly to bless
his sons, but in blessing them to know them.
Or that which Jacob saw, when he too, blind
through great age, with an enlightened heart,
in the persons of his own sons, threw light upon
the races of the future people, presignified in
them ; and laid his hands, mystically crossed,
upon his grandchildren by Joseph, not as their
father, looking outwardly, corrected them, but
as he himself distinguished them.* This is the
light, the only one, and all those who see and
love it are one. But that corporeal light of
which I was speaking seasoneth the life of the
world for her blind lovers, with a tempting and
fatal sweetness. But they who know how to
praise Thee for it, " O God, the world's great
Architect,"* take it up in Thy hymn, and are
not taken up with it® in their sleep. Such de-
sire I to be. I resist seductions of the eyes,
lest my feet with which I advance on Thy way
be entangled ; and I raise my invisible eyes to
Thee, that Thou wouldst be pleased to " pluck
my feet out of the net." ' Thou dost continu-
ally pluck them out, for they are ensnared.
Thou never ceasest to pluck them out, but I
constantly remain fast in the snares set all
around me ; because Thou " that keepest Israel
shall neither slumber nor sleep."®

53. What numberless things, made by divers
arts and manufactures, both in our apparel,
shoes, vessels, and every kind of work, in pict-
ures, too, and sundry images, and these going


* Gen. i. 31.
» Tobit iv.

* Gen xxvii.

* Gen. xlviii.
6 From the beginning of the hymn of St. Ambrose, part of which

I is quoted, ix. sec. 32, above.

* Assuiiiunt earn, in hytnno tuo, non. abswnuntur ab ea.

^ Ps. XXV. 15.

* Ps. cxxi. 4.


I.

13-19.


far beyond necessary and moderate use and
holy signification, have men added for the en-
thralment of the eyes ; following outwardly
what they make, forsaking inwardly Him by
whom they were made, yea, and destroying
that which they themselves were made ! But I,
O my God and my Joy, do hence also sing a
hymn unto Thee, and offer a sacrifice of praise
unto my Sanctifier," because those beautiful
patterns, which through the medium of men's
souls are conveyed into their artistic hands, ^^
emanate from that Beauty which is above our
souls, which my soul sigheth after day and
night. But as for the makers and followers of
those outward beauties, they from thence de-
rive the way of approving them, but not of
using them." And though they see Him not,
yet is He there, that they might not go astray,
but keep their strength for Thee,^^ and not dissi-
pate it upon delicious lassitudes. And I,
though I both say and perceive this, impede
my course with such beauties, but Thou dost
rescue me, O Lord, Thou dost rescue me ;
" for Thy loving-kindness is before mine
eyes. ' ' " For I am taken miserably, and Thou
rescuest me mercifully; sometimes not perceiv-
ing it, in that I had come upon them hesitat-
ingly ; at other times with pain, because I was
held fast by them.

CHAP. XXXV. ANOTHER KIND OF TEMPTATION

IS CURIOSITY, WHICH IS STIMULATED BY THE
LUST OF THE EYES.

54. In addition to this there is another form
of temptation, more complex in its peril. For
besides that concupiscence of the flesh which
lieth in the gratification of all senses and pleas-
ures, wherein its slaves who "are far from Thee
perish,"^* there pertaineth to the soul, through
the same senses of the body, a certain vain and
curious longing, cloaked under the name of
knowledge and learning, not of having pleasure
in the flesh, but of making experiments through
the flesh. This longing, since it originates in
an appetite for knowledge, and the sight being
the chief amongst the senses in the acquisition
of knowledge, is called in divine language,
" the lust of the eyes." ^* For seeing belongeth
properly to the eyes ; yet we apply this word
to the other senses also, when we exercise them
in the search after knowledge. For we do not
say. Listen how it glows, smell how it glistens,
taste how it shines, or feel how it flashes, since
all these are said to be seen. And yet we say


9 Sanctificatori ineo, but some MSS. have sacrificatori.

10 See xi. sec. 7, and note, below.

11 See note 6, sec. 40, above.

12 Ps. Iviii. 10, I'ulg.
■3 Ps. xxvi. 3.

l* Ps. Ixiii. 27.
IS I John ii. 16.


158


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X.


not only, See how it shineth, which the eyes
alone can perceive ; but also, See how it sound-
eth, see how it smelleth, see how it tasteth, see
how hard it is. And thus the general experi-
ence of the senses, as was said before, is termed
"the lust of the eyes," because the function of
seeing, wherein the eyes hold the pre-eminence,
the other senses by way of similitude take pos-
session of, whensoever they seek out any know-
ledge.

55. But by this is it more clearly discerned,
when pleasure and when curiosity is pursued by
the senses ; for pleasure follows after objects
that are beautiful, melodious, fragrant, savoury,
soft ; but curiosity, for experiment's sake, seeks
the contrary of these, — not with a view of
undergoing uneasiness, but from the passion
of experimenting upon and knowing them.
For what pleasure is there to see, in a lacerated
corpse, that which makes you shudder? And
yet if it lie near, we flock thither, to be made
sad, and to turn pale. Even in sleep they fear
lest they should see it. Just as if when awake
any one compelled them to go and see it, or
any report of its beauty had attracted them !
Thus also is it with the other senses, which it
were tedious to pursue. From this malady of
curiosity are all those strange sights exhibited
in the theatre. Hence do we proceed to search
out the secret powers of nature (which is beside
our end), which to know profits not,^ and
wherein men desire nothing but to know.
Hence, too, with that same end of perverted
knowledge we consult magical arts. Hence,
again, even in religion itself, is God tempted,
when signs and wonders are eagerly asked of
Him, — not desired for any saving end, but to
make trial only.

56. In this so vast a wilderness, replete with
snares and dangers, lo, many of them have I
lopped off, and expelled from my heart, as
Thou, O God of my salvation, hast enabled me
to do. And yet when dare I say, since so many
things of this kind buzz around our daily life, —
when dare I say that no such thing makes me
intent to see it, or creates in me vain solicitude ?
It is true that the theatres never now carry me
away, nor do I now care to know the courses
of the stars, nor hath my soul at any time con-
sulted departed spirits ; all sacrilegious oaths I
abhor. O Lord my God, to whom I owe all
humble and single-hearted service, with what

1 Augustin's great end was to attain the knowledge of God.
Hence, in his Soliloquia, i. 7, we read : " Deum et animam scire
cupio. Nihilnepkis? Nihil omnino." And he only esteemed the
knowledge of physical laws so far as they would lead to Him. (See
V. sec. 7, above, and the note there.) In his De Ordine, ii. 14, 15,
etc., writing at the time of his conversion, he had contended that
the knowledge of the liberal sciences would lead to a knowledge of
the divine wisdom ; but in his Retractations (i. 3, sec. 2) he regrets
this, pointing out that while many holy men have not this know-
ledge, many who have it are not holy, Compare also Enchir. c.
16; Serm. Ixviii. i, 2; and De Civ. Dei, ix. 22.


subtlety of suggestion does the enemy influence
me to require some sign from Thee ! But by
our King, and by our pure and chaste country
Jerusalem, I beseech Thee, that as any consent-
ing unto such thoughts is far from me, so may
it always be farther and farther. But when I
entreat Thee for the salvation of any, the end I
aim at is far otherwise, and Thou who doest
what Thou wilt, givest and wilt give me will-
ingly to " follow " Thee.'^

57. Nevertheless, in how many most minute
and contemptible things is our curiosity daily
tempted, and who can number how often we
succumb? How often, when people are nar-
rating idle tales, do we begin by tolerating
them, lest we should give offence unto the weak ;
and then gradually we listen willingly ! I do
not now-a-days go to the circus to see a dog
chasing a hare ;^ but if by chance I pass such a
coursing in the fields, it possibly distracts me
even from some serious thought, and draws me
after it, — not that I turn the body of my beast
aside, but the inclination of my mind. And
except Thou, by demonstrating to me my
weakness, dost speedily warn me, either through
the sight itself, by some reflection to rise to
Thee, or wholly to despise and pass it by, I,
vain one, am absorbed by it. How is it, when
sitting at home, a lizard catching flies, or a
spider entangling them as they rush into her
nets, oftentimes arrests me ? Is the feeling of
curiosity not the same because these are such
tiny creatures ? From them I proceed to praise
Thee, the wonderful Creator and Disposer of
all things; but it is not this that first attracts my
attention. It is one thing to get up quickly,
and another not to fall, and of such things is
my life full ; and my only hope is in Thy ex-
ceeding great mercy. For when this heart of
ours is made the receptacle of such things, and
bears crowds of this abounding vanity, then are
our prayers often interrupted and disturbed
thereby ; and whilst in Thy presence we direct
the voice of our heart to Thine ears, this so
great a matter is broken off" by the influx of I
know not what idle thoughts.

CHAP. XXXVI. A THIRD KIND IS "PRIDE,"

WHICH IS PLEASING TO MAN, NOT TO GOD.

58. Shall we, then, account this too amongst
such things as are to be lightly esteemed, or
shall anything restore us to hope, save Thy
complete mercy, since Thou hast begun to
change us? And Thou knowest to what ex-
tent Thou hast already changed me, Thou who

2 John xxi. 22.

3 In allusion to those venatios, or hunting scenes, in which the
less savage animals were slain. These were held in the circus,
which was sojnetimes planted for the occasion, so as to resemble a
forest. See Smith's Greekand Roman Antiquities , under " Vena-
tio," and vi. sec. 13, note, above.


Chap. xxxviL] THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


159


first healest me of the lust of vindicating my-
self, that so Thou mightest forgive all my re-
maining ** iniquities," and heal all my " dis-
eases," and redeem my life from corruption,
and crown me with " loving-kindness and ten-
der mercies," and satisfy my desire with "good
things;"^ who didst restrain my pride with
Thy fear, and subdue my neck to Thy "yoke."
And now I bear it, and it is " light " ^ unto me,
because so hast Thou promised, and made it,
and so in truth it was, though I knew it not,
when I feared to take it up. But, O Lord, —
Thou who alone reignest without pride, because
Thou art the only true Lord, who hast no lord,
— hath this third kind of temptation left me, or
can it leave me during this life ?

59. The desire to be feared and loved of
men, with no other view than that I may expe-
rience a joy therein which is no joy, is a miser-
able life, and unseemly ostentation. Hence
especially it arises that we do not love Thee,
nor devoutly fear Thee. And therefore dost
Thou resist the proud, but givest grace unto the
humble ; ^ and Thou thunderest upon the ambi-
tious designs of the world, and "the founda-
tions of the hills " tremble.* Because now cer-
tain offices of human society render it necessary
to be loved and feared of men, the adversary
of our true blessedness presseth hard upon us,
everywhere scattering his snares of " well done,
well done ; ' ' that while acquiring them eagerly,
we may be caught unawares, and disunite our
joy from Thy truth, and fix it on the deceits of
men ; and take pleasure in being loved and
feared, not for Thy sake, but in Thy stead, by
which means, being made like unto him, he
may have them as his, not in harmony of love,
but in the fellowship of punishment ; who
aspired to exalt his throne in the north," that
dark and cold they might serve him, imitating
Thee in perverse and distorted ways. But we,
O Lord, lo, we are Thy "little flock ;"« do
Thou possess us, stretch Thy wings over us, and
I let us take refuge under them. Be Thou our
glory ; let us be loved for Thy sake, and Thy
word feared in us. They who desire to be
commended of men when Thou blamest, will
not be defended of men when Thou judgest;
nor will they be delivered when Thou con-
Idemnest. But when not the sinner is praised
lin the desires of his soul, nor he blessed who
Idoeth unjustly,' but a man is praised for some
Igift that Thou hast bestowed upon him, and he
lis more gratified at the praise for himself.


1 Ps. ciii. 3-5.

* Matt. xi. 30.
■ las. iv. 6.

* Ps. xviii. 7.

8 Isa. xiv. 13, 14.

* Luke xii. 32.

T Ps. X. 3, in Vulg. and LXX.


than that he possesses the gift for which he is
praised, such a one is praised while Thou blam-
est. And better truly is he who praised' than
the one who was praised. For the gift of God
in man was pleasing to the one, while the other
was better pleased with the gift of man than
that of God.

CHAP. XXXVII. — HE IS FORCIBLY GOADED ON
BY THE LOVE OF PRAISE.

60. By these temptations, O Lord, are we daily
tried ; yea, unceasingly are we tried. Our daily
"furnace"^ is the human tongue. And in this
respect also dost Thou command us to be con-
tinent. Give what Thou commandest, and
command what Thou wilt. Regarding this
matter, Thou knowest the groans of my heart,
and the rivers" of mine eyes. For I am not
able to ascertain how far I am clean of this
plague, and I stand in great fear of my "secret
faults,"^" which Thine eyes perceive, though
mine do not. For in other kinds of tempta-
tions I have some sort of power of examining
myself; but in this, hardly any. For, both as
regards the pleasures of the flesh and an idle
curiosity, I see how far I have been able to hold
my mind in check when I do without them,
either voluntarily or by reason of their not
being at hand ; " for then I inquire of myself
how much more or less troublesome it is to me
not to have them. Riches truly which are
sought for in order that they may minister to
some one of these three " lusts, "^^ or to two, or
the whole of them, if the mind be not able to
see clearly whether, when it hath them, it de-
spiseth them, they may be cast on one side, that
so it may prove itself. But if we desire to test
our power of doing without praise, need we
live ill, and that so flagitiously and immoderately
as that every one who knows us shall detest us?
What greater madness than this can be either
said or conceived ? But if praise both is wont
and ought to be the companion of a good life
and of good works, we should as little forego
its companionship as a good life itself. But
unless a thing be absent, I do not know whether
I shall be contented or troubled at being with-
out it.

61. What, then, do I confess unto Thee, O
Lord, in this kind of temptation ? What, save
that I am delighted with praise, but more with
the truth itself than with praise ? For were I to
have my choice, whether I had rather, being


8 Isa. xlviii. 10, and Prov. xxvii. 21.

9 Lam. iii. 48.

w Ps. xix. 12. See note 5, page 47, above.

11 In his De Vera Relig. sec. 92, he points out that adversity' also,
when it comes to a good man, will disclose to him how far his heart
is set on worldly things : " Hoc enim sine amore nostro aderat,
quod sine dolore discedit."

12 I John ii. 16. See beginning of sec. 41, above.


i6o


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X.


mad, or astray on all things, be praised by all
men, or, being firm and well-assured in the
truth, be blamed by all, I see which I should
choose. Yet would I be unwilling that the ap-
proval of another should even add to my joy for
any good I have. Yet I admit that it doth in-
crease it, and, more than that, that dispraise doth
diminish it. And when I am disquieted at this
misery of mine, an excuse presents itself to me,
the value of which Thou, God, knowest, for it
renders me uncertain. For since it is not con-
tinency alone that Thou hast enjoined upon us,
that is, from what things to hold back our love,
but righteousness also, that is, upon what to
bestow it, and hast wished us to love not Thee
only, but also our neighbour,' — often, when
gratified by intelligent praise, I appear to myself
to be gratified by the proficiency or towardliness
of my neighbour, and again to be sorry for evil
in him when I hear him dispraise either that
which he understands not, or is good. For I am
sometimes grieved at mine own praise, either
when those things which I am displeased at in
myself be praised in me, or even lesser and
trifling goods are more valued than they should
be. But, again, how do I know whether I am
thus affected, because I am unwilling that he who
praiseth me should differ from me concerning
myself — not as being moved with consideration
for him, but because the same good things which
please me in myself are more pleasing to me
when they also please another ? For, in a sort,
I am not praised when my judgment of myself
is not praised ; since either those things which
are displeasing to me are praised, or those more
so which are less pleasing to me. Am I then
micertain of myself in this matter ?

62. Behold, O Truth, in Thee do I see that
I ought not to be moved at my own praises for
my own sake, but for my neighbour's good.
And whether it be so, in truth I know not. For
concerning this I know less of myself than dost
Thou. I beseech Thee now, O my God, to
reveal to me myself also, that I may confess
unto my brethren, who are to pray for me, what
I find in myself weak. Once again let me more
diligently examine myself.^ If, in mine own
praise, I am moved with consideration for my


1 Lev. xix. 18. See book xii. sees. 35, 41, below.

' It may be well, in connection with the striking piece of soul-
anatomy in this and the last two sections, to advert to other passages
in which Augustin speaks of the temptation arising from the praise
of men. In Serm. cccxxxix, i,he says that he does not altogether
dislike praise when it comes from the good, though feeling it to be a
snare, and does not reject it : " Ne ingrati sint quibus praedico."
That is, as he says above, he accepted it for his " neighbour's good,"
since, had his neighbour not been ready to give praise, it would have
indicated a wrong condition of heart in him. We are, therefore, as
he argues in his De Serin. Dom. in Mon. ii. i, 2, 6, to see that the
design of our acts be not that men should see and praise us (com-
pare also Enarr. in Ps. Ixv. 2). If they praise us it is well, since
it shows that their heart is right ; but if we " act rightly only because
of the praise of men " (Matt. vi. 2, 5), we seek our own glory and
not that of God. See also Semis, xciii. 9, clix. 10, etc. ; and De Civ.
Dei, V. 13, 14.


neighbour, why am I less moved if some other
man be unjustly dispraised than if it be myself?
Why am I more irritated at that reproach which
is cast upon myself, than at that which is with
equal injustice cast upon another in my pres-
ence? Am I ignorant of this also? or does it
remain that I deceive myself,* and do not the
" truth " * before Thee in my heart and tongue ?
Put such madness far from me, O Lord, lest
my mouth be to me the oil of sinners, to anoint
my head.^


CHAP. XXXVIII.


-VAIN-GLORY IS THE HIGHEST
DANGER.


6t,. "I am poor and needy," ® yet better am
I while in secret groanings I displease myself,
and seek for Thy mercy, until what is lacking
in me be renewed and made complete, even up
to that peace of which the eye of the proud is
ignorant. Yet the word which proceedeth out
of the mouth, and actions known to men, have
a most dangerous temptation from the love of
praise, which, for the establishing of a certain
excellency of our own, gathers together solicited
suffrages. It tempts, even when within I re-
prove myself for it, on the very ground that it
is reproved ; and often man glories more vainly
of the very scorn of vain-glory ; wherefore it is
not any longer scorn of vain-glory whereof it
glories, for he does not truly contemn it when
he inwardly glories.

CHAP. XXXIX. OF THE VICE OF THOSE WHO,

WHILE PLEASING THEMSELVES, DISPLEASE GOD.

64. Within also, within is another evil, aris-
ing out of the same kind of temptation ; where-
by they become empty who please themselves in
themselves, although they please not, or displease,
or aim at pleasing others. But in pleasing them-
selves, they much displease Thee, not merely tak-
ing pleasure in things not good as if they were
good, but in Thy good things as though they were
their own ; or even as if in Thine, yet as though
of their own merits ; or even as if though of
Thy grace, yet not with friendly rejoicings, but
as envying that grace to others.'' In all these
and similar perils and labours Thou perceivest
the trembling of my heart, and I rather feel my
wounds to be cured by Thee than not inflicted
by me.


3 Gal. vi. 3.

4 I John i. 8. _

6 Ps. cxli. 5, according to the Vulg. and LXX. The Authorized
Version (with which the Targiiin is in accord) gives the more prob-
able sense, when it makes the oil to be that of the righteous and not
that of the sinner : " Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kind-
ness ; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, which shall
not break my head."

•> Ps. cix. 22.

7 See his De Civ. Dei, v. 20, where he compares the truly pious
man, who attributes all his good to God's mercy, "giving thanks
for what in him is healed, and pouring out prayers for the healing of
that which is yet unhealed," with the philosophers who make their
chief end pleasure or human glory.


Chap. XLIL]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


i6i


CHAP. XL. THE ONLY SAFE RESTING-PLACE FOR

THE SOUL IS TO BE FOUND IN GOD.

65. Where hast Thou not accompanied me, O
Truth, ■^ teaching me both what to avoid and
what to desire, when I submitted to Thee what
I could perceive of sublunary things, and asked
Thy counsel ? With my external senses, as I
could, I viewed the world, and noted the life
which my body derives from me, and these my
senses. Thence I advanced inwardly into the
recesses of my memory, — the manifold rooms,
wondrously full of multitudinous wealth; and
I considered and was afraid, and could discern
none of these things without Thee, and found
none of them to be Thee. Nor was I myself
the discoverer of these things, — I, who went
over them all, and laboured to distinguish and
to value everything according to its dignity,
accepting some things upon the report of my
senses, and questioning about others which I
felt to be mixed up with myself, distinguishing
and numbering the reporters themselves, and in
the vast storehouse of my memory investigating
some things, laying up others, taking out others.
Neither was I myself when I did this (that is,
that ability of mine whereby I did it), nor was it
Thou, for Thou art that never-failing light which
I took counsel of as to them all, whether they
were what they were, and what was their worth ;
and I heard Thee teaching and commanding
me. And this I do often ; this is a delight to
me, and, as far as I can get relief from neces-
sary duties, to this gratification do I resort.
Nor in all these which I review when consult-
ing Thee, find I a secure place for my soul,
save in Thee, into whom my scattered members
may be gathered together, and nothing of me
depart from Thee.''' And sometimes Thou dost
introduce me to a most rare affection, inwardly,
to an inexplicable sweetness, which, if it should
be perfected in me, I know not to what point that
, hfe might not arrive. But by these wretched
[weights* of mine do I relapse into these things,
and am sucked in by my old customs, and am
held, and sorrow much, yet am much held. To
[such an extent does the burden of habit press
[us down. In this way I can be, but will not ;
|in that I will, but cannot, — on both ways miser-
lable.

IcHAP. XLL — HAVING CONQUERED HIS TRIPLE
DESIRE, HE ARRIVES AT SALVATION.

66. And thus have I reflected upon the wear-
inesses of my sins, in that threefold "lust,"*
i'^.i^«Bind have invoked Thy right hand to my aid.
^For with a wounded heart have I seen Thy


brightness, and being beaten back I exclaimed,
' ' Who can attain unto it ? " " I am cut off from
before Thine eyes. ' ' ^ Thou art the Truth, who
presidest over all things, but I, through my covet-
ousness, wished not to lose Thee, but with Thee
wished to possess a lie ; as no one wishes so to
speak falsely as himself to be ignorant of the
truth. So then I lost Thee, because Thou
deignest not to be enjoyed with a lie.

CHAP. XLII. — IN WHAT MANNER MANY SOUGHT
THE MEDIATOR.

67. Whom could I find to reconcile me to
Thee ? Was I to solicit the angels ? By what
prayer ? By what sacraments ? Many striving
to return unto Thee, and not able of them-
selves, have, as I am told, tried this, and have
fallen into a longing for curious visions,* and
were held worthy to be deceived. For they,
being exalted, sought Thee by the pride of
learning, thrusting themselves forward rather
than beating their breasts, and so by corre-
spondence of heart drew unto themselves the
princes of the air,' the conspirators and com-
panions in pride, by whom, through the power
of magic,® they were deceived, seeking a medi-
ator by whom they might be cleansed ; but
none was there. For the devil it was, trans-
forming himself into an angel of light.® And
he much allured proud flesh, in that he had no
fleshly body. For they were mortal, and sin-
ful ; but Thou, O Lord, to whom they arro-
gantly sought to be reconciled, art immortal,
and sinless. But a mediator between God and
man ought to have something like unto God,
and something like unto man ; lest being in
both like unto man, he should be far from
God ; or if in both like unto God, he should
be far from man, and so should not be a medi-
ator. That deceitful mediator, then, by whom
in Thy secret judgments pride deserved to be
deceived, hath one thing in common with man,
that is, sin ; another he would appear to have
with God, and, not being clothed with mortal-
ity of flesh, would boast that he was immortal.^"
But since " the wages of sin is death," " this hath
he in common with men, that together with
them he should be condemned to death.


krtf^H 1 See xii. sec. 35, below.

* See ix. sec. 10, note, above, and xi. sec. 39, below.
J[ * Heb. xii. i.

* See p. 153, note 7, above.


6 Ps. xxxi. 22.

« It would be easy so to do, since even amongst believers, as we
find from Evodius' letter to Augustin (£/. clvi.), there was a prev-
alent belief that the blessed dead visited the earth, and that visions
had an important bearing on human affairs. See also Augustin's
answer to Evodius, in £/: clix. ; Chrysostom, De Sacer. vi. 4;
and on Visions, see sec. 41, note, above.

' Eph. ii. 2.

8 See note 5, p. 69, above.

9 2 Cor. xi. 14.

10 In his De Civ. Dei, x. 24, in speaking of the Incarnation of
Christ as a mvstery unintelligible to Porphyry's pride, he has a sini-
ilar passage, 'in which he speaks of the " true and benignant Medi-
ator," and the " malignant and deceitful mediators." See vii. sec.
24, above.

11 Rom. vi. 23.


l62


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book X.


CHAP. XLIII. — THAT JESUS CHRIST, AT THE SAME
TIME GOD AND MAN, IS THE TRUE AND MOST
EFFICACIOUS MEDIATOR.

68. But the true Mediator, whom in Thy
secret mercy Thou hast pointed out to the
humble, and didst send, that by His example^
also they might learn the same humility — that
" Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus,'"' appeared between mortal sin-
ners and the immortal Just One — mortal with
men, just with God ; that because the reward
of righteousness is life and peace. He might, by
righteousness conjoined with God, cancel the
death of justified sinners, which He willed to
have in common with them.* Hence He was
pointed out to holy men of old ; to the intent
that they, through faith in His Passion to come,*
even as we through faith in that which is past,
might be saved. For as man He was Mediator ;
but as the Word He was not between,^ because
equal to God, and God with God, and together
with the Holy Spirit® one God.

69. How hast Thou loved us,'' O good Father,
who sparedst not Thine only Son, but deliver-
edst Him up for us wicked ones ! * How hast


1 See notes 3, p. 71, and 9 and ii, p. 74, above.
' I Tim. ii. 5.

* Not that our Lord is to be supposed, as some have held, to have
been under the law of death in Adam, because " in Adam all die "
(i Cor. XV. 22; see the whole of c. 23, in De Civ. Dei, xiii., and
compare ix. sec. 34, note 3, above) ; for he says in Serin, ccxxxii.
5: "As there was nothing in us from which life could spring, so
there was nothing in Him from which death could come." He laid
down His life (John x. 18), and as being partaker of the divine
nature, could see no corruption (Acts ii. 27). This is the explana-
tion Augustin gives in his comment on Ps. Ixxxv. 5 (quoted in the
next section) of Christ's being " free among the dead." So also in
his De Trin. xiii. 18, he says he was thus free because " solus enim
a debito mortis liber est mortuus." The true analogy between the
first and second Adam is surely then to be found in our Lord's tie-
ing free from the law of death by reason of His divine nature, and
Adam before his transgression being able to avert death by partak-
ing of the Tree of Life. Christ was, it is true, a child of Adam,
but a child of Adam miraculously born. See note 3, p. 73, above.

* See De Trin. \v. 2; and Trench, Hulsean Lectures (1845),
latter part of lect. iv.

5 Mediiis, alluding to mediator immediately before. See his De
Civ. Dei, i.x. 15, and xi. 2, for an enlargement of this distinction
between Christ as man and Christ as the Word. Compare also De
Trin. i. 20 and xiii. 13; and Mansel, Bampton Lectures, lect. v.
note 20.

6 Some Mss. omit Ciun spiritu sancto.

' Christ did not, as in the words of a well-known hymn, " change
the wrath to love." For, as Augustin remarks in a very beautiful
passage in Ev. Joh. Tract, ex. 6, God loved us before the founda-
tion of the world, and the reconcilement wrought by Christ must
not be " so understood as if the Son reconciled us unto Him in this
respect, that He now began to love those -whom He formerly hated,
in the same way as enemy is reconciled to enemy, so that thereafter
they become friends, and mutual love takes the place of their mu-
tual hatred ; but we were reconciled unto Him who already looted
us, but with whom we were at enmity because of our sin. Whether
I say the truth on this let the apostle testify, when he says : ' God
commendeth His love towards us, in that, while we were yet sinners,
Christ died tor us ' " (Rom. v. 8, 9). He similarly applies the text
last quoted in his De Trin. .xiii. 15. See also ibid. sec. 21, where
he speaks of the wrath of God, and ibid. iv. 2. Compare Arch-
bishop Thomson, Bampton Lectures, lect. vii., and note 95.

8 Rom. viii. 34, which is not " for us wicked ones," but " for us
all," as the Authorized Version has it; and we must not narrow
the words. Augustin, in Ev.Joh. Tract, ex. 2, it will be remem-
bered, when commenting on John xvii. 21, " that they all may be
one. . . that the world may believe Thou hast sent me," limits " the
world " to the believi7ig world, and continues {ibid. sec. 4), " Ipsi


Thou loved us, for whom He, who thought it
no robbery to be equal with Thee, "became
obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross;"' He alone " free among the dead,"^"
that had power to lay down His life, and power
to take it again ; " for us was He unto Thee
both Victor and Victim, and the Victor as be-
ing the Victim ; for us was He unto Thee both
Priest and Sacrifice, and Priest as being the
Sacrifice ; of slaves making us Thy sons, by be-
ing born of Thee, and serving us. Rightly,
then, is my hope strongly fixed on Him, that
Thou wilt heal all my diseases'^ by Him who
sitteth at Thy right hand and maketh interces-
sion for us ; ^* else should I utterly despair." For
numerous and great are my infirmities, yea,
numerous and great are they ; but Thy medi-
cine is greater. We might think that Thy
Word was removed from union with man, and
despair of ourselves had He not been "made
flesh and dwelt among us. ' ' ^*

70. Terrified by my sins and the load of my
misery, I had resolved in my heart, and medi-
tated flight into the wilderness ; ^^ but Thou didst
forbid me, and didst strengthen me, saying,
therefore, Christ "died for all, that they which
live should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto Him which died for them." " Behold,
O Lord, I cast my care upon Thee,^^ that I may
live, and "behold wondrous things out of Thy
law."^* Thou knowest my unskilfulness and
my infirmities; teach me, and heal me. Thine
only Son — He " in whom are hid all the treas-
ures of wisdom and knowledge ' ' ^^ — hath re-
deemed me with His blood. Let not the proud
speak evil of me,'^^ because I consider my ran-
som, and eat and drink, and distribute ; and
poor, desire to be satisfied from Him, together
with those who eat and are satisfied, and they
praise the Lord that seek him.^'^

sunt enim mundus, non permanens inimicus, quails est mundis dam-
nationi prsedestinatus." On Christ being a ransom for all, see
Archbisfiop Thomson, Bampton Lectures, lect. vii. part 5, and
note roi.

9 Phil. ii. 6, 8.

10 Ps. Ixxxviii. 5 ; see sec. 68, note, above.

" John X. 18.

12 Ps. ciii. 3.

!■* Rom. viii. 34.

i< See note 11, p. 140, above.

15 John i. 14.

16 Ps. Iv. 7.

I'' 2 Cor. v. 15.

18 Ps. Iv. 22.

19 Ps. cxix. 18.

20 Col. li. 3. Compare Dean Mansel, Bampton Lectures, lect. v.
and note 22.

21 Ps. cxix. 122, Old Ver. He may perhaps here allude to the
spiritual pride of the Donatists, who, holding rigid views as to pur-
ity of discipline, disparaged both his life and doctrine, pointing to
his Manichaeanism and the sinfulness of life before baptism. In his
Answer to Petilian, iii. 11, 20, etc., and Serm. 3, sec. 19, on Ps.
xxxvi.,he alludes at length to the charges brought against him,
referring then finally to his own confessions in book iii. above.

23 Ps. xxii. 26. Augustin probably alludes here to the Lord's
Supper, in accordance with the general Patristic interpretation.


BOOK XI.

THE DESIGN OF HIS CONFESSIONS BEING DECLARED, HE SEEKS FROM GOD THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE
HOLY SCRIPTURES, AND BEGINS TO EXPOUND THE WORDS OF GENESIS I. I, CONCERNING THE CREA-
TION OF THE WORLD. THE QUESTIONS OF RASH DISPUTERS BEING REFUTED, " WHAT DID GOD
BEFORE HE CREATED THE WORLD?" THAT HE MIGHT THE BETTER OVERCOME HIS OPPONENTS, HE
ADDS A COPIOUS DISQUISITION CONCERNING TIME.


CHAP. I. — BY CONFESSION HE DESIRES TO STIMU-
LATE TOWARDS GOD HIS OWN LOVE AND THAT
OF HIS READERS.

1. O Lord, since eternity is Thine, art Thou
ignorant of the things which I say unto Thee ?
Or seest Thou at the time that which cometh
to pass in time ? Why, therefore, do I place
before Thee so many relations of things ? Not
surely that Thou mightest know them through
me, but that I may awaken my own love and
that of my readers towards Thee, that we may
all say, " Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised."^ I have already said, and shall say,
for the love of Thy love do I this. For we
also pray, and yet Truth says, "Your Father
kiioweth what things ye have need of before ye
ask Him."^ Therefore do we make known
unto Thee our love, in confessing unto Thee

lour own miseries and Thy mercies upon us,
Ithat Thou mayest free us altogether, since Thou
mast begun, that we may cease to be wretched
lin ourselves, and that we may be blessed in
iThee ; since Thou hast called us, that we may
Ibe poor in spirit, and meek, and mourners, and
|hungering and athirst after righteousness, and
lerciful, and pure in heart, and peacemakers.*
Jehold, I have told unto Thee many things,
|ivhich I could and which I would, for Thou first
muldest that I should confess unto Thee, the
Lord my God, for Thou art good, since Thy
]* mercy endureth for ever."*

IIHAP. II — HE BEGS OF GOD THAT THROUGH THE
HOLY SCRIPTURES HE MAY BE LED TO TRUTH.

2. But when shall I suffice with the tongue
If my pen to express all Thy exhortations, and
In Thy terrors, and comforts, and guidances.
Thereby Thou hast led me to preach Thy Word


B* Ps. xcvi. 4. See note 3, page 45, above.
W Matt. vi. 8.
Jp Matt. V. 3-9.
^ Ps. cxviii, I,


and to dispense Thy Sacrament^ unto Thy peo-
ple ? And if I suffice to utter these things in
order, the drops® of time are dear to me. Long
time have I burned to meditate in Thy law, and
in it to confess to Thee my knowledge and igno-
rance, the beginning of Thine enlightening,
and the remains of my darkness, until infirm-
ity be swallowed up by strength. And I would
not that to aught else those hours should flow
away, which I find free from the necessities of
refreshing my body, and the care of my mind,
and of the service which we owe to men, and
which, though we owe not, even yet we pay.'

3. O Lord my God, hear my prayer, and let
Thy mercy regard my longing, since it burns
not for myself alone, but because it desires to
benefit brotherly charity ; and Thou seest into
my heart, that so it is. I would sacrifice to
Thee the service of my thought and tongue ;
and do Thou give what I may offer unto Thee.
For "I am poor and needy,"* Thou rich unto
all that call upon Thee,^ who free from care
carest for us. Circumcise from all rashness and


6 He ver>' touchingly alludes in Serm. ccclv. 2 to the way in which
he was forced against his will (as was frequently the custom in those
days), first, to become a presbyter (a.d. 391), and, four years later,
coadjutor to Valerius, Bishop of Hippo (Ep. xxxi. 4, and £/>. ccxiii.
4), whom on his death he succeeded. His own wish was to estab-
lish a monasterj', and to this end he sold his patrimony, " which
consisted of only a few small fields " (Ep. cxxvi, 7). He absolutely
dreaded to become a bishop, and as he knew his name was highly
esteemed in the Church, he avoided cities in which the see was
vacant. His former backsliding had made him humble ; and he tells
us in the sermon above referred to, " Cavebam hoc, et agebam quan-
tam poteram, ut in loco humili salvarer ne in alio periclitarer.'"
Augustin also alludes to his ordination in Ep. xxi., addressed to
Bishop Valerius.

6 " He alludes to the hour-glasses of his time, which went by
water, as ours do now by sand." — W. W.

"< Augustin, in common with other bishops, had his time much
invaded by those who sought his arbitration or judicial decision in
secular matters, and in his De 0/>. Jifonach. sec. 37, he says, what
many who have much mental toil will readily appreciate, that he
would rather have spent the time not occupied in prayer and the
study of the Scriptures in working with his hands, as did the monks,
than have to bear these tumultuosissiinas perplexiiates. In the
year 426 we find him (Ep. ccxiii.) designating Eraclius, in public
assembly, as his successor in the see, and to relieve him (though,
meanwhile, remaining a presbyter) of these anxious duties. See
vi. sec. 15, and note i, above; and also ibid. sec. 3.

8 Ps. Ixxxvi. I.

s Rom. X. 12.


164


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XI.


from all lying my inward and outward lips.^
Let Thy Scriptures be my chaste delights.
Neither let me be deceived in them, nor de-
ceive out of them.'^ Lord, hear and pity, O
Lord my God, light of the blind, and strength
of the weak ; even also light of those that see,
and strength of the strong, hearken unto my
soul, and hear it crying "out of the depths."^
For unless Thine ears be present in the depths
also, whither shall we go ? whither shall we cry ?
" The day is Thine, and the night also is Thine. ' ' *
At Thy nod the moments flee by. Grant thereof
space for our meditations amongst the hidden
things of Thy law, nor close it against us who
knock. For not in vain hast Thou willed that
the obscure secret of so many pages should be
written. Nor is it that those forests have not
their harts,^ betaking themselves therein, and
ranging, and walking, and feeding, lying down,
and ruminating. Perfect me, O Lord, and reveal
them unto me. Behold, Thy voice is my joy.
Thy voice surpasseth the abundance of pleasures.
Give that which I love, for I do love ; and this
hast Thou given. Abandon not Thine own
gifts, nor despise Thy grass that thirsteth. Let
me confess unto Thee whatsoever I shall have
found in Thy books, and let me hear the voice
of praise, and let me imbibe Thee, and reflect
on the wonderful things of Thy law ; ® even from
the beginning, wherein Thou madest the heaven
and the earth, unto the everlasting kingdom of
Thy holy city that is with Thee.

* Ex. vi. 12.

2 Augustin is always careful to distinguish between the certain
truths of faith and doctrine which all may know, and the mysteries
of Scripture which all have not the ability equally to apprehend.
" Among the thmgs," he says {£>e Doctr. Christ, ii. 14), " that are
plainly laid down in Scripture, are to be found all matters that con-
cern faith, and the manner of life." As to the Scriptures that are
obscure, he is slow to come to conclusions, lest he should " be
deceived in them or deceive out of them." In his De Gen. ad
Lit. i. 37, he gives a useful warning against forcing our own mean-
ing on Scripture in doubtful questions, and, ibid. viii. 5, we have the
memorable words : " Melius est dubitare de rebus occultis, quam
litigare de incertis." For examples of how careful he is in such
matters not to go beyond what is written, see his answer to the ques-
tion raised by Evodius, — a question which reminds us of certain
modern speculations (see The Unseen Uniz'erse, arts. 61, 201, etc.),
— whether the soul on departing from the body has not still a body
of some kind, and at least some of the senses proper to a body; and
also (Ep. cl.viv.) his endeavours to unravel Evodius' difiSculties as to
Christ's preaching to the spirits in prison (i Pet. iii. 18-21). Simi-
larly, he says, as to the Antichrist of 2 Thess. ii. 1-7 {De Civ. Dei,
XX. 19) : " I frankly confess I know not what he means. I will,
nevertheless, mention such conjectures as I have heard or read. "
See notes, pp. 64 and 92, above.

'^ Ps. c.\,x.\. I.

* Ps. Ixxiv. 16.

5 Ps. xxix. 9. In his comment on this place as given in the Old
Version, " vox Domini perficientis cervos," he makes the forest
with its thick darkness to symbolize the mysteries of Scripture,
while the harts ruminating thereon represent the pious Christian
meditating on those mysteries (see vi. sec. 3, note, above). In this
:same passage he speaks of those who are tlius being perfected as
overcoming the poisoned tongues. This is an allusion to the fabled
power the stags had of enticing serpents from their holes by their
breath, and then destroying them. Augustin is very fond of this
kind of fable from natural history. In his Enarr. in Ps. cxxix.
and cxli., we have similar allusions to the supposed habits of stags ;
and, ibid, ci., we have the well-known fable of the pelican in its
charity reviving its young, and feeding them with its own blood.
This use of fables was very common with the mediaeval writers, and
those familiar with the writings of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries will recall many illustrations of it amongst the preachers
of those days.

^ Ps. xxvi. 7.


4. Lord, have mercy on me and hear my
desire. For I think that it is not of the earth,
nor of gold and silver, and precious stones, nor
gorgeous apparel, nor honours and powers, nor
the pleasures of the flesh, nor necessaries for the
body, and this life of our pilgrimage ; all which
are added to those that seek Thy kingdom and
Thy righteousness.' Behold, O Lord my God,
whence is my desire. The unrighteous have told
me of delights, but not such as Thy law, O
Lord.* Behold whence is my desire. Behold,
Father, look and see, and approve ; and let it
be pleasing in the sight of Thy mercy, that I
may find grace before Thee, that the secret
things of Thy Word may be opened unto me
when I knock. ^ I beseech, by our Lord Jesus
Christ, Thy Son, " the Man of Thy right hand,
the Son of man, whom Thou madest strong for
Thyself," ^° as Thy Mediator and ours, through
whom Thou hast sought us, although not seek-
ing Thee, but didst seek us that we might seek
Thee," — Thy Word through whom Thou hast
made all things,'^ and amongst them me also, —
Thy Only-begotten, through whom Thou hast
called to adoption the believing people, and
therein me also. I beseech Thee through Him,
who sitteth at Thy right hand, and " maketh
intercession for us,"^^ "in whom are hid all
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. ' ' " Him ^*
do I seek in Thy books. Of Him did Moses
write ; ^® this saith Himself; this saith the Truth.

CHAP. III. — HE BEGINS FROM THE CREATION OF
THE WORLD NOT UNDERSTANDING THE HE-
BREW TEXT.

5. Let me hear and understand how in the
beginning Thou didst make the heaven and the
earth. ^' Moses wrote this; he wrote and de-
parted,— passed hence from Thee to Thee. Nor
now is he before me ; for if he were I would
hold him, and ask him, and would adjure him
by Thee that he would open unto me these
things, and I would lend the ears of my body
to the sounds bursting forth from his mouth. ;
And should he speak in the Hebrew tongue, in
vain would it beat on my senses, nor would
aught touch my mind ; but if in Latin, I should
know what he said. But whence should I knowjij
whether he said what was true? But if I knewjft';
this even, should I know it from him ? Verilyi|ii
within me, within in the chamber of my thought, |


' Matt. vi. 33.

8 Ps. cxix. 85.

9 See p. 48, note 5, above.

10 Ps. Ixxx. 17.

11 See note 9, p. 74, above.
1'-' John i. 3,

13 Rom. viii. 34.
n Col. ii. 3.

15 Many Mss., however, re.2.Aipsos, and xiotipsum.

16 John V. 4-6.

17 Gen. i. 1.


Chap. VI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


165


Truth, neither Hebrew,' nor Greek, nor Latin,
nor barbarian, without the organs of voice and
tongue, without the sound of syllables, would
say, "He speaks the truth," and I, forthwith
assured of it, confidently would say unto that
man of Thine, "Thou speakest the truth."
As, then, I cannot inquire of him, I beseech
Thee, — Thee, O Truth, full of whom he spake
truth, — Thee, my God, I beseech, forgive my
sins ; and do Thou, who didst give to that Thy
servant to speak these things, grant to me also
to understand them.

CHAP. IV. — HEAVEN AND EARTH CRY OUT THAT
THEY HAVE BEEN CREATED BY GOD.

6. Behold, the heaven and earth are ; they
proclaim that they were made, for they are
changed and varied. Whereas whatsoever hath
not been made, and yet hath being, hath noth-
ing in it which there was not before ; this is what
it is to be changed and varied. They also pro-
claim that they made not themselves; "there-
fore we are, because we have been made ; we
were not therefore before we were, so that we
could have made ourselves. ' ' And the voice of
those that speak is in itself an evidence. Thou,
therefore. Lord, didst make these things ; Thou
who art beautiful, for they are beautiful ; Thou
who art good, for they are good ; Thou who art,
for they are. Nor even so are they beautiful,
nor good, nor are they, as Thou their Creator art ;
compared with whom they are neither beautiful,
nor good, nor are at all.^ These things we
know, thanks be to Thee. And our knowledge,
compared with Thy knowledge, is ignorance.

CHAP. v. — GOD CREATED THE WORLD NOT FROM
ANY CERTAIN MATTER, BUT IN HIS OWN WORD.

7. But how didst Thou make the heaven and
the earth, and what was the instrument of Thy

I so mighty work ? For it was not as a human
worker fashioning body from body, according


' Augiistin was not singular amongst the early Fathers in not
Iknowing Hebrew, for of the Greeks only Origen, and of the Latins
I Jerome, knew anything of it. We find him confessing his ignorance
I both here and elsewhere \Enarr. in Ps, cxxxvi. 7, and De Doctr.
I Christ, ii. 22) ; and though he recommends a knowledge of Hebrew
las well as Greek, to correct " the endless diversity' of the Latin trans-
llators '' (De Doctr. Christ, ii. 16); he speaks as strongly as does
IGrinfield, in his Apology for the Septuagint, in favour of the claims
lof that version to " biblical and canonical authority " {Eps. xxviii.,
llxxi., and Ixxv. ; De Civ. Dei, xviii. 42, 43 ; De Doctr. Christ, ii.
I22). He discountenanced Jerome's new translation, probably from
Ifear of giving offence, and, as we gather from Ep. Ixxi. 5, not with-
laut cause. From the tumult he there describes as ensuing upon
IJerome's version being read, the outcry would appear to have been
lis great as when, on the change of the old style of reckoning to the
liew, the ignorant mob clamoured to have back their eleven days !
I * It was the doctrine of Aristotle that excellence of character is
Ihe proper object of love, and in proportion as we recognise such
rxcellence in others are we attracted to become like them (see Sidg-
Ivick's Methods 0/ Ethics, book iv. c. 5, sec. 4). If this be true of
Ihe creature, how much more should it be so of the Creator, who is
Ihe perfection of all that we can conceive of goodness and truth.
I.ompare De Trin. viii. 3-6, De Vera Relig. 57, and an extract
Irom Athanese Coquerel in Archbishop Thomson's Bamiton Lec-
Vtres, note 73.


to the fancy of his mind, in somewise able to
assign a form which it perceives in itself by its
inner eye.* And whence should he be able to
do this, hadst not Thou made that mind ? And
he assigns to it already existing, and as it were
having a being, a form, as clay, or stone, or
wood, or gold, or such like. And whence should
these things be, hadst not Thou appointed them?
Thou didst make for the workman his body, —
Thou the mind commanding the limbs, — Thou
the matter whereof he makes anything,* — Thou
the capacity whereby he may apprehend his art,
and see within what he may do without, — Thou
the sense of his body, by which, as by an inter-
preter, he may from mind unto matter convey
that which he doeth, and report to his mind
what may have been done, that it within may
consult the truth, presiding over itself, whethen
it be well done. All these things praise Thee,
the Creator of all. But how dost Thou make
them ? How, O God, didst Thou make heaven
and earth? Truly, neither in the heaven nor
in the earth didst Thou make heaven and earth ;
nor in the air, nor in the waters, since these also
belong to the heaven and the earth ; nor in the
whole world didst Thou make the whole world ;
because there was no place wherein it could be
made before it was made, that it might be ; nor
didst Thou hold anything in Thy hand where-
with to make heaven and earth. For whence
couldest Thou have what Thou hadst not made,
whereof to make anything ? For what is, save
because Thou art ? Therefore Thou didst speak
and they were made,^ and in Thy Word Thou
madest these things.®

CHAP. VI. HE DID NOT, HOWEVER, CREATE IT

BY A SOUNDING AND PASSING WORD.

8. But how didst Thou speak? Was it in
that manner in which the voice came from the
cloud, saying, "This is my beloved Son"?^'
For that voice was uttered and passed away,,
began and ended. The syllables sounded and
passed by, the second after the first, the third'
after the second, and thence in order, until the
last after the rest, and silence after the last.
Hence it is clear and plain that the motion of a
creature expressed it, itself temporal, obeying
Thy Eternal will. And these thy words formed
at the time, the outer ear conveyed to the intel-


3 See X. sec. 40, note 6, and sec. 53, above.

< That is, the artificer makes, God creates. The creation of mat-
ter is distinctively a doctrine of revelation. The ancient philoso-
phers believed in the eternity of matter. As Lucretius puts it (i.
51): " NuUam rem e nihilo gigni divinitus unquam." See Burton,
Batupton Lectures, lect. iii. and notes 18-21, and Mansel, Bampton
Lectures, lect. iii. note 12. See also p. 76, note 8, above, for the
jSIanichaean doctrine as to the i/Aij ; and The Unseen Universe, arts.
85, 86, 151, and 160, for the modern doctrine of " continuity." See
also Kalisch, Commentary oa Gen. i. i.

6 Ps. xxxiii. 9.

6 IHd. ver. 6.

7 Matt. xvii. 5.


1 66


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[?iOOK XI,


ligent mind, whose inner ear lay attentive to
Thy eternal word. But it compared these words
sounding in time with Thy eternal word in
silence, and said, ''It is different, very different.
These words are far beneath me, nor are they,
since they flee and pass away ; but the Word of
my Lord remaineth above me for ever." If,
then, in sounding and fleeting words Thou
didst say that heaven and earth should be made,
and didst thus make heaven and earth, there
was already a corporeal creature before heaven
and earth by whose temporal motions that voice
might take its course in time. But there was
nothing corporeal before heaven and earth ; or
if there were, certainly Thou without a transi-
tory voice hadst created that whence Thou
wouldest make the passing voice, by which to
say that the heaven and the earth should be
made. For whatsoever that were of which such
a voice was made, unless it were made by Thee,
it could not be at all. By what word of Thine
•was it decreed that a body might be made,
whereby these words might be made ?

CHAP. VII. BY HIS CO-ETERNAL WORD HE

SPEAKS, AND ALL THINGS ARE DONE.

9. Thou callest us, therefore, to understand
the Word, God with Thee, God,^ which is
spoken eternally, and by it are all things spoken
eternally. For what was spoken was not fin-
ished, and another spoken until all were spoken;
but all things at once and for ever. For other-
wise have we time and change, and not a true
eternity, nor a true immortality. This I know,
O my God, and give thanks. I know, I con-
fess to Thee, O Lord, and whosoever is not
unthankful to certain truth, knows and blesses
Thee with me. We know, O Lord, we know ;
since in proportion as anything is not what it
was, and is what it was not, in that proportion
does it die and arise. Not anything, therefore,
of Thy Word giveth place and cometh into
place again, because it is truly immortal and
eternal. And, therefore, unto the Word co-
eternal with' Thee, Thou dost at once and for
ever say all that Thou dost say ; and whatever
Thou sayest shall be made, is made ; nor dost
Thou make otherwise than by speaking; yet
all things are not made both together and ever-
lasting which Thou makest by speaking

CHAP. VIII. — THAT WORD ITSELF IS THE BEGIN-
NING OF ALL THINGS, IN THE WHICH WE ARE
INSTRUCTED AS TO EVANGELICAL TRUTH.

10. Why is this, I beseech Thee, O Lord my
God ? I see it, however ; but how I shall express
it, I know not, unless that everything which be-
gins to be and ceases to be, then begins and

} John i. I.


ceases when in Thy eternal Reason it is known
that it ought to begin or cease where nothing
beginneth or ceaseth. The same is Thy Word,
which is also "the Beginning," because also It
speaketh unto us.^ Thus, in the gospel He
speaketh through the flesh ; and this sounded
outwardly in the ears of men, that it might be
believed and sought inwardly, and that it might
be found in the eternal Truth, where the good
and only Master teacheth all His disciples. There,

0 Lord, I hear Thy voice, the voice of one speak-
ing unto me, since He speaketh unto us who
teacheth us. But He that teachth us not,
although He speaketh, speaketh not to us.
Moreover, who teacheth us, unless it be the im-
mutable Truth ? For even when we are admon-
ished through a changeable creature, we are led
to the Truth immutable. There we learn truly
while we stand and hear Him, and rejoice
greatly " because of the Bridegroom's voice," '
restoring us to that whence we are. And, there-
fore, the Beginning, because unless It remained,
there would not, where we strayed, be whither
to return. But when we return from error, it is
by knowing that we return. But that we may
know. He teacheth us, because He is the Begin-
ning and speaketh unto us.

CHAP. IX. — WISDOM AND THE BEGINNING.

II. In this Beginning, O God, hast Thou
made heaven and earth, — in Thy Word, in Thy
Son, in Thy Power, in Thy Wisdom, in Thy
Truth, wondrously speaking and wondrously
making. Who shall comprehend ? who shall
relate it ? What is that which shines through
me, and strikes my heart without injury, and I
both shudder and burn ? I shudder inasmuch as

1 am unlike it ; and I burn inasmuch as I am
like it. It is Wisdom itself that shines through
me, clearing my cloudiness, which again over-
whelms me, fainting from it, in the darkness and
amount of my punishment. For my strength is
brought down in need,* so that I cannot endure
my blessings, until Thou, O Lord, who hast


2 John viii. 25, Old Ver. Though some would read, Qin et
loquitur, making it correspond to the Vulgate, instead of Quia et
loquitur, as above, the latter is doubtless the correct reading, since
we find the text similarly quoted In Ev. Joh. Tract, xxxviii. 11,
where he enlarges on " The Beginning," comparing principium
with apxri- It will assist to the understanding of this section to refer
to the early part of the note on p. 107, above, where the Platonic
view of the Logos, as ei'SiaSero? and Trpoi^optxo?, or in the " bosom
of the Father " and " made flesh," is given ; which terminology', as
Dr. Newman tells ■a<i.{Arians,\>'L. i.e. 2, sec. 4), was accepted by
the Church. Augustin, consistently with this idea, says (on John
viii. 25, as above) : " Forif the Beginning, as it is in itself, had re-
mained so with the Father as not to receive the form of a servant
and speak as man with men, how could they have believed in Him,
since their weak hearts could not have heard the word intelligently
without some voice that would appeal to their senses ? Therefore, said
He, believe me to be the Beginning ; for that you may believe, I
not only am, but also speak to you." Newman, as quoted above,
may be referred to for the significance of opxi ^^ applied to the Son,
and ibid. sec. 3, also, on the " Word." For the difference between
a mere " voice " and the " Word," compare Aug. Sertn. ccxciii.
sec. 3, and On^en, In Joann. ii. 36.

3 John iii. 29.

* Ps. xxxi. 10.


Chap. XIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


167


been gracious to all mine iniquities, heal also all
mine infirmities ; because Thou shalt also re-
deem my life from corruption, and crown me
with Thy loving-kindness and mercy, and shalt
satisfy my desire with good things, because my
youth shall be renewed like the eagle's.^ For
by hope we are saved ; and through patience
we await Thy promises.^ Let him that is able
hear Thee discoursing within. I will with confi-
dence cry out from Thy oracle, How wonderful
are Thy works, O Lord, in Wisdom hast Thou
made them all.^ And this Wisdom is the Begin-
ning, and in that Beginning hast Thou made
heaven and earth.

CHAP. X. — THE RASHNESS OF THOSE WHO INQUIRE
WHAT GOD DID BEFORE HE CREATED HEAVEN
AND EARTH.

12. Lo, are they not full of their ancient way,
who say to us, " What was God doing before
He made heaven and earth ? For if," say they,
" He were unoccupied, and did nothing, why
does He not for ever also, and from henceforth,
cease from working, as in times past He did ?
For if any new motion has arisen in God, and a
new will, to form a creature which He had never
before formed, however can that be a true
eternity where there ariseth a will which was
not before ? For the will of God is not a creat-
ure, but before the creature ; because nothing
could be created unless the will of the Creator
were before it. The will of God, therefore,
pertaineth to His very Substance. But if any-
thing hath arisen in the Substance of God
which was not before, that Substance is not
truly called eternal. But if it was the eternal
will of God that the creature should be, why
was not the creature also from eternity? "

CHAP. XI. THEY WHO ASK THIS HAVE NOT AS YET

KNOWN THE ETERNITY OF GOD, WHICH IS
EXEMPT FRO.M THE RELATION OF TIME.

13. Those who say these things do not as yet
understand Thee, O Thou Wisdom of God,
Thou light of souls ; not as yet do they under-
stand how these things be made which are made
by and in Thee. They even endeavour to com-
prehend things eternal ; but as yet their heart
flieth about in the past and future motions of
things, and is still wavering. Who shall hold it
and fix it, that it may rest a little, and by degrees
catch the glory of that ever-standing eternity,
and compare it with the times which never stand,
and see that it is incomparable ; and that a long
time cannot become long, save from the many
motions that pass by, which cannot at the same


1 Ps. ciii. 3-5.

* Rom viii. 24, 25.

* Ps. civ. 24.


instant be prolonged ; but that in the Eternal
nothing passeth away, but that the whole is
present ; but no time is wholly present ; and
let him see that all time past is forced on by
the future, and that all the future foUoweth from
the past, and that all, both past and future, is
created and issues from that which is always
present ? Who will hold the heart of man, that
it may stand still, and see how the still-standing
eternity, itself neither future nor past, uttereth
the times future and past ? Can my hand accom-
plish this, or the hand of my mouth by persua-
sion bring about a thing so great ? *

CHAP. XII. WHAT GOD DID BEFORE THE CREA-
TION OF THE WORLD.

14. Behold, I answer to him who asks,
" What was God doing before He made heaven
and earth? " I answer not, as a certain person
is reported to have done facetiously (avoiding
the pressure of the question), " He was prepar-
ing hell," saith he, " for those who pry into
mysteries." It is one thing to perceive, another
to laugh, — these things I answer not. For more
willingly would I have answered, " I know not
what I know not," than that I should make him
a laughing-stock who asketh deep things, and
gain praise as one who answereth false things.
But I say that Thou, our God, art the Creator
of every creature ; and if by the term " heaven
and earth" every creature is understood, I
boldly say, " That before God made heaven and
earth, He made not anything. For if He did,
what did He make unless the creature ? ' ' And
would that I knew whatever I desire to know to
my advantage, as I know that no creature Avas
made before any creature was made.

CHAP. XIII. BEFORE THE TIMES CREATED BY GOD,

TIMES WERE NOT.

15. But if the roving thought of any one
should wander through the images of bygone
time, and wonder that Thou, the God Almighty,
and All-creating, and All-sustaining, the Archi-
tect of heaven and earth, didst for innumerable
ages refrain from so great a work before Thou
wouldst make it, let him awake and consider
that he wonders at false things. For whence
could innumerable ages pass by which Thou
didst not make, since Thou art the Author and
Creator of all ages ? Or what times should those
be which were not made by Thee ? Or how
should they pass by if they had not been ? Since,
therefore. Thou art the Creator of all times, if
any time was before Thou madest heaven and
earth, why is it said that Thou didst refrain from
working ? For that very time Thou madest, nor
could times pass by before Thou madest times.


* See note 12, p. 174, below.


1 68


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XL


But if before heaven and earth there was no time,
why is it asked, What didst Thou then ? For
there was no " tlien " when time was not.

1 6. Nor dost Thou by time precede time ;
else wouldest not Thou precede all times. But
in the excellency of an ever-present eternity,
Thou precedest all times past, and survivest all
future times, because they are future, and when
they have come they will be past ; but " Thou
art the same, and Thy years shall have no
end."^ Thy years neither go nor come; but
ours both go and come, that all may come. All
Thy years stand at once since they do stand ;
nor were they when departing excluded by
coming years, because they pass not away ; but
all these of ours shall be when all shall cease to
be. Thy years are one day, and Thy day is not
daily, but to-day ; because Thy to-day yields
not with to-morrow, for neither doth it follow
yesterday. Thy to-day is eternity ; therefore
didst Thou beget the Co-eternal, to whom
Thou saidst, " This day have I begotten Thee. ' ' ^
Thou hast made all time ; and before all times
Thou art, nor in any time was there not time.

CHAP. XIV. — NEITHER TIME PAST NOR FUTURE,
BUT THE PRESENT ONLY, REALLY IS.

17. At no time, therefore, hadst Thou not
made anything, because Thou hadst made time
itself. And no times are co-eternal with Thee,
because Thou remainest for ever ; but should
these continue, they would not be times. For
what is time? Who can easily and briefly ex-
plain it ? Who even in thought can comprehend
it, even to the pronouncing of a word concern-
ing it ? But what in speaking do we refer to
more familiarly and knowingly than time ? And
certainly we understand when we speak of it ;
we understand also when we hear it spoken of
by another. What, then, is time ? If no one
ask of me, I know; if I wish to explain to him
who asks, I know not. Yet I say with confi-
dence, that I know that if nothing passed away,
there would not be past time ; and if nothing
were coming, there would not be future time ;
and if nothing were, there would not be present
time. Those two times, therefore, past and future,
how are they, when even the past now is not,
and the future is not as yet ? But should the
present be always present, and should it not pass
into time past, time truly it could not be, but
eternity. If, then, time present — if it be time
— only comes into existence because it passes
into time past, how do we say that even this is,
whose cause of being is that it shall not be —
namely, so that we cannot truly say that time is,
unless because it tends not to be?


1 Ps. cii. 27.

* Ps. ii. 7, and Heb. v. 5.


CHAP. XV. THERE IS ONLY A MOMENT OF PRESENT

TIME.

18. And yet we say that " time is long and
time is short ; " nor do we speak of this save of
time past and future. A long time past, for
example, we call a hundred years ago ; in like
manner a long time to come, a hundred years
hence. But a short time past we call, say, ten
days ago : and a short time to come, ten days
hence. But in what sense is that long or short
which is not? For the past is not now, and the
future is not yet. Therefore let us not say, " It
is long; " but let us say of the past, "It hath
been long," and of the future, " It will be long."
O my Lord, my light, shall not even here Thy
truth deride man ? For that past time which was
long, was it long when it was already past, or when
it was as yet present ? For then it might be long
when there was that which could be long, but
when past it no longer was ; wherefore that could
not be long which was not at all. Let us not,
therefore, say, " Time past hath been long; "
for we shall not find what may have been long,
seeing that since it was past it is not ; but let us
say ' ' that present time was long, because when
it was present it was long. ' ' For it had not as
yet passed away so as not to be, and therefore
there was that which could be long. But after
it passed, that ceased also to be long which
ceased to be.

19. Let us therefore see, O human soul,
whether present time can be long ; for to thee is
it given to perceive and to measure periods of
time. What wilt thou reply to me ? Is a hun-
dred years when present a long time ? See, first,
whether a hundred years can be present. For
if the first year of these is current, that is present,
but the other ninety and nine are future, and
therefore they are not as yet. But if the second
year is current, one is already past, the other
present, the rest future. And thus, if we fix on
any middle year of this hundred as present,
those before it are past, those after it are future ;
wherefore a hundred years cannot be present.
See at least whether that year itself which is
current can be present. For if its first month
be current, the rest are future ; if the second,
the first hath already passed, and the remainder
are not yet. Therefore neither is the year
which is current as a whole present ; and if it is
not present as a whole, then the year is not
present. For twelve months make the year, of
which each individual month which is current
is itself present, but the rest are either past or
future. Although neither is that month which
is current present, but one day only : if the first,
the rest being to come, if the last, the rest being
past ; if any of the middle, then between past
and future.

20. Behold, the present time, which alone we


M


Chap. XVIIL]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


169


found could be called long, is abridged to the
space scarcely of one day. But let us discuss
even that, for there is not one day present as a
whole. For it is made up of four-and-twenty
hours of night and day, whereof the first hath
the rest future, the last hath them past, but any
one of the intervening hath those before it past,
those after it future. And that one hour passeth
away in fleeting particles. Whatever of it hath
flown away is past, whatever remaineth is future.
If any portion of time be conceived which can-
not now be divided into even the minutest par
tides of moments, this only is that which may
be called present ; which, however, flies so
rapidly from future to past, that it cannot be ex-
tended by any delay. For if it be extended, it
is divided into the past and future ; but the
present hath no space. Where, therefore, is the
time which we may call long ? Is it tuture ? In-
deed we do not say, "It is long," because it is
not yet, so as to be long ; but we say, " It will
be long. ' ' When, then, will it be ? For if even
then, since as yet it is future, it will not be long,
because what may be long is not as yet ; but it
shall be long, when from the future, which as
yet is not, it shall already have begun to be,
and will have become present, so that there
could be that which may be long ; then doth the
present time cry out in the words above that it
cannot be long.

CHAP. XVI. — TIME CAN ONLY BE PERCEIVED OR
MEASURED WHILE IT IS PASSING.

21. And yet, O Lord, we perceive intervals
of times, and we compare them with themselves,
and we say some are longer, others shorter. We
even measure by how much shorter or longer this
time may be than that ; and we answer, ' ' That
this is double or treble, while that is but once,
or only as much as that." But we measure
times passing when we measure them by perceiv-
ing them ; but past times, which now are not,
or future times, which as yet are not, who can

I measure them ? Unless, perchance, any one will

dare to say, that that can be measured which is

not. When, therefore, time is passing, it can

be perceived and measured; but when it has

[passed, it cannot, since it is not.

JCHAP. XVII. NEVERTHELESS THERE IS TIME PAST

AND FUTURE.

22. I ask. Father, I do not affirm. O my
rod, rule and guide me. " Who is there who
m say to me that there are not three times (as
i^e learned when boys, and as we have taught

jboys), the past, present, and future, but only
present, because these two are not ? Or are they
ilso ; but when from future it becometh present,
tometh it forth from some secret place, and
irhen from the present it becometh past, doth it


retire into anything secret? For where have
they, who have foretold future things, seen these
things, if as yet they are not ? For that which is
not cannot be seen. And they who relate things
past could not relate them as true, did they not
perceive them in their mind. Which things, if
they were not, they could in no wise be dis-
cerned. There are therefore things both future
and past.

CHAP. XVIII. PAST AND FUTURE TIMES CANNOT

BE THOUGHT OF BUT AS PRESENT.

23. Suffer me, O Lord, to seek further ; O
my Hope, let not my purpose be confounded.
For if there are times past and future, I desire
to know where they are. But if as yet I do not
succeed, I still know, wherever they are, that
they are not there as future or past, but as pre-
sent. For if there also they be future, they are
not as yet there; if even there they be past,
they are no longer there. Wheresoever, there-
fore, they are, whatsoever they are, they are
only so as present. Although past things are
related as true, they are drawn out from the
memory, — not the things themselves, which
have passed, but the words conceived from the
images of the things' which they have formed in
the mind as footprints in their passage through
the senses. My childhood, indeed, which
no longer is, is in time past, which now is
not ; but when I call to mind its image, and
speak of it, I behold it in the present, be-
cause it is as yet in my memory. Whether
there be a like cause of foretelling future things,
that of things which as yet are not the images
may be perceived as already existing, I confess,
my God, I know not. This certainly I know,
that we generally think before on our future
actions, and that this premeditation is present ;
but that the action whereon we premeditate is
not yet, because it is future ; which when we
shall have entered upon, and have begun to do
that which we were premeditating, then shall
that action be, because then it is not future, but
present.

24. In whatever manner, therefore, this secret
preconception of future things may be, nothing
can be seen, save what is. But what now is is
not future, but present. When, therefore, they
say that things future are seen, it is not them-
selves, which as yet are not (that is, which are
future) ; but their causes or their signs perhaps
are seen, the which already are. Therefore, to
those already beholding them, they are not
future, but present, from which future things
conceived in the mind are foretold. Which
conceptions again now are, and they who fore-
tell those things behold these conceptions pres-
ent before them. Let now so multitudinous a
variety of things afford me some example. I


170


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XI.


behold daybreak ; I foretell that the sun is about
to rise. That which I behold is present ; what
I foretell is future, — not that the sun is future,
which already is ; but his rising, which is not yet.
Yet even its rising I could not predict unless I
had an image of it in my mind, as now I have
while I speak. But that dawn which I see in
the sky is not the rising of the sun, although it
may go before it, nor that imagination in my
mind ; which two are seen as present, that the
other which is future may be foretold. Future
things, therefore, are not as yet ; and if they
are not as yet, they are not. And if they are
not, they cannot be seen at all ; but they can
be foretold from things present which now are,
and are seen.

CHAP. XIX. — ^WE ARE IGNORANT IN WHAT MAN-
NER GOD TEACHES FUTURE THINGS.

25. Thou, therefore, Ruler of Thy creatures,
what is the method by which Thou teachest souls
those things which are future ? For Thou hast
taught Thy prophets. What is that way by
which Thou, to whom nothing is future, dost
teach future things ; or rather of future things
dost teach present ? For what is not, of a cer-
tainty cannot be taught. Too far is this way
from my view ; it is too mighty for me, I cannot
attain unto it ; ^ but by Thee I shall be enabled,
when Thou shalt have granted it, sweet light of
my hidden eyes.

CHAP. XX. IN WHAT MANNER TIME MAY PROP-
ERLY BE DESIGNATED.

26. But what now is manifest and clear is,
that neither are there future nor past things.
Nor is it fitly said, " There are three times, past,
present and future; " but perchance it might be
fitly said, " There are three times; a present of
things past, a present of things present, and a
present of things future." For these three do
somehow exist in the soul, and otherwise I see
them not : present of things past, memory ;
present of things present, sight ; present of
things future, expectation. If of these things
we are permitted to speak, I see three times, and
I grant there are three. It may also be said,
"There are three times, past, present and
future," as usage falsely has it. See, I trouble
not, nor gainsay, nor reprove ; provided always
that which is said may be understood, that
neither the future, nor that which is past, now is.
For there are but few things which we speak
properly, many things improperly ; but what we
may wish to say is understood.

CHAP. XXI. — HOW TIME MAY BE MEASURED.

27. I have just now said, then, that we
measure times as they pass, that we may be able

1 Ps. cxxxix. 6.


to say that this time is twice as much as that
one, or that this is only as much as that, and so
of any other of the parts of time which we are
able to tell by measuring. Wherefore, as I said,
we measure times as they pass. And if any one
should ask me, "Whence dost thou know?"
I can answer, "I know, because we measure;
nor can we measure things that are not ; and
things past and future are not." But how do
we measure present time, since it hath not space ?
It is measured while it passeth ; but when it
shall have passed, it is not measured ; for there
will not be aught that can be measured. But
whence, in what way, and whither doth it pass
while it is being measured ? Whence, but from
the future ? Which way, save through the pres-
ent ? Whither, but into the past ? From that,
therefore, which as yet is not, through that which
hath no space, into that which now is not. But
what do we measure, unless time in some space ?
For we say not single, and double, and triple,
and equal, or in any other way in which we
speak of time, unless with respect to the spaces
of times. In what space, then, do we measure
passing time ? Is it in the future, whence it
passeth over ? But what yet we measure not, is
not. Or is it in the present, by which it passeth ?
But no space, we do not measure. Or in the
past, whither it passeth ? But that which is not
now, we measure not.

CHAP. XXII. HE PRAYS GOD THAT HE WOULD

EXPLAIN THIS MOST ENTANGLED ENIGMA.

28. My soul yearns to know this most entan-
gled enigma. Forbear to shut up, O Lord my
God, good Father, — through Christ I beseech
Thee, — forbear to shut up these things, both
usual and hidden, from my desire, that it may
be hindered from penetrating them ; but let
them dawn through Thy enlightening mercy, O
Lord. Of whom shall I inquire concerning
these things ? And to whom shall I with more
advantage confess my ignorance than to Thee,
to whom these my studies, so vehemently kindled
towards Thy Scriptures, are not troublesome?
Give that which I love ; for I do love, and this
hast Thou given me. Give, Father, who truly
knowest to give good gifts unto Thy children.^
Give, since I have undertaken to know, and
trouble is before me until Thou dost open it.'
Through Christ, I beseech Thee, in His name,
Holy of Holies, let no man interrupt me. For
I believed, and therefore do I speak.* This is
my hope ; for this do I live, that I may contem-
plate the delights of the Lord.* Behold, Thou
hast made my days old,® and they pass away, and


* Matt. vii. II.
s Ps. Ixxiii. 16.

* Ps. cxvi. 10.
6 Ps. .\xvii. 4.
' Ps. xxxix. 5.


ir.


Chap. XXIV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


171


in what manner I know not. And we speak as
to time and time, times and times, — " How long
is the time since he said this ? " " How long the
time since he did this?" and, "How long
the time since I saw that?" and, "This sylla-
ble hath double the time of that single short
syllable." These words we speak, and these we
hear ; and we are understood, and we under-
stand. They are most manifest and most usual,
and the same things again lie hid too deeply,
and the discovery of them is new.

CHAP. XXIII. — THAT TIME IS A CERTAIN EXTEN-
SION.

29. I have heard from a learned man that the
motions of the sun, moon, and stars constituted
time, and I assented not.^ For why should not
rather the motions of all bodies be time ? What
if the lights of heaven should cease, and a
potter's wheel run round, would there be no
time by which we might measure those revolu-
tions, and say either that it turned with equal
pauses, or, if it were moved at one time more
slowly, at another more quickly, that some rev-
olutions were longer, others less so ? Or while we
were saying this, should we not also be speaking
in time ? Or should there in our words be some
syllables long, others short, but because those
sounded in a longer time, these in a shorter ?
God grant to men to see in a small thing ideas
common to things great and small. Both the
stars and luminaries of heaven are "for signs
and for seasons, and for days and years. ' ' ^ No
doubt they are ; but neither should I say that
the circuit of that wooden wheel was a day, nor
yet should he say that therefore there was no
time.

30. I desire to know the power and nature
of time, by which we measure the motions of
bodies, and say (for example) that this motion
is twice as long as that. For, I ask, since
"day" declares not the stay only of the sun
upon the earth, according to which day is one
thing, night another, but also its entire circuit
from east even to east, — according to which we
say, " So many days have passed " (the nights
being included when we say "so many days,"
and their spaces not counted apart), — since,
then, the day is finished by the motion of the


1 Compare Gillies {Analysis of Aristotle, c. 2, p. 138) : " As our
conception of space originates in that of body, and our conception
of motion in that of space, so our conception of time originates in
that of motion; and particularly in those regular and equable
motions carried on in the heavens, the parts of which, from their
perfect similarity to each other, are correct measures of the contin-
uous and successive quantity called Time, with which they are
conceived to co-exist. Time, therefore, may be defined the per-
ceived number of successive movements ; for, as number ascertains
the greater or lesser quantity of things numbered, so time ascertains
I the greater or lesser quantity of motion performed." And with this
laccords Monboddo's definition of time (Ancient Metaphysics, vol.
li. book 4, chap, i.), as " the measure of the duration of things that
lexist in succession by the motion of the heavenly bodies." See xii.
'ec. 40, and note, below.
* Gen. i. 14.


sun, and by his circuit from east to east, I ask,
whether the motion itself is the day, or the
period in which that motion is completed,
or both? For if the first be the day, then
would there be a day although the sun should
finish that course in so small a space of time as
an hour. If the second, then that would not
be a day if from one sunrise to another there
were but so short a period as an hour, but the
sun must go round four-and-twenty times to
complete a day. If both, neither could that be
called a day if the sun should run his entire
round in the space of an hour ; nor that, if,
while the sun stood still, so much time should
pass as the sun is accustomed to accomplish his
whole course in from morning to morning. I
shall not therefore now ask, what that is which
is called day, but what time is, by which we,
measuring the circuit of the sun, should say that
it was accomplished in half the space of time it
was wont, if it had been completed in so small
a space as twelve hours ; and comparing both
times, we should call that single, this double
time, although the sun should run his course
from east to east sometimes in that single,
sometimes in that double time. Let no man
then tell me that the motions of the heavenly
bodies are times, because, when at the prayer
of one the sun stood still in order that he might
achieve his victorious battle, the sun stood still,
but time went on. For in such space of time
as was sufficient was that battle fought and
ended.* I see that time, then, is a certain ex-
tension. But do I see it, or do I seem to see it ?
Thou, O Light and Truth, wilt show me.

CHAP. XXIV. THAT TIME IS NOT A MOTION OF A

BODY WHICH WE MEASURE BY TIME.

3 1 . Dost Thou command that I should assent,
if any one should say that time is " the motion
of a body?" Thou dost not command me.
For I hear that no body is moved but in time.
This Thou sayest ; but that the very motion of
a body is time, I hear not ; Thou sayest it not.
For when a body is moved, I by time measure
how long it may be moving from the time in
which it began to be moved till it left off. And
if I saw not whence it began, and it continued
to be moved, so that I see not when it leaves
off, I cannot measure unless, perchance, from
the time I began imtil I cease to see. But if I
look long, I only proclaim that the time is long,
but not how long it may be ; because when we
say, " How long," we speak by comparison, as,
" This is as long as that," or, " This is double
as long as that," or any other thing of the kind.
But if we were able to note down the distances
of places whence and whither cometh the body


' Josh. X. 12-14.


172


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XI.


which is moved, or its parts, if it moved as in a
wheel, we can say in how much time the motion
of the body or its part, from this place unto
that, was performed. Since, then, the motion
of a body is one thing, that by which we meas-
ure how long it is another, who cannot see
which of these is rather to be called time?
For, although a body be sometimes moved,
sometimes stand still, we measure not its motion
only, but also its standing still, by time ; and
we say, " It stood still as much as it moved ; "
or, " It stood still twice or thrice as long as it
moved;" and if any other space which our
measuring hath either determined or imagined,
more or less, as we are accustomed to say.
Time, therefore, is not the motion of a body.

CHAP. XXV. HE CALLS ON GOD TO ENLIGHTEN

HIS MIND.

32. And I confess unto Thee, O Lord, that
I am as yet ignorant as to what time is, and
again I confess unto Thee, O Lord, that I know
that I speak these things in time, and that I
have already long spoken of time, and that very
" long " is not long save by the stay of time.
How, then, know I this, when I know not what
time is ? Or is it, perchance, that I know not
in what wise I may express what I know ? Alas
for me, that I do not at least know the extent
of my own ignorance ! Behold, O my God,
before Thee I lie not. As I speak, so is my
heart. Thou shalt light my candle ; Thou, O
Lord my God, wilt enlighten my darkness.^

CHAP. XXVI. WE MEASURE LONGER EVENTS BY

SHORTER IN TIME.

33. Doth not my soul pour out unto Thee
truly in confession that I do measure times?
But do I thus measure, O my God, and know
not what I measure ? I measure the motion of
a body by time ; and the time itself do I not
measure? But, in truth, could I measure the
motion of a body, how long it is, and how long
it is in coming from this place to that, unless I
should measure the time in which it is moved ?
How, therefore, do I measure this very time it-
self? Or do we by a shorter time measure a
longer, as by the space of a cubit the space of a
crossbeam ? For thus, indeed, we seem by the
space of a short syllable to measure the space
of a long syllable, and to say that this is double.
Thus we measure the spaces of stanzas by the
spaces of the verses, and the spaces of the verses
by the spaces of the feet, and the spaces of the
feet by the spaces of the syllables, and the spaces
of long by the spaces of short syllables ; not
measuring by pages (for in that manner we

1 Ps. xviii. 28.


measure spaces, not times), but when in utter-
ing the words they pass by, and we say, "It is
a long stanza because it is made up of so many
verses ; long verses, because they consist of so
many feet; long feet, because they are pro-
longed by so many syllables ; a long syllable,
because double a short one." But neither thus
is any certain measure of time obtained ; since
it is possible that a shorter verse, if it be pro-
nounced more fully, may take up more time
than a longer one, if pronounced more hur-
riedly. Thus for a stanzas, thus for a foot, thus
for a syllable. Whence it appeared to me that
time is nothing else than protraction ; but of
what I know not. It is wonderful to me, if it
be not of the mind itself. For what do I meas-
ure, I beseech Thee, O my God, even when I
say either indefinitely, ''This time is longer
than that ; " or even definitely, " This is double
that?" That I measure time, I know. But
I measure not the future, for it is not yet ; nor
do I measure the present, because it is extended
by no space ; nor do I measure the past, be-
cause it no longer is. What, therefore, do I
measure ? Is it times passing, not past ? For
thus had I said.

CHAP. XXVII. — TIMES ARE MEASURED IN PROPOR-
TION AS THEY PASS BY.

34. Persevere, O my mind, and give earnest
heed. God is our helper ; He made us, and
not we ourselves. '^ Give heed, where truth
dawns. Lo, suppose the voice of a body begins
to sound, and does sound, and sounds on, and
lo ! it ceases, — it is now silence, and that voice
is past and is no longer a voice. It was future
before it sounded, and could not be measured,
because as yet it was not ; and now it cannot,
because it longer is. Then, therefore, while it
was sounding, it might, because there was then
that which might be measured. But even then
it did not stand still, for it was going and pass-
ing away. Could it, then, on that account be
measured the more ? For, while passing, it was
being extended into some space of time, in
which it might be measured, since the present
hath no space. If, therefore, then it might be
measured, lo ! suppose another voice hath begun
to sound, and still soundeth, in a continued
tenor without any interruption, we can measure
it while it is sounding ; for when it shall have
ceased to sound, it will be already past, and
there will not be that which can be measured.
Let us measure it truly, and let us say how
much it is. But as yet it sounds, nor can it be
measured, save from that instant in which it
began to sound, even to the end in which it
left off. For the interval itself we measure from


s Ps. c. 3.


it


Chap. XXVIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


^n


some beginning unto some end. On which
account, a voice which is not yet ended cannot
be measured, so tliat it may be said how long
or how short it may be ; nor can it be said to
be equal to another, or single or double in re-
spect of it, or the like. But when it is ended,
it no longer is. In what manner, therefore,
may it be measured ? And yet we measure
times ; still not those which as yet are not, nor
those which no longer are, nor those which are
protracted by some delay, nor those which have
no limits. We, therefore, measure neither
future times, nor past, nor present, nor those
passing by ; and yet we do measure times.

35. Deus Creator 07nmum ; this verse of eight
syllables alternates between short and long sylla-
bles. The four short, then, the first, third, fifth
and seventh, are single in respect of the four long,
the second, fourth, sixth, and eighth. Each of
these hath a double time to every one of those.
I pronounce them, report on them, and thus it is,
as is perceived by common sense. By common
sense, then, I measure a long by a short syllable,
and I find that it has twice as much. But when
one sounds after another, if the former be short
the latter long, how shall I hold the short one,
and how measuring shall I apply it to the long,
so that I may find out that this has twice as
much, when indeed the long does not begin to
sound unless the short leaves off sounding?
That very long one I measure not as present,
since I measure it not save when ended. But
its ending is its passing away. What, then, is
it that I can measure ? Where is the short syl-
lable by which I measure? Where is the
long one which I measure ? Both have sounded,
have flown, have passed away, and are no
longer ; and still I measure, and I confidently
answer (so far as is trusted to a practised sense),
that as to space of time this syllable is single,
that double. Nor could I do this, unless be-
cause they have past, and are ended. There-
fore do I not measure themselves, which now
are not, but something in my memory, which
remains fixed.

36. In the'e, O my mind, I measure times. ^ Do
not overwhelm me with thy clamour. That is,
do not overwhelm thyself with the multitude of

1 With the argument in this and the previous sections, compare
Dr. Reid's remarks in his Intellectical Powers, iii. 5 : " We may
measure duration by the succession of thoughts in the mind, as we
measure length by inches or feet, but the notion or idea of duration
must be antecedent to the mensuration of it, as the notion of length
is antecedent to its being measured. . . . Reason, from the contem-
plation of finite extended things, leads us necessarily to the belief
of an imtnensity that contains them. In like manner, memory gives
I us the conception and belief of finite intervals of duration. From
the contemplation of these, reason leads us necessarily to the belief
of an eternity, which comprehends all things that have a beginning
and an end." The student will with advantage examine a mono-
I graph on this subject by C. Fortlage, entitled, Aurelii Augustini
\doctrina de tempore ex libro xi. Con/essionum deprotnta, Aristo-
\telic(E, Kantiante, aliaruviqiie theoriarium recensione aticta, et
Vcofigruis hodierncB philosophiiE ideis ampli/icata (Heidelbergae,
I1836). He says that amongst all the philosophers none have so
[nearly approached truth as Augustin.


thy impressions. In thee, I say, I measure
times; the impression which things as they
pass by make on Thee, and which, when they
have passed by, remains, that I measure as time
present, not those things which have passed by,
that the impression should be made. This I
measure when I measure times. Either, then,
these are times, or I do not measure times.
What when we measure silence, and say that
this silence hath lasted as long as that voice
lasts? Do we not extend our thought to the
measure of a voice, as if it sounded, so that we
may be able to declare something concerning
the intervals of silence in a given space of time?
For when both the voice and tongue are still,
we go over in thought poems and verses, and
any discourse, or dimensions of motions ; and
declare concerning the spaces of times, how
much this may be in respect of that, not other-
wise than if uttering them we should pronounce
them. Should any one wish to utter a length-
ened sound, and had with forethought deter-
mined how long it should be, that man hath in
silence verily gone through a space of time,
and, committing it to memory, he begins to utter
that speech, which sounds until it be extended
to the end proposed ; truly it liath sounded, and
will sound. For what of it is already finished
hath verily sounded, but what remains will
sound ; and thus does it pass on, until the pre-
sent intention carry over the future into the
past ; the past increasing by the diminution of
the future, until, by the consumption of the
future, all be past.

CHAP. XXVni. TIME IN THE HUMAN MIND,

WHICH EXPECTS, CONSIDERS, AND REMEMBERS.

37. But how is that future diminished or
consumed which as yet is not ? Or how doth
the past, which is no longer, increase, unless in
the mind which enacteth this there are three
things done? For it both expects, and con-
siders, and remembers, that that which it ex-
pecteth, through that which it considereth, may
pass into that which it remembereth. Who,
therefore, denieth that future things as yet are
not ? But yet there is already in the mind the
expectation of things future. And who denies
that past things are now no longer ? But, how-
ever, there is still in the mind the memory of
things past. And who denies that time present
wants space, because it passeth away in a mo-
ment? But yet our consideration endureth,
through which that which may be present may
proceed to become absent. Future time, which
is not, is not therefore long; but a "long
future" is "a long expectation of the future."
Nor is time past, which is now no longer, long ;
but a long past is " a long memory of the past."


174


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XI.


38. I am about to repeat a psalm that I know.
Before I begin, my attention is extended to the
whole ; but when I have begun, as much of it
as becomes past by niy saying it is extended in
my memory; and the life of this action of mine
is divided between my memory, on account of
what I have repeated, and my expectation, on
account of what I am about to repeat ; yet my
consideration is present with me, through which
that which was future may be carried over so
that it may become past. Which the more it
is done and repeated, by so much (expectation
being shortened) the memory is enlarged, until
the whole expectation be exhausted, when that
whole action being ended shall have passed into
memory. And what takes place in the entire
psalm, takes place also in each individual part
of it, and in each individual syllable : this holds
in the longer action, of which that psalm is per-
chance a portion ; the same holds in the whole
life of man, of which all the actions of man are
parts ; the same holds in the whole age of the
sons of men, of which all the lives of men are
parts.

CHAP. XXIX. THAT HUMAN LIFE IS A DISTRAC-
TION, BUT THAT THROUGH THE MERCY OF GOD
HE WAS INTENT ON THE PRIZE OF HIS HEAV-
ENLY CALLING.

39. But "because Thy loving-kindness is
better than life,"^ behold, my life is but a dis-
traction,^ and Thy right hand upheld me^ in
my Lord, the Son of man, the Mediator be-
tween Thee,* The One, and us the many, — in
many distractions amid many things, — that
through Him I may apprehend in whom I have
been apprehended, and may be re-collected
from my old days, following The One, forget-
ting the things that are past ; and not dis-
tracted, but drawn on,* not to those things
which shall be and shall pass away, but to those
things which are before,* not distractedly, but
intently, I follow on for the prize of my heav-
enly calling,' where I may hear the voice of


1 Ps. Ixiii. 3.

s Distcntio. It will be observed that there is a play on the word
throughout the section.

s Ps. Ixiii. 8.

* I Tim. ii. 5.

5 Non distentus sed extentus. So in Serin, cclv. 6, we have :
" Unum nos e.vtendat, ne multa disiendant, et abrumpant ab uno."

' Phil iii. 13.

' Phil. iii. 14. Many wish to attain the prize who never earn-
estly pursue it. And it may be said here in view of the subject of
this book, that there is no ."itranger delusion than that which pos-
sesses the idle and the worldly as to the influence of time in amelio-
rating their condition. They have "good intentions," and hope
that time in the future may do for them what it has not in the
past. But in truth, time merely affords an opportunity for energy
and life to work. To quote that lucid and nervous thinker, Bishop
Copleston {Remains, p. 123) : " One of the commonest errors is to
regard time as an agent. But in reality time does nothing, and is
nothing. We use it as a compendious expression for all those
causes which operate slowly and imperceptibly ; but, unless some
positive cause is in action, no change takes place in the lapse of one
thousand years; e. .f., a drop of water encased in a cavity of
silex."


Thy praise, and contemplate Thy delights,®
neither coming nor passing away. But now
are my years spent in mourning.' And Thou,
O Lord, art my comfort, my Father everlasting.
But I have been divided amid times, the order
of which I know not ; and my thoughts, even
the inmost bowels of my soul, are mangled
with tumultuous varieties, until I flow together
unto Thee, purged and molten in the fire of
Thy love.^o

CHAP. XXX, AGAIN HE REFUTES THE EMPTY

QUESTION, "WHAT DID GOD BEFORE THE
CREATION OF THE WORLD ? ' '

40. And I will be immoveable, and fixed in
Thee, in my mould, Thy truth ; nor will I
endure the questions of men, who by a penal
disease thirst for more than they can hold, and
say, ' ' What did God make before He made
heaven and earth ? ' ' Or, ' ' How came it into
His mind to make anything, when He never
before made anything?" Grant to them, O
Lord, to think well what they say, and to see
that where there is no time, they cannot say
"never." What, therefore. He is said "never
to have made," what else is it but to say, that
in no time was it made ? Let them therefore
see that there could be no time without a created
being, " and let them cease to speak that vanity.
Let them also be extended unto those things
which are before,'" and understand that thou,
the eternal Creator of all times, art before all
times, and that no times are co-eternal with
Thee, nor any creature, even if there be any
creature beyond all times.

CHAP. XXXI. — HOW THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD
DIFFERS FROM THAT OF MAN.

41. O Lord my God, what is that secret place
of Thy mystery, and how far thence have the
consequences of my transgressions cast me?
Heal my eyes, that I may enjoy Thy light.
Surely, if there be a mind, so greatly abounding
in knowledge and foreknowledge, to which all
things past and future are so known as one
psalm is well known to me, that mind is exceed-
ingly wonderful, and very astonishing ; because
whatever is so past, and whatever is to come of
after ages, is no more concealed from Him than
was it hidden from me when singing that psalm,
what and how much of it had been sung from
the beginning, what and how much remained
unto the end. But far be it that Thou, the
Creator of the universe, the Creator of souls and


8 Ps. xxvi. 7.
8 Ps. xxvii. 4.

10 Ps. xxxi. 10.

11 He argues similarly in his De Civ. Dei, xi. 6 : " That the
world and time had both one beginning. "

VJ Phil. iii. 13.


Chap. XXXI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


175


bodies, — far be it that Thou shouldest know all
things future and past. Far, far more wonder-
fully, and far more mysteriously, Thou knowest
them.^ For it is not as the feelings of one sing-
ing known things, or hearing a known song, are
— through expectation of future words, and in
remembrance of those that are past — varied, and


1 Dean Mansel's argument, in his Bampton Lectures, as to our
knowledge of the Infinite, is well worthy of consideration. He
refers to Augustin's views on the subject of this book in note 13 to
his third lecture, and in the text itself says : " The limited character
of all existence which can be conceived as having a continuous
duration, or as made up of successive moments, is so far manifest,
that it has been assumed almost as an axiom, by philosophical
theologians, that in the existence of God there is no distinction be-
tween past, present, and future. ' In the changes of things,' says
Augustin, ' there is a past and a future ; in God there is a present,
in which neither past nor future can be.' ' Eternity,' says Beethius,
' is the perfect possession of interminable life, and of all that life at
once ; ' and Aquinas, accepting the definition, adds, ' Eternity has no
succession, but exists all together.' But whether this assertion be
literally true or not (and this we have no means of ascertaining), it is
clear that such a mode of existence is altogether inconceivable by
us, and that the words in which it is described represent not thought,
but the refusal to think at all. " See notes to xiii. 12, below.


his senses divided, that anything happeneth
unto Thee, unchangeably eternal, that is, the
truly eternal^ Creator of minds. As, then,
Thou in the Beginning knewest the heaven and
the earth without any change of Thy knowledge,
so in the Beginning didst Thou make heaven
and earth without any distraction of Thy action.'
Let him who understandeth confess unto Thee ;
and let him who understandeth not, confess unto
Thee. Oh, how exalted art Thou, and yet the
humble in heart are Thy dwelling-place ; for
Thou raisest up those that are bowed down,* and
they whose exaltation Thou art fall not.

2 " With God, indeed, all things are arranged and fixed ; and
when He seemeth to act upon sudden motive. He doth nothing but
what He foreknew that He should do from eternity " (Aug. in Ps.
cvi. 35). With this passage may well be compared Dean Mansel's
remarks (Bampton Lectures, lect. vi., and notes 23-25) on the
doctrine, that the world is but a machine and is not under the con-
tinual government and direction of God. See also note 4, on p. 80
and note 2 on p. 136, above.

''See p. 166, note 2.

* Ps. cxlvi. 8.


I


BOOK XII.


HE CONTINUES HIS EXPLANATION OF THE FIRST CHAPTER OF GENESIS ACCORDING TO THE SEPTUAGINT,
AND BY ITS ASSISTANCE HE ARGUES, ESPECIALLY, CONCERNING THE DOUBLE HEAVEN, AND THE
FORMLESS MATTER OUT OF WHICH THE WHOLE WORLD MAY HAVE BEEN CREATED ; AFTERWARDS
OF THE INTERPRETATIONS OF OTHERS NOT DISALLOWED, AND SETS FORTH AT GREAT LENGTH THE
SENSE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE.


CHAP. I . THE DISCOVERY OF TRUTH IS DIFFICULT,

BUT GOD HAS PROMISED THAT HE WHO SEEKS
SHALL FIND.

1. My heart, O Lord, affected by the words
of Thy Holy Scripture, is much busied in this
poverty of my hfe ; and therefore, for the most
part, is the want of human intelhgence copious
in language, because inquiry speaks more than
discovery, and because demanding is longer
than obtaining, and the hand that knocks is
more active than the hand that receives. We
hold the promise ; who shall break it ? "If God
be for us, who can be against us ? " ^ " Ask, and
ye shall have ; seek, and ye shall find ; knock,
and it shall be opened unto you : for every one
that asketh receiveth ; and he that seeketh
findeth ; and to him that knocketh it shall be
opened.'"' These are Thine own proinises ;
and who need fear to be deceived where the
Truth promiseth ?

CHAP. II. OF THE DOUBLE HEAVEN, — THE VISI-
BLE, AND THE HEAVEN OF HEAVENS.

2. The weakness of my tongue confesseth
unto Thy Highness, seeing that Thou madest
heaven and earth. This heaven which I see,
and this earth upon which I tread (from which
is this earth that I carry about me), Thou hast
made. But where is that heaven of heavens,"
O Lord, of which we hear in the words of the
Psalm, The heaven of heavens are the Lord's,
but the earth hath He given to the children of
men ?* Where is the heaven, which we behold
not, in comparison of which all this, which we
behold, is earth ? For this corporeal whole, not
as a whole everywhere, hath thus received its

1 Rom. viii. 31.

'■' Matt. vii. 7, 8.

* That is, not the atmosphere which surrounds the earth, as when
we say, " the birds of heaven " (Jer. iv. 25), " the dew of heaven "
(Gen. -x.xvii. 28) ; nor that " firmament of heaven" (Gen. i. 17) in
which the stars have their courses; nor both these together; but
that " third heaven " to which Paul was " caught up " (2 Cor. xii.
i) in his rapture, and where God most manifests His glory, and the
angels do Him homage

< Ps. cxv. 16, after the LXX., Vulgate, and Syriac.

176


beautiful figure in these lower parts, of which
the bottom is our earth ; but compared with that
heaven of heavens, even the heaven of our earth
is but earth ; yea, each of these great bodies is
not absurdly called earth, as compared with that,
I know not what manner of heaven, which is the
Lord's, not the sons' ofmen.

CHAP. III. OF THE DARKNESS UPON THE DEEP,

AND OF THE INVISIBLE AND FORMLESS EARTH.

3. And truly this earth was invisible and
formless,* and there was I know not what pro-
fundity of the deep upon which there was no
light,® because it had no form. Therefore didst
Thou command that it should be written, that
darkness was upon the face of the deep ; what
else was it than the absence of light ? ' For had
there been light, where should it have been save
by being above all, showing itself aloft, and
enlightening ? Where, therefore, light was as
yet not, why was it that darkness was present,
unless because light was absent ? Darkness
therefore was upon it, because the light above
was absent ; as silence is there present where
sound is not. And what is it to have silence
there, but not to have sound there ? Hast not
Thou, O Lord, taught this soul which confesseth
unto Thee ? Hast not Thou taught me, O Lord,
that before Thou didst form and separate this
formless matter, there was nothing, neither
colour, nor figure, nor body, nor spirit ? Yet
not altogether nothing; there was a certain
formlessness without any shape.

CHAP. IV. FROM THE FORMLESSNESS OF MATTER,

THE BEAUTIFUL WORLD HAS ARISEN.

4. What, then, should it be called, that even
in some ways it might be conveyed to those of|


6 Gen. i. 2, as rendered by the Oid Ver. from the LXX. : aopa^l
TO? Kai aKaTacr/ceuao-Tos. Kalisch in his Commentary translates

^nil inn: " dreariness and emptiness."

8 The reader should keep in mind in reading what follows the
Manichsean doctrine as to the kingdom of light and darkness. See
notes, pp. 68 and 103, above.

' Compare De Civ. Dei, xi. 9, 10.


Chap. VII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


177


duller mind, save by some conventional word ?
But what, in all parts of the world, can be found
nearer to a total formlessness than the earth and
the deep? For, from their being of the lowest
position, they are less beautiful than are the
other higher parts, all transparent and shining.
Why, therefore, may I not consider the form-
lessness of matter — which Thou hadst created
without shape, whereof to make this shapely
world — to be fittingly intimated unto men by
the name of earth invisible and formless ?

CHAP. V. WHAT JMAY HAVE BEEN THE FORM OF

MATTER.

5. So that when herein thought seeketh what
the sense may arrive at, and saith to itself, " It
is no intelligible form, such as life or justice,
because it is the matter of bodies ; nor percepti-
ble by the senses, because in the invisible and
formless there' is nothing which can be seen and
felt ; — while human thought saith these things to
itself, it may endeavour either to know it by be-
ing ignorant, or by knowing it to be ignorant.

CHAP. VI. — HE CONFESSES THAT AT ONE TIME HE
HIMSELF THOUGHT ERRONEOUSLY OF MATTER.

6. But were I, O Lord, by my mouth and by
my pen to confess unto Thee the whole, what-
ever Thou hast taught me concerning that
matter, the name of which hearing beforehand,
and not understanding (they who could not
understand it telling me of it), I conceived* it
as having innumerable and varied forms. And
therefore did I not conceive it ; my mind re-
Ivolved in disturbed order foul and horrible
r* forms," but yet "forms;" and I called it
[formless, not that it lacked form, but because it
jhad such as, did it appear, my mind would turn
|from, as unwonted and incongruous, and at

irhich human weakness would be disturbed. But
2ven that which I did conceive was formless, not
)y the privation of all form, but in comparison
)f more beautiful forms ; and true reason per-
buaded me that I ought altogether to remove
From it all remnants of any form whatever, if I
ashed to conceive matter wholly without form ;
id I could not. For sooner could I imagine
|hat that which should be deprived of all form
iras not at all, than conceive anything be-
reen form and nothing, — neither formed, nor
lothing, formless, nearly nothing. And my
lind hence ceased to question my spirit, filled
it was) with the images of formed bodies,
jild changing and varying them according to its
ill ; and I applied myself to the bodies them-
blves, and looked more deeply into their mutabil-
|y, by which they cease to be what they had
ten, and begin to be what they were not ; and

■ See iii. sec. 11, and p. 103, note, above.


this same transit from form unto form I have
looked upon to be through some formless con-
dition, not through a very nothing ; but I
desired to know, not to guess. And if my
voice and my pen should confess the whole unto
Thee, whatsoever knots Thou hast untied for me
concerning this question, who of my readers
would endure to take in the whole ? Nor yet,
therefore, shall my heart cease to give Thee
honour, and a song of praise, for those things
which it is not able to express. For the mutabil-
ity of mutable things is itself capable of all
those forms into which mutable things are
changed. And this mutability, what is it ? Is
it soul ? Is it body ? Is it the outer appearance
of soul or body? Could it be said, " Nothing
were something," and " That which is, is not,"
I would say that this were it ; and yet in some
manner was it already, since it could receive
these visible and compound shapes.

CHAP. VII. OUT OF NOTHING GOD MADE HEAVEN

AND EARTH.

7. And whence and in what manner was this,
unless from Thee, from whom are all things, in
so far as they are? But by how much the
farther from Thee, so much the more unlike
unto Thee ; for it is not distance of place.
Thou, therefore, O Lord, who art not one thing
in one place, and otherwise in another, but the
Self-same, and the Self-same, and the Self-same,*
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, didst
in the beginning,^ which is of Thee, in Thy
Wisdom, which was born of Thy Substance,
create something, and that out of nothing.*
For Thou didst create heaven and earth, not
out of Thyself, for then they would be equal
to Thine Only-begotten, and thereby even to
Thee ; * and in no wise would it be right that
anything should be equal to Thee which was not
of Thee. And aught else except Thee there was
not whence Thou mightest create these things,
O God, One Trinity, and Trine Unity; and,
therefore, out of nothing didst Thou create
heaven and earth, — a great thing and a small, —
because Thou art Almighty and Good, to make
all things good, even the great heaven and the
small earth. Thou wast, and there was nought
else from which Thou didst create heaven and
earth ; two such things, one near unto Thee,
the other near to nothing,* — one to which
Thou shouldest be superior, the other to whicji
nothing should be inferior.


2 See ix. sec. 11 , above.

3 See p. 166, note, above.

* See p. 165, note 2, above.

6 In the beginning of sec. 10, book xi. of his Z)e Civ. Dei, he
similarly argues that the world was, not like the Son, " begotten of
the simple good," but " created." See also note 8, p. 76, above.

* " Because at the first creation, it had no form nor thing in it." —
W. W.


178


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XII.


chap. viii. heaven and earth were made

"in the beginning;" afterwards the
world, during six days, from shapeless
matter.

8. But that heaven of heavens was for Thee,
O Lord ; but the earth, which Thou hast given
to the sons of men,^ to be seen and touched,
was not such as now we see and touch. For it
was invisible and " without form," ^ and there
was a deep over which there was not hght ; or,
darkness was over the deep, that is, more than
in the deep. For this deep of waters, now
visible, has, even in its depths, a light suitable
to its nature, perceptible in some manner unto
fishes and creeping things in the bottom of it.
But the entire deep was almost nothing, since
hitherto it was altogether formless ; yet there
was then that which could be formed. For
Thou, O Lord, hast made the world of a form-
less matter, which matter, out of nothing, Thou
hast made almost nothing, out of which to make
those great things which we, sons of men, won-
der at. For very wonderful is this corporeal
heaven, of which firmament, between water and
water, the second day after the creation of light.
Thou saidst. Let it be made, and it was made.^
Which firmament Thou calledst heaven, that is,
the hea/en of this earth and sea, which Thou
madest on the third day, by giving a visible
shape to the formless matter which Thou madest
before all days. For even already hadst Thou
made a heaven before all days, but that was the
heaven of this heaven ; because in the beginning
Thou hadst made heaven and earth. But the
earth itself which Thou hadst made was formless
matter, because it was invisible and without form,
and darkness was upon the deep. Of which in-
visible and formless earth, of which formlessness,
of which almost nothing. Thou mightest make
all these things of which this changeable world
consists, and yet consisteth not ; whose very
changeableness appears in this, that times can be
observed and numbered in it. Because times are
made by the changes of things, while the shapes,
whose matter is the invisible earth aforesaid, are
varied and turned.

CHAP. IX. that the heaven OF HEAVENS WAS

an intellectual CREATURE, BUT THAT THE
EARTH WAS INVISIBLE AND FORMLESS BEFORE
THE DAYS THAT IT WAS MADE.

9. And therefore the Spirit, the Teacher of
Thy servant,* when He relates that Thou didst
in the Beginning create heaven and earth, is
silent as to times, silent as to days. For, doubt-
less, that heaven of heavens, which Thou in the

1 Ps. cxv. 16.

2 Gen. i. 2.

3 Gen. i. 6-8.
* Of Moses.


Beginning didst create, is some intellectual
creature, which, although in no wise co-eternal
unto Thee, the Trinity, is yet a partaker of
Thy eternity, and by reason of the sweetness
of that most happy contemplation of Thyself,
doth greatly restrain its own mutability, and
without any failure, from the time in which it
was created, in clinging unto Thee, surpasses all
the rolling change of times. But this shapeless-
ness — this earth invisible and without form — has
not itself been numbered among the days. For
where there is no shape nor order, nothing either
cometh or goeth ; and where this is not, there
certainly are no days, nor any vicissitude of
spaces of times.

CHAP. X. HE BEGS OF GOD THAT HE MAY LIVE

IN THE TRUE LIGHT, AND MAY BE INSTRUCTED'
AS TO THE MYSTERIES OF THE SACRED BOOKS.

10. Oh, let Truth, the light of my heart,^ not
my own darkness, speak unto me ! I have de-
scended to that, and am darkened. But thence,
even thence, did I love Thee. I went astray, and
remembered Thee. I heard Thy voice behind
me bidding me return, and scarcely did I hear
it for the tumults of the unquiet ones. And
now, behold, I return burning and panting after
Thy fountain. Let no one prohibit me ; of
this will I drink, and so have life. Let me not
be my own life ; from myself have I badly
lived, — death was I unto myself; in Thee do I
revive. Do Thou speak unto me; do Thou
discourse unto me. Li Thy books have I be-
lieved, and their words are very deep.®


CHAP. XI.


II. Already hast Thou told me, O Lord, with
a strong voice, in my inner ear, that Thou art
eternal, having alone immortality.' Since Thou
art not changed by any shape or motion, nor is
Thy will altered by times, because no will which;
changes is immortal. This in Thy sight is clear ^
to me, and let it become more and more clear,'
I beseech Thee ; and in that manifestation let
me abide more soberly under Thy wings. Like-
wise hast Thou said to me, O Lord, with a strong
voice, in my inner ear, that Thou hast made all
natures and substances, which are not what Thou
Thyself art, and yet they are ; and that only is
not from Thee which is not, and the motion of '


6 See note 2, p. 76, above.

6 As Gregory- the Great has it. Revelation is a river broad and
deep, " In quo et agnus ambulet, et elephas natet." And these
deep things of God are to be learned only by patient searching. W(
must, says St. Chrysostom {De Free. serm. ii.), dive down into thi
sea as those who would fetch up pearls from its depths. The very,'
mysteriousness of Scripture is, doubtless, intended by God to stim.-^;
ulate us to search the Scriptures, and to strengthen our spiritual'
insight (Enar. in Ps cxlvi. 6). See also, p. 48, note 5; p. 164, noW
2, above ; and the notes on pp. 370, 371, below.

' I Tim. vi. 16.


-WHAT MAY BE DISCOVERED TO HIM I:
BY GOD.


Chap. XIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


179


the will from Thee who art, to that which in a
less degree is, because such motion is guilt and
sin;^ and that no one's sin doth either hurt
Thee, or disturb the order of Thy rule,''' either
first or last. This, in Thy sight, is clear to me,
and let it become more and more clear, I be-
seech Thee ; and in that manifestation let me
abide more soberly under Thy wings.

12. Likewise hast Thou said to me, with a
strong voice, in my inner ear, that that creature,
whose will Thou alone art, is not co-eternal unto
Thee, and which, with a most persevering
purity" drawing its support from Thee, doth, in
place and at no time, put forth its own muta-
bility ; * and Thyself being ever present with it,
unto whom with its entire affection it holds itself,
having no future to expect nor conveying into
the past what it remembereth, is varied by no
change, nor extended into any times.* O blessed
one, — if any such there be, — in clinging unto
Thy Blessedness ; blest in Thee, its everlasting
Inhabitant and its Enlightener ! Nor do I find
what the heaven of heavens, which is the Lord's,
can be better called than Thine house, which
contemplateth Thy delight without any defection
of going forth to another; a pure mind, most
peacefully one, by that stability of peace of holy
spirits,® the citizens of Thy city " in the heaven-
ly places," above these heavenly places which
lare seen '

13. Whence the soul, whose wandering has
jbeen made far away, may understand, if now she

:hirsts for Thee, if now her tears have become
•read to her, while it is daily said unto her
["Where is thy God?" * if she now seeketh of
'hee one thing, and desireth that she may dwell
|n Thy house all the days of her life.* And
'hat is her life but Thee ? And what are Thy
[ays but Thy eternity, as Thy years which fail
tot, because Thou art the same ? Hence, there-
ire, can the soul, which is able, understand
[ow far beyond all times Thou art eternal ;
'hen Thy house, which has not wandered from
phee, although it be not co-eternal with Thee,
:t by continually and unfailingly clinging unto
I'hee, suffers no vicissitude of times. This in
[hy sight is clear unto me, and may it become
Lore and more clear unto me, I beseech Thee ;
■d in this manifestation may I abide more
[berly under Thy wings.


J For Augustin's view of evil as a " privation of good," see p. 64,
Ije I, above, and with it compare vii. sec. 22, above ; Con. Secun-
It. c. 12 ; and jD^ Lib. Arb. ii. 53. Parker, in his Tlieism, Atheism,
ll. p. 119, contends that God Himself must in some way be the

Ihor of evil, and a similar view is maintained by Schleiermacher,
yfistliche Glaube, sec. 80.

ISee ii. sec. 13, and v. sec. 2, notes 4, 9, above.

I See iv. sec. 3, and note i, above.

ISee sec. 19, below.

ISee xi. sec. 38, above, and sec. 18, below.

BSee xiii. sec. 50, below.

lEph. i. 20, etc.
jPs. xlii. 2, 3, 10,

IjPs. xxvii. 4.


14. Behold, I know not what shapelessness
there is in those changes of these last and low-
est creatures. And who shall tell me, unless it
be some one who, through the emptiness of his
own heart, wanders and is staggered by his own
fancies ? AVho, unless such a one, would tell
me that (all figure being diminished and con-
sumed), if the formlessness only remain, through
which the thing was changed and was turned
from one figure into another, that that can ex-
hibit the changes of times ? For surely it could
not be, because without the change of motions
times are not, and there is no change where
there is no figure.

CHAP. Xn. FROM THE FORMLESS EARTH GOD

CREATED ANOTHER HEAVEN AND A VISIBLE
AND FORMED EARTH.

15. W^hich things considered as much as
Thou givest, O my God, as much as Thou ex-
citest me to "knock," and as much as Thou
openest unto me when I knock,^** two things I
find which Thou hast made, not within the
compass of time, since neither is co-eternal
with Thee. One, which is so formed that,
without any failing of contemplation, without
any interval of change, although changeable,
yet not changed, it may fully enjoy Thy eter-
nity and unchangeableness ; the other, which
was so formless, that it had not that by which
it could be changed from one form into an-
other, either of motion or of repose, whereby it
might be subject unto time. But this Thou
didst not leave to be formless, since before all
days, in the beginning Thou createdst heaven
and earth, — these two things of which I spoke.
But the earth was invisible and without form,
and darkness was upon the deep." By which
words its shapelessness is conveyed unto us, —
that by degrees those minds may be drawn on
which cannot wholly conceive the privation of
all form without coming to nothing, — whence
another heaven might be created, and another
earth visible and well-formed, and water beau-
tifully ordered, and whatever besides is, in the
formation of this world, recorded to have been,
not without days, created ; because such things
are so that in them the vicissitudes of times may
take place, on account of the appointed changes
of motions and of forms. ^^

CHAP. XIII. OF THE INTELLECTUAL HEAVEN AND

FORMLESS EARTH, OUT OF WHICH, ON AN-
OTHER DAY, THE FIRMAMENT WAS FORMED.

16. Meanwhile I conceive this, O my God,
when I hear Thy Scripture speak, saying. In
the beginning God made heaven and earth;


10 Matt. vii. 7.

11 Gen. i. 2.

12 See end of sec. 40, below.


i8o


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XII.


but the earth was invisible and without form,
and darkness was upon the deep, and not stat-
ing on what day Thou didst create these things.
Thus, meanwhile, do I conceive, that it is on
account of that heaven of heavens, that intel-
lectual heaven, where to understand is to know
all at once, — not "in part," not "darkly,"
not "through a glass," ^ but as a whole, in
manifestation, "face to face;" not this thing
now, that anon, but (as has been said) to know
at once without any change of times ; and on
account of the invisible and formless earth,
without any change of times ; which change is
wont to have "this thing now, that anon,"
because, where there is no form there can be no
distinction between " this " or " that ; " — it is,
then, on account of these two, — a primitively
formed, and a wholly formless; the one heaven,
but the heaven of heavens, the other earth, but
the earth invisible and formless ; — on account
of these two do I meanwhile conceive that Thy
Scripture said without mention of days, "In
the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth." For immediately it added of what
earth it spake. And when on the second day the
firmament is recorded to have been created, and
called heaven, it suggests to us of which heaven
He spake before without mention of days.

CHAP. XIV. OF THE DEPTH OF THE SACRED

SCRIPTURE, AND ITS ENEMIES.

17. Wonderful is the depth of Thy oracles,
whose surface is before us, inviting the little
ones ; and yet wonderful is the depth, O my
God, wonderful is the depth. ^ It is awe to
look into it ; and awe of honour, and a tremor
of love. The enemies thereof I hate vehem-
ently.^ Oh, if Thou wouldest slay them with
Thy two-edged sword,* that they be not its ene-
mies ! For thus do I love, that they should be
slain unto themselves that they may live unto
Thee. But behold others not reprovers, but
praisers of the book of Genesis, — "The Spirit
of God," say they, "Who by His servant
Moses wrote these things, willed not that these
words should be thus understood. He willed
not that it should be understood as Thou sayest,
but as we say." Unto whom, O God of us all,
Thyself being Judge, do I thus answer.

CHAP. XV. HE ARGUES AGAINST ADVERSARIES

CONCERNING THE HEAVEN OF HEAVENS.

18. " Will you say that these things are false,

* I Cor. xiii. 12.

» See p. 112, note 2, and p. 17S, note 2, above, See also Trench,
thilsean Lectures (1845), feet. 6, " The Inexhaustibility of Script-
ure."

* Ps. cxxxix. 21.

* Ps. cxlix. 6. He refers to the Manichaeans (see p. 71, note i).
In his comment on this place, he interprets the " two-edged sword "
to mean the Old and New Testament, called two-edged, he says,
because it speaks of things temporal and eternal.


which, with a strong voice, Truth tells me in
my inner ear, concerning the very eternity of
the Creator, that His substance is in no wise
changed by time, nor that His will is separate
from His substance? Wherefore, He willeth
not one thing now, another anon, but once and
for ever He willeth all things that He willeth ;
not again and again, nor now this, now that ;
nor willeth afterwards what He willeth not be-
fore, nor willeth not what before He willed.
Because such a will is mutable, and no mutable
thing is eternal ; but our God is eternal.^ Like-
wise He tells me, tells me in my inner ear, that
the expectation of future things is turned to
sight when they have come; and this same
sight is turned to memory when they have
passed. Moreover, all thought which is thus
varied is mutable, and nothing mutable is eter-
nal; but our God is eternal." These things I
sum up and put together, and I find that my
God, the eternal God, hath not made any crea-
ture by any new will, nor that His knowledge
sufifereth anything transitory.

19. What, therefore, will ye say, ye objectors?
Are these things false? "No," they say.
"What is this? Is it false, then, that every
nature already formed, or matter formable, is
only from Him who is supremely good, because
He is supreme ? " " Neither do we deny this,"
say they. "What then? Do you deny this,
that there is a certain sublime creature, cling-
ing with so chaste a love with the true and
truly eternal God, that although it be not co-
eternal with Him, yet it separateth itself not
from Him, nor floweth into any variety and
vicissitude of times, but resteth in the truest
contemplation of Him only ? " Since Thou, O
God, showest Thyself unto him, and sufificest
him, who loveth Thee as muce as Thou com-'
mandest, and, therefore, he declineth not from|
Thee, nor toward himself.® This is the housed
of God,' not earthly, nor of any celestial bulk:
corporeal, but a spiritual house and a partaker
of Thy eternity, because without blemish forj
ever. For Thou hast made it fast for ever and
ever ; Thou hast given it a law, which it shall
not pass.® Nor yet is it co-eternal with Thee,
O God, because not without beginning, for it
was made.

20. For although we find no time before it,
for wisdom was created before all things,' —
not certainly that Wisdom manifestly co-eternal
and equal unto Thee, our God, His Father,


6 See xi. sec. 41, above.

6 In his De Vera Relig. c. 13, he says : " We must confess that!
the angels are in their nature mutable as God is Immutable. Yetl
by that will with which they love God more than themselves, theyi
remain firm and staple in Him, and enjoy His majesty, being mostl
willingly subject to Him alone."

7 In his Con. Adv. Leg. et Proph. i. 2, he speaks of all who 1
holy, whether angels or men, as being God's dwelling-place.

8 Ps. cxlviii. 6.
• Ecclus. i. 4.


Chap. XVI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


i8i


and by Whom all things were created, and in
Whom, as the Beginning, Thou createdst
heaven and earth ; but truly that wisdom which
has been created, namely, the intellectual
nature,^ which, in the contemplation of light,
is light. For this, although created, is also
called wisdom. But as great as is the difference
between the Light which enlighteneth and that
which is enlightened,^ so great is the difference
between the Wisdom that createth and that
which hath been created ; as between the
Righteousness which justifieth, and the right-
eousness which has been made by justification.
For we also are called Thy righteousness ; for
thus saith a certain servant of Thine: "That
we might be made the righteousness of God in
Him."^ Therefore, since a certain created
wisdom was created before all things, the
rational and intellectual mind of that chaste
city of Thine, our mother which is above, and
is free,* and "eternal in the heavens"* (in
what heavens, unless in those that praise Thee,
the " heaven of heavens," because this also is
the "heaven of heavens,"® which is the Lord's)
— although we find not time before it, because
that which hath been created before all things
also precedeth the creature of time, yet is the
Eternity of the Creator Himself before it, from
Whom, having been created, it took the iDegin-
ning, although not of time, — for time as yet
was not, — yet of its own very nature.

21. Hence comes it so to be of Thee, our
God, as to be manifestly another than Thou,
and not the Self-same.' Since, although we
find time not only not before it, but not in it
(it being proper ever to behold Thy face, nor is
ever turned aside from it, wherefore it happens
that it is varied by no change), yet is there in it
that mutability itself whence it would become
dark and cold, but that, clinging unto Thee
with sublime love, it shineth and gloweth from
Thee like a perpetual noon. O house, full of
light and splendour ! I have loved thy beauty,
and the place of the habitation of the glory of
my Lord, * thy builder and owner. Let my
wandering sigh after thee ; and I speak unto Him
that made thee, that He may possess me also in
thee, seeing He hath made me likewise. " I
have gone astray, like a lost sheep ; " '' yet upon


1 " Pet. Lombard, lib. sent. 2, dist. 2, affirms that by Wisdom,
Ecclus. i. 4, the angels be understood, the whole spiritual intellect-
lual nature; namely, this highest heaven, in which the angels were
I created, and it by them instantly filled." — W. W.
I * On God as the Father of Lights, see p. 76, note 2. In addition
Ito the references there given, compare in Ev.Joh. Tract, ii. sec.
|7; *'v. sees. I, 2 ; and xxxv. sec. 3. See also p. 373, note, bebw.

* 2 Cor. V. 21.

* Gal. iv. 26.

* 2 Cor. V. I.

* Ps. cxlviii. 4.

^ Against the Manichaeans. See iv. sec. 26, and part 2 of note on
>. 76, above.

* Ps. xxvi. 8.

* Ps. cxix. 176.


the shoulders of my Sheperd,^" thy builder, I
hope that I may be brought back to thee.

22. " What say ye to me, O ye objectors
whom I was addressing, and who yet believe
that Moses was the holy servant of God, and
that his books were the oracles of the Holy
Ghost ? Is not this house of God, not indeed
co-eternal with God, yet, according to its meas-
ure, eternal in the heavens, " where in vain you
seek for changes of times, because you will not
find them ? For that surpasseth all extension,
and every revolving space of time, to which it
is ever good to cleave fast to God. " ^^ " It is, "
say they. " What, therefore, of those things
which my heart cried out unto my God, when
within it heard the voice of His praise, what
then do you contend is false ? Or is it because
the matter was formless, wherein, as there was
no form, there was no order ? But where there
was no order there could not be any change of
times; and yet this ' almost nothing,' inasmuch
as it was not altogether nothing, was verily from
Him, from Whom is whatever is, in what state
soever anything is." "This also," say they,
" we do not deny."

CHAP. XVL HE WISHES TO HAVE NO INTER-
COURSE WITH THOSE WHO DENY DIVINE TRUTH.

23. With such as grant that all these things
which Thy truth indicates to my mind are true,
I desire to confer a little before Thee, O my
God. For let those who deny these things bark
and drown their own voices with their clamour
as much as they please ; I will endeavour to
persuade them to be quiet, and to suffer Thy
word to reach them. But should they be unwill-
ing, and should they repel me, I beseech, O my
God, that Thou " be not silent to me." ^' Do
Thou speak truly in my heart, for Thou only so
speakest, and I will send them away blowing
upon the dust from without, and raising it up
into their own eyes ; and I will myself enter
into my chamber, ^* and sing there unto Thee
songs of love, — groaning with groaning unut-
terable ^° in my pilgrimage, and remembering
Jerusalem, with heart raised up towards it, ^®

1" Luke XV. 5.

11 2 Cor. v. I.

12 Ps. Ixxiii. 28.

13 Ps. xxviii. I.
1* Isa. xxvi. 20.

15 Rom. viii. 26.

16 Baxter has a noteworthy passage on our heavenly citizenship in
his Saints' Rest : " As Moses, before he died, went up into Mount
Nebo, to take a survey of the land of Canaan, so the Christian as-
cends the Mount of Contemplation, and by faith surveys his rest.

. As Daniel in his captivity daily opened his window towards
Jerusalem, though far out of sight, when he went to God in his devo-
tions, so may the believing soul, in this captivity of the flesh, look
towards ' Jerusalem which is above ' (Gal. iv. 26). And as Paul was
to the Colossians (ii. 5), so may the believer be with the glorified
spirits, 'though absent in the flesh,' yet with them ' in the spirit,'
joying and beholding their heavenly 'order." And as the lark
sweetly sings while she soars on high, but is suddenly silenced when
she falls to the earth, so is the frame of the soul most delightful and
divine while it keeps in the views of God by contemplation. Alas,
we make there too short a stay, fall down again, and lay by our
music ! " (Fawcett's Ed. p. 327).


l82


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XII.


Jerusalem my country, Jerusalem my mother, and
Thyself, the Ruler over it, the Enlightener, the
Father, the Guardian, the Husband, the chaste
and strong delight, the solid joy, and all good
things ineffable, even all at the same time, be-
cause the one supreme and true Good. And I
will not be turned away until Thou collect all
that I am, from this dispersion ^ and deformity,
into the peace of that very dear mother, where
are the first-fruits of my spirit, ^ whence these
things are assured to me, and Thou conform
and confirm it for ever, my God, my Mercy.
But with reference to those who say not that all
these things which are true and false, who hon-
our Thy Holy Scripture set forth by holy Moses,
placing it, as with us, on the summit of an au-
thority^ to be followed, and yet who contradict
us in some particulars, I thus speak : Be Thou,
O our God, judge between my confessions and
their contradictions.

CHAP. XVII. — HE MENTIONS FIVE EXPLANATIONS
OF THE WORDS OF GENESIS i. I.

24. For they say, " Although these things be
true, yet Moses regarded not those two things,
when by divine revelation he said, ' In the be-
ginning God created the heaven and the earth.' *
Under the name of heaven he did not indicate
that spiritual or intellectual creature which
always beholds the face of God ; nor under the
name of earth, that shapeless matter." " What
then ? " '' That man," say they, " meant as we
say ; this it is that he declared by those words. ' '
" What is that ? " "By the name of heaven and
earth," say they, "did he first wish to set forth,
universally and briefly, all this visible world,
that afterwards by the enumeration of the days
he might distribute, as if in detail, all those things
which it pleased the Holy Spirit thus to reveal.
For such men were that rude and carnal people
to which he spoke, that he judged it prudent
that only those works of God as were visible
should be entrusted to them. ' ' They agree,
however, that the earth invisible and formless,
and the darksome deep (out of which it is subse-
quently pointed out that all these visible things,
which are known to all, were made and set in
order during those " days "), may not unsuitably
be understood of this formless matter.

25. What, now, if another should say " That
this same formlessness and confusion of matter
was first introduced under the name of heaven
and earth, because out of it this visible world,
with all those natures which most manifestly
appear in it, and which is wont to be called by


1 See ii. sec. 1 ; ix. sec. 10 ; x. sec. 40, note ; ibid. sec. 65 ; and
xi. sec. 39, above.

2 See ix. sec. 24, above ; and xiii. sec. 13, below.
8 See p. 118, note 12, above.

* Gen. i. I.


the name of heaven and earth, was created and
perfected"? But what if another should say,
that "That invisible and visible nature is not
inaptly called heaven and earth ; and that conse-
quently the universal creation, which God in
His wisdom hath made, — that is, ' in the begin-
ing,' — was compreliended under these two
words. Yet, since all things have been made,
not of the substance of God, but out of nothing^
(because they are not that same thing that God
is, and there is in them all a certain mutability,
whether they remain, as doth the eternal house
of God, or be changed, as are the soul and body
of man), therefore, that the common matter of
all things invisible and visible, — as yet shapeless,
but still capable of form, — out of which Avas to
be created heaven and earth (that is, the invisi-
ble and visible creature already formed), was
spoken of by the same names by which the
earth invisible and formless and the darkness
upon the deep would be called ; with this dif-
ference, however, that the earth invisible and
formless is understood as corporeal matter,
before it had any manner of form, but the
darkness upon the deep as spiritual matter,
before it was restrained at all of its unlimited
fluidity, and before the enlightening of wis-
dom."

26. should any man wish, he may still say,
" That the already perfected and formed natures,
invisible and visible, are not signified under the
name of heaven and earth when it is read, ' In
the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth ; ' but that the yet same formless beginning
of things, the matter capable of being formed
and made, was called by these names, because
contained in it there were these confused things
not as yet distinguished by their qualities and
forms, the which now being digested in their
own orders, are called heaven and earth, the
former being the spiritual, the latter the cor-
poreal creature."

CHAP. XVIII. — WHAT ERROR IS HARMLESS IN
SACRED SCRIPTURE.

27. All which things having been heard and
considered, I am unwilling to contend about
words,® for that is profitable to nothing but to
the subverting of the hearers.' But the laAv is
good to edify, if a man use it lawfully ; * for the
end of it " is charity out of a pure heart, and of
a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned."'
And well did our Master know, upon which
two commandments He hung all the Law and


6 See p. 165, note 4, above.
6 See p. 164, note 2, above
' 2 Tim. ii. 14.

8 I Tim. i. 8.

9 Ibid. ver. 5.


Chap. XXI.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


m


I


the Prophets.^ And what doth it hinder me,
O my God, Thou Hght of my eyes in secret,
while ardently confessing these things, — since
by these words many things may be understood,
all of which are yet true, — what, I say, doth it
hinder me, should I think otherwise of what the
writer thought than some other man thinketh ?
Indeed, all of us who read endeavour to trace
out and to understand that which he whom we
read wished to convey ; and as we believe him
to speak truly, we dare not suppose that he has
spoken anything which we either know or sup-
pose to be false. Since, therefore, each person
endeavours to understand in the Holy Scriptures
that which the writer understood, what hurt is
it if a man understand what Thou, the light of
all true-speaking minds, dost show him to be
true although he whom he reads understood not
this, seeing that he also understood a Truth,
not, however, this Truth ?


CHAP. XIX. — HE ENUMERATES THE THINGS CON-
CERNING WHICH ALL AGREE.

28. For it is true, O Lord, that Thou hast
made heaven and earth ; it is also true, that the
Beginning is Thy Wisdom, in Which Thou hast
made all things.^ It is likewise true, that this
visible world hath its own great parts, the
heaven and the earth, which in a short compass
comprehends all made and created natures. It
is also true, that everything mutable sets before
our minds a certain want of form, whereof it
taketh a form, or is changed and turned. It is
true, that that is subject to no times which so
cleaveth to the changeless form as that, though
it be mutable, it is not changed. It is true, that
the formlessness, which is almost nothing, can-
not have changes, of times. It is true, that that
of which anything is made may by a certain
mode of speech be called by the name of that
thing which is made of it ; whence that form-
lessness of which heaven and earth were made
might it be called " heaven and earth." It is
true, that of all things having form, nothing is
nearer to the formless than the earth and the
deep. It is true, that not only every created
and formed thing, but also whatever is capable
of creation and of form, Thou hast made, " by

It is true, that every-


thing that is formed from that which is formless
was formless before it was formed.

CHAP. XX. OF THE WORDS, " IN THE BEGIN-
NING," VARIOUSLY UNDERSTOOD.

29. From all these truths, of which they
doubt not whose inner eye Thou hast granted
to see such things, and who immoveably believe
Moses, Thy servant, to have spoken in the
spirit of truth ; from all these, then, he taketh
one who saith, " In the beginning God created
the heaven and the earth," — that is, "In His
Word, co-eternal with Himself, God made the
intelligible and the sensible, or the spiritual and
corporeal creature." He taketh another, who
saith, " In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth," — that is, " In His Word,
co-eternal with Himself, God made the uni-
versal mass of this corporeal world, with all those
manifest and known natures which it contain-
eth." He, another, who saith, " In the begin-
ning God created the heaven and the earth," —
that is, " In His Word, co-eternal with Himself,
God made the formless matter of the spiritual*
and corporeal creature." He, another, who
saith, " In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth," — that is, "In His
Word, co-eternal with Himself, God made the
formless matter of the corporeal creature, where-
in heaven and earth lay as yet confused, which
being now distinguished and formed, we, at
this day, see in the mass of this world." He,
another, who saith, " In the beginning God
created heaven and earth," — that is, " In the
very beginning of creating and working, God


made that formless matter confusedly contain-
ing heaven and earth, out of which, being
formed, they now stand out, and are manifest,,
with all the things that are in them."

THE EXPLANATION OF THE,


CHAP. XXI. OF

WORDS,

30. And as concerns the understanding of


" THE EARTH WAS INVISIBLE.'

the


his letter to Jerome (^/. clxvi. 4) on " The origin.
'' says : " The soul, whether it be termed material


I whom are all things


1 Matt. xxii. 40. For he says in his Con. Faust, xvii. 6, remark-
j°g on John i. 17, a text which he often quotes in this connection :
" The law itself by being fulfilled becomes grace and truth. Grace
IS the fulfilment of love." And so in ibid. xix. 27 we read : " From
the words, ' I came not to destroy the law but to fulfil it,' we are not
to understand that Christ by His precepts filled up what was want-
ing in the law ; but what the literal command failed in doing from
|the pride and disobedience of men is accomplished by grace. .

So, the apostle says, ' faith worketh by love.' " So, again, we
read in Serm. cxxv. : " Quia venit dare caritatem, et caritas per-
jncit legem ; merito dixit non veni legem solvere sed implere." And
lence in his letter to Jerome (.£/. clxvii. 19), he speaks ofthe" royal

aw " as being " the law of iibei

). 348, note 4, above.

' Ps civ. 24. See p. 297 note i, above,

' 1 Cor. viii. 6.


erty, which is the law of love.'


* Augustin,
of the human soul

or immaterial, has a certain nature of its own, created from a sub-
stance superior to the elements of this world." And in \\h, De Gen.
ad Lit. vii. 10, he speaks of the soul being formed from a certain
"spiritual matter," even as flesh was formed from the earth. It
should be observed that at one time Augustin held to the theory
that the souls of infants were created by God out of nothing at eaclx
fresh birth, and only rejected this view for that of its being gene-
rated by the parents with the body under the pressure of the Pela-
gian controversy. The first doctrine was generally held by th«
Schoolmen ; and William of Conches njaintained this belief on the
authorit}' of Augustin, — apparently being unaware of any modifica-
tion in his opinion : " Cum Augustino," he says (Victor Cousin,
Ouz'rages ined. d' Abelard, p. 673), " credo et sentioquotidie novas
animas non ex traduce, non ex aliqua substantia, sed e.x nihilo, solo
jussu creatoris creari." Those who held the first-named belief
were called Cr^«/2'a«2' ; those who held the second, Truduciani. It
may be noted as to the word" Traduciani," that Tertullian, in his
De Aninia, chaps. 24-27, etc., frequently uses the word tradux
in this connection. Augustin, in his Retractations , ii. 45, refers to
his letter to Jerome, and urges that if so obscure a matter is to be
discussed at all, that solution only should be received : " Quae con-
traria non sit apertissimis rebus quas de originati peccato fides
catholica novit inparvulis, nisi regenerentur in Christo, sine dubita-
tione damnandis." On Tertullian's views, see Bishop Kays, p.
17S, etc.


1 84


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XII.


the following words, out of all those truths he
selected one to himself, who saith, " But the
earth was invisible and without form, and dark-
ness was upon the deep," — that is, " That cor-
poreal thing, which God made, was as yet the
formless matter of corporeal things, without
order, without light." He taketh another, who
saith, " But the earth was invisible and without
form, and darkness was upon the deep," — that
is, " This whole, which is called heaven and
earth, was as yet formless and darksome matter,
out of which the corporeal heaven and the cor-
poreal earth were to be made, with all things
therein which are known to our corporeal
senses." He, another, who saith, "But the
earth was invisible and without form, and dark-
ness was upon the deep," — that is, "This
whole, which is called heaven and earth, was as
yet a formless and darksome matter, out of
which were to be made that intelligible heaven,
which is otherwise called the heaven of heavens,
and the earth, namely, the whole corporeal
nature, under which name may also be com-
prised this corporeal heaven, — that is, from
which every invisible and visible creature would
be created." He, another, who saith, "But
the earth was invisible and without form, and
darkness was upon the deep," — "The Scrip-
ture called not that formlessness by the name of
heaven and earth, but that formlessness itself,"
saith he, " already was, which he named the
earth invisible and formless and the darksome
deep, of which he had said before, that God had
made the heaven and the earth, namely, the
spiritual and corporeal creature." He, another,
who saith, "But the earth was invisible and
formless, and darkness was upon the deep," —
that is, " There was already a formless matter,
whereof the Scripture before said, that God had
made heaven and earth, namely, the entire cor-
poreal mass of the world, divided into two very
great parts, the superior and the inferior, with
all those familiar and known creatures which
are in them."

CHAP. XXII. HE DISCUSSES WHETHER MATTER

WAS FROM ETERNITY, OR WAS MADE BY GOD.^

31. For, should any one endeavour to con-
tend against these last two opinions, thus, — " If
you will not admit that this formlessness of mat-
ter appears to be called by the name of heaven
and earth, then there was something which
God had not made out of which He could make
heaven and earth ; for Scripture hath not told
us that God made this matter, unless we un-
derstand it to be implied in the term of hea-

1 See xi. sec. 7, and note, above ; and xii. sec. 33, and note, be-
low. See also the subtle reasoning of Dean Mansel (Bam/>ton Lect-
ures, lect. ii.), on the inconsequence of receiving the idea of the
creation out of nothing on other than Christian principles. And
compare Coleridge, The Friend, iii. 213.


ven and earth, or of earth only, when it is
said, * In the beginning God created heaven
and ecrth,' as tuat which follows, but the earth
was invisible and formless, although it was pleas-
ing to him so to call the formless matter, we
may not yet understand any but that which
God made in that text which hath been already
written, ' God made heaven and earth.' " The
maintainers of either one or the other of these
two opinions which we have put last will, when
they have heard these things, answer and say,
" We deny not indeed that this formless matter
was created by God, the God of whom are all
things, very good ; for, as we say that that is a
greater good which is created and formed, so
we acknowledge that that is a minor good which
is capable of creation and form, but yet good.
But yet the Scripture hath not declared that
God made this formlessness, any more than it
hath declared many other things ; as the ' Cher-
ubim,' and 'Seraphim,'^ and those of which
the apostle distinctly speaks, 'Thrones,' 'Do-
minions,' 'Principalities,' 'Powers,'^ all of
which it is manifest God made. Or if in that
which is said, ' He made heaven and earth,' all
things are comprehended, what do we say of
the waters upon which the Spirit of God moved?
For if they are understood as incorporated in
the word earth, how then can formless matter
be meant in the term earth when we see the
waters so beautiful ? Or if it be so meant, why
then is it written that out of the same formless-
ness the firmament was made and called
heaven, and yet it is not written that the waters
were made ? For those waters, which we per-
ceive flowing in so beautiful a manner, remain
not formless and invisiblee. But if, then, they
received that beauty when God said. Let the
water which is under the firmament be gathered
together,* so that the gathering be the very for-
mation, what will be answered concerning the
waters which are above the firmament, because
if formless they would not have deserved to re-
ceive a seat so honourable, nor is it written by
what word they were formed ? If, then. Gene-
sis is silent as to anything that God has made,
which, however, neither sound faith nor uner-
ring understanding doubteth that God hath
made,^ let not any sober teaching dare to say
that these waters were co-eternal with God be-
cause we find them mentioned in the book of
Genesis ; but when they were created, we find
not. Why — truth instructing us — may we not
understand that that formless matter, which the
Scripture calls the earth invisible and without
form, and the darksome deep,® have been made


'•i Isa. vi. 2, and xxxvii. 16.
3 Col. i. 16.

* Gen. i. o.

6 See p. 16;, note 4, above.

* See p. 176, note 5, above.


Chap. XXII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


185


by God out of nothing, and therefore that they
are not co-eternal with Him, although that nar-
rative hath failed to tell when they were made ? "

CHAP. XXin. TWO KINDS OF DISAGREEMENTS IN

THE BOOKS TO BE EXPLAINED.

32. These things, therefore, being heard and
perceived according to my weakness of appre-
hension, which I confess unto Thee, O Lord,
who knowest it, I see that two sorts of differ-
ences may arise when by signs anything is re-
lated, even by true reporters, — one concerning
the truth of the things, the other concerning the
meaning of him who reports them. For in one
way we inquire, concerning the forming of the
creature, what is true ; but in another, what
Moses, that excellent servant of Thy faith, would
have wished that the reader and hearer should
understand by these words. As for the first
kind, let all those depart from me who imagine
themselves to know as true what is false. And
as for the other also, let all depart from me
who imagine Moses to have spoken things that
are false. But let me be united in Thee, O
Lord, with them, and in Thee delight myself
with them that feed on Thy truth, in the breadth
of charity ; and let us approach together unto the
words of Thy book, and in them make search
for Thy will, through the will of Thy servant by
whose pen Thou hast dispensed them.

CHAP. XXrV. — OUT OF THE MANY TRUE THINGS,
IT IS NOT ASSERTED CONFIDENTLY THAT MOSES
UNDERSTOOD THIS OR THAT.

^^. But which of us, amid so many truths
which occur to inquirers in these words, under-
stood as they are in different ways, shall so dis-
cover that one interpretation as to confidently
say " that Moses thought this," and " that in
that narrative he wished this to be understood,"
as confidently as he says " that this is true,"
whether he thought this thing or the other?
For behold, O my God, I Thy servant, who in
this book have vowed unto Thee a sacrifice of
confession, and beseech Thee that of Thy mercy
I may pay my vows unto Thee,' behold, can I,
as I confidently assert that Thou in Thy im-
mutable word hast created all things, invisible
and visible, with equal confidence assert that
Moses meant nothing else than this when he
wrote, " In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth." ^ No. Because it is
not as clear to me that this was in his mind


I ■ Ps. xxu. 25.

j * It is curious to note here Fichte's strange idea {Anweisung

II zum seligen Leben, Werke, v. 479), that St. John, at the commence-
1 ment of his Gospel, in his teachmg as to the " Word," intended to
'confute the Mosaic statement, which Fichte — since it ran counter
(to that idea of" the absolute " which he made the point of departure
iiin his philosophy — antagonizes as a heathen and Jewish error. On
1" In the Beginning," see p. 166, note 2, above.


when he wrote these things, as I see it to be
certain in Thy truth. For his thoughts might
be set upon the very beginning of the creation
when he said, " In the beginning ; " and he
might wish it to be understood that, in this
place, " the heaven and the earth " were no
formed and perfected nature, whether spiritual
or corporeal, but each of them newly begun,
and as yet formless. Because I see, that which-
soever of these had been said, it might have
been said truly ; but which of them he may
have thought in these words, I do not so per-
ceive. Although, whether it were one of these,
or some other meaning which has not been men-
tioned by me, that this great man saw in his
mind when he used these words, I make no
doubt but that he saw it truly, and expressed it
suitably.

CHAP. XXV. — IT BEHOVES INTERPRETERS, WHEN
DISAGREEING CONCERNING OBSCURE PLACES, TO
REGARD GOD THE AUTHOR OF TRUTH, AND THE
RULE OF CHARITY.

34. Let no one now trouble me by saying,
" Moses thought not as you say, but as I say."
For should he ask me, " Whence knowest thou
that Moses thought this which you deduce from
his words?" I ought to take it contentedly,^
and reply perhaps as I have before, or some-
what more fully should he be obstinate. But
when he says, " Moses meant not what you say,
but what I say," and yet denies not what each
of us says, and that both are true, O my God,
life of the poor, in whose bosom there is no
contradiction, pour down into my heart Thy
soothings, that I may patiently bear with such
as say this to me ; not because they are divine,
and because they have seen in the heart of Thy
servant what they say, but because they are
proud, and have not known the opinion of
Moses, but love their own, — not because it is
true, but because it is their own. Otherwise they
would equally love another true opinion, as I
love what they say when they speak what is true ;
not because it is theirs, but because it is true,
and therefore now not theirs because true. But
if they therefore love that because it is true, it
is now both theirs and mine, since it is common
to all the lovers of truth. But because they
contend that Moses meant not what I say, but
what they themselves say, this I neither like nor
love ; because, though it were so, yet that rash-
ness is not of knowledge, but of audacity ; and
not vision, but vanity brought it forth. And
therefore, O Lord, are Thy judgments to be
dreaded, since Thy truth is neither mine, nor
his, nor another's, but of all of us, whom Thou
publicly callest to have it in common, warning

3 See p. 48, note, and p. 164, note 2, above.


i86


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XII.


us terribly not to hold it as specially for our-
selves, lest we be deprived of it. P'or whoso-
ever claims to himself as his own that which
Thou appointed to all to enjoy, and desires that
to be his own which belongs to all, is forced
away from what is common to all to that which
is his own — that is, from truth to falsehood.
For he that " speaketh a lie, speaketh of his
own." '

35. Hearken, O God, Thou best Judge I
Truth itself, hearken to what I shall say to this
gainsayer ; hearken, for before Thee I say it,
and before my brethren who use Thy law law-
fully, to the end of charity ; ^ hearken and be-
hold what I shall say to him, if it be pleasing
unto Thee. For this brotherly and peaceful
word do I return unto him : " If we both see
that that which thou sayest is true, and if we
both see that what I say is true, where, I ask, do
we see it? Certainly not I in thee, nor thou in
me, but both in the unchangeable truth itself,^
which is above our minds." When, therefore,
we may not contend about the very light of
the Lord our God, why do we contend about the
thoughts of our neighbour, which we cannot so
see as incommutable truth is seen ; when, if
Moses himself had appeared to us and said,
"This I meant," not so should we see it, but
believe it? Let us not, then, "be puffed up for
one against the other,"'* above that which is writ-
ten ; let us love the Lord our God with all our
heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind,
and our neighbour as ourself.s As to which two
precepts of charity, unless we believe that Moses
meant whatever in these books he did mean, we
shall make God a liar when we think otherwise
concerning our fellow-servants' mind than He
hath taught us. Behold, now, how foolish it is,
in so great an abundance of the truest opinions
which can be extracted from these words, rashly
to affirm which of them Moses particularly
meant ; and with pernicious contentions to offend
charity itself, on account of which he hath spoken
all the things whose words we endeavour to ex-
plain !

CHAP. XXVI. — WHAT HE MIGHT HAVE ASKED OF
GOD HAD HE BEEN ENJOINED TO WRITE THE
BOOK OF GENESIS.

36. And yet, O my God, Thou exaltation of
my humility, and rest of my labour, who hearest
my confessions, and forgivest my sins, since Thou
commandest me that I should love my neighbour
as myself, I cannot believe that Thou gavest to
Moses, Thy most faithful servant, a less gift

' John viii. 44.

2 I Tim. i. 8.

3 As to all truth being God's, see vii. sec. 16, and note 3, above;
and compare x. sec. 65, above,

* I Cor. iv. 6.

5 Mark .\ii. 30, 31.


than I should wish and desire for myself from
Thee, had I been born in his time, and hadst
Thou placed me in that position that through
the service of my heart and of my tongue those
books might be distributed, which so long after
were to profit all nations, and through the whole
world, from so great a pinnacle of authority, were
to surmount the words of all false and proud
teachings. I should have wished truly had I
then been Moses (for we all come from the same
mass ; and what is man, saving that Thou art
mindful of him?^). I should then, had I been
at that time what he was, and enjoined by Thee
to write the book of Genesis, have wished that
such a power of expression and such a method
of arrangement should be given me, that they
who cannot as yet understand how God creates
might not reject the words as surpassing their
powers ; and they who are already able to do
this, would find, in what true opinion soever they
had by thought arrived at, that it was not passed
over in the few words of Thy servant ; and
should another man by the light of truth have
discovered another, neither should that fail to
be found in those same words.

CHAP. XXVII. THE STYLE OF SPEAKING IN THE

BOOK OF GENESIS IS SIMPLE AND CLEAR.

37. For as a fountain in a limited space is
more plentiful, and affords supply for more
streams over larger spaces than any one of those
streams which, after a wide interval, is derived
from the same fountain ; so the narrative of Thy
dispenser, destined to benefit many who were
likely to discourse thereon, does, from a limited
measure of language, overflow into streams of
clear truth, whence each one may draw out for
himself that truth which he can concerning these
subjects, — this one that truth, that one another,
by larger circumlocutions of discourse. For
some, when they read or hear these words, think
that God as a man or some mass gifted with
immense power, by some new and sudden re- I
solve, had, outside itself, as if at distant places,
created heaven and earth, two great bodies
above and below, wherein all things were to be
contained. And when they hear, God said, Let |
it be made, and it was made, they think of words
begun and ended, sounding in times and passing
away, after the departure of which that came
into being which was commanded to be ; and
whatever else of the kind their familiarity with
the world ^ would suggest. In whom, being as
yet little ones,^ while their weakness by this
humble kind of speech is carried on as if in a
mother's bosom, their faith is healthfully built

6 Ps. viii. 8.

7 " Ex familiaritate carnis," literally, " from familiarity with the il
flesh."

8 " Parvulis animalibus."


Chap. XXVII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


187


up, by which they have and hold as certain that
God made all natures, which in wondrous variety
their senses perceive on every side. Which
words, if any one despising them, as if trivial,
with proud weakness shall have stretched him-
self beyond his fostering cradle, he will, alas, fall
miserably. Have pity, O Lord God, lest they
who pass by trample on the unfledged bird ; and
send Thine angel, who may restore it to its nest,
that it may live until it can fly.'

CHAP. XXVIII. THE WORDS, " IN THE BEGINNING,"


AND, "THE HEAVEN AND THE EARTH,
DIFFERENTLY UNDERSTOOD.


ARE


38. But others, to whom these words are no
longer a nest, but shady fruit-bowers, see the
fruits concealed in them, fly around rejoicing,
and chirpingly search and pluck them. For
they see when they read or hear these words,
O God, that all times past and future are sur-
mounted by Thy eternal and stable abiding, and
still that there is no temporal creature which
Thou hast not made. And by Thy will, because
it is that which Thou art. Thou hast made all
things, not by any changed will, nor by a will
which before was not, — not out of Thyself, in
Thine own likeness, the form of all things, but
out of nothing, a formless unlikeness which
should be formed by Thy likeness (having re-
course to Thee the One, after their settled capa-
city, according as it has been given to each thing
in his kind), and might all be made very good ;
whether they remain around Thee, or, being by
degrees removed in time and place, make or
undergo beautiful variations. These things they
see, and rejoice in the light of Thy truth, in the
little degree they here may.

39. Again, another of these directs his atten-
tion to that which is said, " In the beginning
God made the heaven and the earth," and be-
holdeth Wisdom, — the Beginning,^ because It
also speaketh unto us.^ Another likewise di-
rects his attention to the same words, and by
"beginning" understands the commencement
of things created ; and receives it thus, — In
the beginning He made, as if it were said. He
at first made. And among those who under-
stand " In the beginning " to mean, that " in
Thy Wisdom Thou hast created heaven and
earth," one believes the matter out of which

j the heaven and earth were to be created to be

there called "heaven and earth ; " another, that

they are natures already formed and distinct;

another, one formed nature, and that a spiritual,

junder the name of heaven, the other formless,

|of corporeal matter, under the name of earth.

' In allusion, perhaps, to Prov. xxvii. 8: " As a bird that wan-
pereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place."
^ See p. 166, note 2.
' John viii. 23.


But they who under the name of " heaven and
earth" understand matter as yet formless, out
of which were to be formed heaven and earth,
do not themselves understand it in one manner ;
but one, that matter out of which the intelligible
and the sensible creature were to be completed ;
another, that only out of which this sensible
corporeal mass was to come, holding in its vast
bosom these visible and prepared natures. Nor
are they who believe that the creatures already
set in order and arranged are in this place called
heaven and earth of one accord ; but the one,
both the invisible and visible ; the other, the
visible only, in which we admire the luminous
heaven and darksome earth, and the things that
are therein.


CHAP. XXIX. CONCERXrNG THE OPINION OF THOSE

WHO EXPLAIN IT "AT FIRST HE MADE."

40. But he who does not otherwise under-
stand, " In the beginning He made," than if it
were said, " At first He made," can only truly
understand heaven and earth of the matter of
heaven and earth, namely, of the universal, that
is, intelligible and corporeal creation. For if
he would have it of the universe, as already
formed, it might rightly be asked of him : " If
at first God made this, what made He after-
wards?" And after the universe he will find
nothing ; thereupon must he, though unwilling,
hear, " How is this first, if there is nothing after-
wards?" But when he says that God made
matter first formless, then formed, he is not ab-
surd if he be but able to discern what precedes
by eternity, what by time, what by choice, \yhat
by origin. By eternity, as God is before all
things ; by time, as the flower is before the fruit ;
by choice, as the fruit is before the flower ; by
origin, as sound is before the tune. Of these
four, the first and last which I have referred to
are with much difficulty understood ; the two
middle very easily. For an uncommon and too
lofty vision it is to behold, O Lord, Thy Eternity,
immutably making things mutable, and thereby
before them. Who is so acute of mind as to be
able without great labour to discover how the
sound is prior to the tune, because a tune is
a formed sound ; and a thing not formed may
exist, but that which existeth not cannot be
formed ?'♦ So is the matter prior to that which
is made from it ; not prior because it maketh it,
since itself is rather made, nor is it prior by an
interval of time. For we do not as to time first
utter formless sounds without singing, and then
adapt or fashion them into the form of a song,
just as wood or silver from which a chest or
vessel is made. Because such materials do by


* See a similar argument in his Cofi. adv. Leg. et Proph. i. 9;
and sec. 29, and note, above.


i88


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XII.


time also precede the forms of the things which
are made from them ; but in singing this is not
so. For when it is sung, its sound is heard at
the same time ; seeing there is not first a form-
less sound, which is afterwards formed into a
song. For as soon as it shall have first sounded
it passeth away ; nor canst thou find anything
of it, which being recalled thou canst by art
compose. And, therefore, the song is absorbed
in its own sound, which sound of it is its matter.
Because this same is formed that it may be a
tune ; and therefore, as I was saying, the matter
of the sound is prior to the form of the tune,
not before through any power of making it a
tune ; for neither is a sound the composer of
the tune, but is sent forth from the body and is
subjected to the soul of the singer, that from it
he may form a tune. Nor is it first in time, for
it is given forth together with the tune ; nor first
in choice, for a sound is not better than a tune,
since a tune is not merely a sound, but a beau-
tiful sound. But it is first in origin, because the
tune is not formed that it may become a sound,
but the sound is formed that it may become a tune.
By this example, let him who is able understand
that the matter of things was first made, and
called heaven and earth, because out of it heaven
and earth were made. Not that it was made first
in time, because the forms of things give rise to
time,' but that was formless ; but now, in time,
it is perceived together with its form. Nor yet
can anything be related concerning that matter,
unless as if it were prior in time, while it is con-
sidered last (because things formed are assuredly
superior to things formless), and is preceded by
the Eternity of the Creator, so that there might
be out of nothing that from which something
might be made.

CHAP. XXX. — IN THE GREAT DIVERSITY OF OPIN-
IONS, IT BECOMES ALL TO UNITE CHARITY AND
DIVINE TRUTH.

41. In this diversity of true opinions let Truth
itself beget concord ; ^ and may our God have
mercy upon us, that we may use the law lawfully,^
the end of the commandment, pure charity."*
And by this if any one asks of me, " Which of


1 See xi. sec. 29, above, and Gillies' note thereon; and compare
with it Augustin's De. Gen. ad Lit. v. 5: " In vain we inquire after
time before the creation as though we could find time before time, for
if there were no motion of the spiritual or corporeal creatures where-
by through the present the future might succeed the past, there would
be no tirne at all. But the creature could not have motion unless it
were. Time, therefore, begins rather from the creation, than creation
from time, but both are from God."

2 See p. 164^ note 2, above.

3 I Tim. i. 8.

4 See p. 183, note, above; and on the supremacy of this law of
love, may be compared Jeremy Taylor's curious story (Works, iv.
477) Eden's ed.) : " St. Lewis, the king, having sent Ivo, Bishop of
Chartres, on an embassy, the bishop met a woman on the way, grave,
sad, fantastic, and melancholy, with fire in one hand, and water in
the other. He asked what those symbols meant. She answered, ' My
purpose is with fire to burn Paradise, and with my water to tjuench
the flames of hell, that men may serve God without the incentives of
hope and fear, and purely for the love of God.' "


these was the meaning of Thy servant Moses ? "
these were not the utterances of my confessions,
should I not confess unto Thee, " I know not ; "
and yet I know that those opinions are true,
with the exception of those carnal ones concern-
ing which I have spoken wliat I thought well.
However, these words of Thy Book affright not
those little ones of good hope, treating few of
high tilings in a humble fashion, and few things
in varied ways.s But let all, whom I acknowl-
edge to see and speak the truth in these words,
love one another, and equally love Thee, our
God, fountain of truth, — if we thirst not for
vain things, but for it ; yea, let us so honour
this servant of Thine, the dispenser of this
Scripture, full of Thy Spirit, as to believe that
when Thou revealedst Thyself to him, and he
wrote these things, he intended that which in
them chiefly excels both for light of truth and
fruitfulness of profit. ^

CHAP. XXXI. — MOSES IS SUPPOSED TO HAVE PER-
CEIVED WHATEVER OF TRUTH CAN BE DISCOV-
ERED IN HIS WORDS.

42. Thus, when one shall say, " He [Moses]
meant as I do," and another, " Nay, but as I
do," I suppose that I am speaking more reli-
giously when I say, " Why not rather as both, if
both be true ? " And if there be a third truth,
or a fourth, and if any one seek any truth alto-
gether different in those words, why may not he
be believed to have seen all these, through whom
one God hath tempered the Holy Scriptures to
the senses of many, about to see therein things
true but different ? I certainly, — and I fear-
lessly declare it from my heart, — were I to
write anything to have the highest authority,
should prefer so to write, that whatever of truth
any one might apprehend concerning these mat-
ters, my words should re-echo, rather than that
I should set down one true opinion so clearly on
this as that I should exclude the rest, that which
was false in which could not offend me. There-
fore am I unwilling, O my God, to be so head-
strong as not to believe that from Thee this man
[Moses] hath received so much. He, surely,
when he wrote those words, perceived and
thought whatever of truth we have been able
to discover, yea, and whatever we have not been
able, nor yet are able, though still it may be
found in them.

CHAP. XXXII. — FIRST, THE SENSE OF THE \VRITER
IS TO BE DISCOVERED, THEN THAT IS TO BE
BROUGHT OUT WHICH DIVINE TRUTH INTENDED.

43. Finally, O Lord, who art God, and not
flesh and blood, if man doth see anything less,


S See end of note 17, p. 197, below.


Chap. XXXII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


189


can anything lie hid from "Thy good Spirit,"
who shall "lead me into the land of uj^right-
ness," ' which Thou Thyself, by those words,
wert about to reveal to future readers, although
he through whom they were spoken, amid the
many interpretations that might have been found,
fi.xed on but one ? Which, if it be so, let that
which he thought on be more exalted than the
rest. But to us, O Lord, either point out the
same, or any other true one which may be
pleasing unto Thee ; so that whether Thou mak-
est known to us that which Thou didst to that
man of Thine, or some other by occasion of the
same words, yet Thou mayest feed us, not error
deceive us.^ Behold, O Lord my God, how

' Ps. cxliii. 10.

2 Augustin, as we have seen (see notes, pp. 65 and 92), was
frequently addicted to allegorical interpretation, but he, none the less,
laid stress on the necessity of avoiding obscure and allegorical pas-
sages when it was necessary to convince the opponent of Christianity


many things we have written concerning a few
words, — how many, I beseech Thee ! What
strength of ours, what ages would suffice for all
Thy books after this manner? Permit me, there-
fore, in these more briefly to confess unto Thee,
and to select some one true, certain, and good
sense, that Thou shalt inspire, although many
senses offer themselves, where many, indeed,
may ; this being the faith of my confession, that
if I should say that which Thy minister felt,
rightly and profitably, this I should strive for;
the which if I shall not attain, yet I may say
that which Thy Truth willed through Its words
to say unto me, which said also unto him what
It willed.


{De Unit. Eccl. ch. 5). It should also be noted that, however varied
the meaning deduced from a doubtful Scripture, he ever maintained
that such meaning must be sacrce fidei cotigruain. Compare De
Gen. ad Lit. end of book i. ; and ibid, viii. 4 and 7. See also notes,
pp. 164 and 1 78, above.


BOOK XIII.


OF THE GOODNESS OF GOD EXPLAINED IN THE CREATION OF THINGS, AND OF THE TRINITY AS
FOUND IN THE FIRST WORDS OF GENESIS. THE STORY CONCERNING THE ORIGIN OF THE
WORLD (GEN. I.) IS ALLEGORICALLY EXPLAINED, AND HE APPLIES IT TO THOSE THINGS WHICH
GOD WORKS FOR SANCTIFIED AND BLESSED MAN. FINALLY, HE MAKES AN END OF THIS WORK,
HAVING IMPLORED ETERNAL REST FROM GOD.


CHAP. I. — HE CALLS UPON GOD, AND PROPOSES TO |
HLMSELF TO WORSHIP HIM.

1. I CALL upon Thee, my God, my mercy,
who madest me, and who didst not forget me,
though forgetful of Thee. I call Thee into ' my
soul, which by the desire which Thou inspirest
in it Thou preparest for Thy reception. Do not
Thou forsake me calling upon Thee, who didst
anticipate me before I called, and didst importu-
nately urge with manifold calls that I should hear
Thee from afar, and be converted, and call upon
Thee who calledst me. For Thou, O Lord, hast
blotted out all my evil deserts, that Thou might-
est not repay into my hands wherewith I have
fallen from Thee, and Thou hast anticipated all
my good deserts, that Thou mightest repay into
Thy hands wherewith Thou madest me ; because
before I was. Thou wast, nor was I [anything]
to which Thou mightest grant being. And yet
behold, I am, out of Thy goodness, anticipating
all this which Thou hast made me, and of which
Thou hast made me. For neither hadst Thou
stood in need of me, nor am I such a good as to
be helpful unto Thee,- my Lord and God ; not
that I may so serve Thee as though Thou wert
fatigued in working, or lest Thy power may be
less if lacking my assistance ; nor that, like the
land, I may so cultivate Thee that Thou vvould-
est be uncultivated did I cultivate Thee not ;
but that I may serve and worship Thee, to the
end that I may have well-being from Thee, from
whom it is that I am one susceptible of well-
being.

CHAP. II. — ALL CREATURES SUBSIST FROM THE
PLENITUDE OF DIVINE GOODNESS.

2. For of the plenitude of Thy goodness Thy
creature subsists, that a good, which could prof-
it Thee nothing, nor though of Thee was equal
to Thee, might yet be, since it could be made of
Thee. For what did heaven and earth, which

■ See i. sec. 2, above.

^ Similar views as to God's not having need of us, though He
created us, and as to our service being for our and not His advantage,
will be found in his De Gen. ad Lit. viii. 11 ; and Con. Adv. Leg. et
J^roph. i. 4.

190


Thou madest in the beginning, deserve of Thee ?
Let those spiritual and corporeal natures, which
Thou in Thy wisdom madest, declare what they
deserve of Thee to depend thereon, — even the
inchoate and formless, each in its own kind,
either spiritual or corporeal, going into excess,
and into remote unUkeness unto Thee (the spir-
itual, though formless, more excellent than if it
were a formed body ; and the corporeal, though
formless, more excellent than if it were alto-
gether nothing), and thus they as formless would
depend upon Thy Word, unless by the same
Word they were recalled to Thy Unity, and
endued with form, and from Thee, the one sov-
ereign Good, were all made very good. How
have they deserved of Thee, that they should be
even formless, since they would not be even this
except from Thee?

3. How has corporeal matter deserved of
Thee, to be even invisible and formless,^ since it
were not even this hadst Thou not made it ; and
therefore since it was not, it could not deserve
of Thee that it should be made ? Or how could
the inchoate spiritual creature ■* deserve of Thee,
that even it should flow darksomely like the
deep, — unlike Thee, had it not been by the
same Word turned to that by Whom it was cre-
ated, and by Him so enlightened become light,
although not equally, yet conformably to that
Form which is equal unto Thee ? For as to a
body, to be is not all one with being beautiful,
for then it could not be deformed ; so also to a
created spirit, to live is not all one with living
wisely, for then it would be wise unchangeably.
But it is good s for it always to hold fast unto I
Thee,^ lest, in turning from Thee, it lose that {
light which it hath obtained in turning to Thee,

3 Gen. i. 2.

■• In his De Gen. ad Lit. i. 5, he maintains that the spiritual crea-
ture may have a formless life, since it has its form — its wisdom and
happiness — by being turned to the Word of God, the Immutable
Light of Wisdom.

5 Ps. Ixxiii. 28.

'^ Similarly, in his De Civ. Dei, xii. i, he argues that true ble.ss-
edness is to be attained " by adhering to the Immutable Good, the
.Supreme God." This, indeed, imparts the only true life (see note,
p. 133, above) ; for, as Origen says {in .S. Joh. ii. 7), " the good man
is he who truly exists," and " to be evil and to be wicked are the same
as not to be." See notes, pp. 75 and 151, above.


Chap. II.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


191


and relapse into a light resembling the darksome
deep. For even we ourselves, who in respect
of the soul are a spiritual creature, having turned
away from Thee, our light, were in that life
" sometimes darkness ; " ' and do labour amidst
the remains of our darkness, until in Thy Only
One we become Thy righteousness, like the
mountains of God. For we have been Thy
judgments, which are like the great deep.^

CHAP. III. GENESIS I. 3, OF "LIGHT," HE

UNDERSTANDS AS IT IS SEEN IN THE SPIRITUAL
CREATURE.

4. But what Thou saidst in the beginning of
the creation, " Let there be light, and there was
light," 3 I do not unfitly understand of the spir-
itual creature ; because there was even then a
kind of life, which Thou mightest illuminate.
But as it had not deserved of Thee that it should
be such a life as could be enlightened, so neither,
when it already was, hath it deserved of Thee
that it should be enlightened. For neither could
its formlessness be pleasing unto Thee, unless it
became light, — not by merely existing, but by
beholding the illuminating light, and cleaving
unto it ; so also, that it lives, and lives happily,"*
it owes to nothing whatsoever but to Thy grace ;
being converted by means of a better change
unto that which can be changed neither into
better nor into worse ; the which Thou only art
because Thou only simply art, to whom it is not
one thing to live, another to live blessedly, since
Thou art Thyself Thine own Blessedness.

CHAP. rV. ALL THINGS HAVE BEEN CREATED BY

THE GRACE OF GOD, AND ARE NOT OF HIM AS
STANDING IN NEED OF CREATED THINGS.

5. What, therefore, could there be wanting
unto Thy good, which Thou Thyself art, although
these things had either never been, or had re-
mained formless, — the which Thou madest not
out of any want, but out of the plenitude of Thy
goodness, restraining them and converting them
to form not as though Thy joy were perfected
by them? For to Thee, being perfect, their
imperfection is displeasing, and therefore were
they perfected by Thee, and were pleasing unto
Thee ; but not as if Thou wert imperfect, and
wert to be perfected in their perfection. For
Thy good Spirit was borne over the waters, 5 not
borne up by them as if He rested upon them.

> Eph. V. 8.

^ Ps. xxxvi. 6, as in the Vulgate, which renders the Hebrew more

Icorrectly than the Authorized Version. This passage has been vari-

lously interpreted. Augustin makes " the mountains of God " to

|mean the saints, prophets, and apostles, while " the great deep " he

interprets of the wicked and sinful. Compare In Ev. Joh. Tract, i.

t\ and in Ps. xxxv. 7, sec. 10.

3 Gen. i. 3.

* Compare the end of chap. 24 of book xi of the De Ch' Dei,
«'here he says that the life and light and joy of the holy city which is
fibove is in God.

* Gen. i. 2.


For those in whom Thy good Spirit is said to
rest,^ He causes to rest in Himself. But Thy
incorruptible and unchangeable will, which in
itself is all-sufficient for itself, was borne over
that life which Thou hadst made, to which to
live is not all one with living happily, since, flow-
ing in its own darkness, it liveth also ; for which
it remaineth to be converted unto Him by whom
it was made, and to live more and more by " the
fountain of life," and in His light to " see light," 7
and to be perfected, and enlightened, and made
happy.

CHAP. V. HE RECOGNISES THE TRINITY IN THE

FIRST TWO VERSES OF GENESIS.

6. Behold now, the Trinity appears unto me
in an enigma, which Thou, O my God, art, since
Thou, O Father, in the Beginning of our wis-
dom, — Which is Thy Wisdom, born of Thyself,
equal and co-eternal unto Thee, — that is, in
Thy Son, hast created heaven and earth. Many
things have we said of the heaven of heavens,
and of the earth invisible and formless, and of
the darksome deep, in reference to the wander-
ing defects of its spiritual deformity, were it not
converted unto Him from whom was its life,
such as it was, and by His enlightening became
a beauteous life, and the heaven of that heaven
which was afterwards set between water and
water. And under the name of God, I now held
the Father, who made these things ; and under
the name of the Beginning,^ the Son, in whom
He made these things ; and believing, as I did,
that my God was the Trinity, I sought further
in His holy words, and behold. Thy Spirit was
borne over the waters. Behold the Trinity, O
my God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, — the
Creator of all creation.

CHL^P. VI. WHY THE HOLY GHOST SHOULD HAVE

BEEN MENTIONED AFTER THE MENTION OF
HEAVEN AND EARTH.

7. But what was the cause, O Thou true-speak-
ing Light ? LTnto Thee do I lift up my heart,
let it not teach me vain things ; disperse its
darkness, and tell me, I beseech Thee, by our
mother charity, tell me, I beseech Thee, the rea-
son why, after the mention of heaven, and of the
earth invisible and formless, and darkness upon
the deep, Thy Scripture should then at length
mention Thy Spirit? Was it because it was
meet that it should be spoken of Him that He
was " borne over," and this could not be said,
unless that were first mentioned " over " which
Thy Spirit may be understood to have been
"borne?" For neither was He "borne over"


6 Num. xi. 25.

7 Ps. xxxvi. 9.

8 See also xi. sec. lo, and note, above.


192


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XIII.


the Father, nor the Son, nor could it rightly be
said that He was "borne over" if He were
"borne over" nothing. That, therefore, was
first to be spoken of " over " which He might be
"borne ; " and then He, whom it was not meet to
mention otherwise than as having been "borne."
Why, then, was it not meet that it should other-
wise be mentioned of Him, than as having been
" borne over? "

CHAP. VII. THAT THE HOLY SPIRIT BRINGS US TO

GOD.

8. Hence let him that is able now follow Thy
apostle with his understanding where he tlius
speaks, because Thy love " is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto
us;"' and where, "concerning spiritual gifts,"
he teacheth and showeth unto us a more excel-
lent way of charity ; ^ and where he bows his
knees unto Thee for us, that we may know the
super-eminent knowledge of the love of Christ. ^
And, therefore, from the beginning was He super-
eminently " borne above the waters." To whom
shall I tell this? How speak of the weight
of lustful desires, pressing downwards to the
steep abyss? and how charity raises us up again,
through Thy Spirit which was " borne over the
waters?" To whom shall I tell it? How tell
it ? For neither are there places in which we
are merged and emerge.'* AVhat can be more
like, and yet more unlike ? They be affections,
they be loves ; the filthiness of our spirit flowing
away downwards with the love of cares, and the
sanctity of Thine raising us upwards by the love
of freedom from care ; that we may lift our
hearts 5 unto Thee where Thy Spirit is " borne
over the waters ; " and that we may come to that
pre-eminent rest, when our soul shall have passed
through the waters which have no substance.^

CHAP. VIII. THAT NOTHING WHATEVER, SHORT

OF GOD, CAN YIELD TO THE RATIONAL CREA-
TURE A HAPPY REST.

9. The angels fell, the soul of man fell,^ and
they have thus indicated the abyss in that dark

* Rom, V. 5.

2 I Cor. xii. I, 31.

3 Eph. iii. 14-19.

* " Neque enim loca sunt quibus mergimur et emergimus."

S Watts remarks here: " This sentence was generally in the
Church service and communion. Nor is there scarce any one old
liturgy but hath it, Surs7/»! corda, Habetmis ad Dominum."
Palmer, speaking of the Lord's Supper, says, in his Origi>ies Litiir-
gica, iv. 14, that " Cyprian, in the third century, attested the use of
the form, ' Lift up your hearts,' and its response, in the liturgy of
Africa (Cyprian, De Orat. Don. p. 152, Opera, ed. Fell). Augus-
tin, at the beginning of the fifth century, sjieaks of these words as
being used in all churches" (Aug. De I'era Relig. iii). We find
from the same writer, ibid. v. 5, that in several churches this sentence
was used in the office of baptism.

'i " Sine substantia," the Old V'er. rendering of Ps. cxxiv. 5. The
Vulgate gives " aquam intolerabilem." The Authorized Version,
however, correctly renders the Hebrew by " proud waters," that is,
swollen. Augustin, in Ps. cxxiii. 5, sec. 9, explains the "aqua
sine substantia," as the water of sins; '' for," he says, " sins have not
substance; they have weakness, not substance; want, not substance."

' We may note here that Augustin maintains the existence of the
relationship between these two events. He says in his Enchiridion,


deep, ready for the whole spiritual creation,
unless Thou hadst said from the beginning, " Let
there be light," and there had been light, and
every obedient intelligence of Thy celestial City
had cleaved to Thee, and rested in Thy Spirit,
which unchangeably is "borne over" everything
changeable. Otherwise, even the heaven of
heavens itself would have been a darksome deep,
whereas now it is light in the Lord. For even
in that wretched restlessness of the spirits who
fell away, and, when unclothed of the garments
of Thy light, discovered their own darkness, dost
Thou sufficiently disclose how noble Thou hast
made the rational creature ; to which nought
which is inferior to Thee will suffice to yield a
happy rest,^ and so not even herself. For Thou,
O our God, shalt enlighten our darkness ; 9 from
Thee are derived our garments of hght,'° and
tlien shall our darkness be as the noonday."
Give Thyself unto me, O my God, restore Thy-
self unto me ; behold, I love Thee, and if it be
too little, let me love Thee more strongly. I
cannot measure my love, so that I may come to
know how much there is yet wanting in me, ere
my life run into Thy embracements, and not be
turned away until it be hidden in the secret
place of Thy Presence.'- This only I know, that
woe is me except in Thee, — not only without,
but even also within myself; and all plenty which
is not my God is poverty to me.'^


CHAP. IX. WHY THE HOLY SPIRIT WAS ONLY

"BORNE over" THE WATERS.

lo. But was not either the Father or the Son
"borne over the waters?" If we understand
this to mean in space, as a body, then neither
was the Holy Spirit ; but if the incommutable
super-eminence of Divinity above everything,
mutable, then both Father, and Son, and Holyj

c. xxix., that " the restored part of humanity will fill up the gap whicl
the rebellion and fall of the devils had lett in the company of the
angels. For this is the promise to the saints, that at the resurrection
they shall be equal to the angels of God (Luke xx. 36). And thus
the Jerusalem which is above, which is the mother of us all, the Cit
of God, shall not be spoiled of any of the number of her citizens, shall
perhaps reign over even a more abundant population." He speaks
to the same effect at the close of ch. i of his De Civ. Dei, xxii. This
doctrine was enlarged upon by some of the writers of the seveM
teenth century. _ ^ IL

^ See his De Civ. Dei, xxii. i, where he beautilully compares sii^l
to blindness, in that it makes us miserable in depriving us of the sight
of God. Also his De Cat. Rud. sec. 24, where he shows that thel
restlessness and changefulness of the world cannot give rest. Compjj
p. 46, note 7, above.

9 Ps. xviii. 28.

»o Ps. civ. 2.

" Ps. cxxxix. 12.

12 Ps. xxxi. 20. "In abscondito vultus tui," Old Ver. Augus
tin in his comment on this passage {Enarr. 4, sec. 8) gives us hisj
interpretation. He points out that the refuge of a particular place!
{e.g. the bosom of Abraham) is not enough. We must have Goc'I
with us here as our refuge, and then we will be hidden in His counte-i
nance hereafter; or in other words, if we receive Him into our hear
now. He will hereafter receive us into His countenance — Ille posik
hoc siecnlii/n excipiet te vultu siio. For heaven is a prepared plac^
for a prepared people, and we must be fitted to live with Him there l_
going to Him now, and this, to quote from his De Serm. Dmn. it\
Mon. i. 27, " not with a slow movement of the body, but with th(j
swift impulse of love."

t-i See p. 133, note 2, above.


lb

it

lilii


V

r


\\


Chap. IX.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


193


Ghost were borne " over the waters." Why,
then, is this said of Thy Spirit only ? \\'hy is
it said of Him alone ? As if He had been in
place who is not in place, of whom only it is
written, that He is Thy gift ? ' In Thy gift we
rest ; there we enjoy Thee. Our rest is our
place. Love lifts us up thither, and Thy good
Spirit lifteth our lowliness from the gates of
death.- In Thy good pleasure lies our peace. ^
The body by its own weight gra\'itates towards
its own place. Weight goes not downward only,
but to its own place. Fire tends upwards, a
stone downwards. They are propelled by their
own weights, they seek their own places. Oil
poured under the water is raised above the
water ; water poured upon oil sinks under the
oil. They are propelled by their own weights,
they seek their own places. Out of order, they
are restless ; restored to order, they are at rest.
My weight is my love ; '* by it am I borne
whithersoever I am borne. By Thy Gift we are
inflamed, and are borne upwards ; we wax hot
inwardly, and go forwards. We ascend Thy
ways that be in our heart,^ and sing a song of
degrees ; we glow inwardly with Thy fire, with
Thy good fire, and we go, because we go up-
wards to the peace of Jerusalem ; for glad was I
when they said unto me, " Let us go into the
house of the Lord."^ There hath Thy good
pleasure placed us, that we may desire no other
thing than to dwell there for ever.

CHAP. X. — THAT NOTHING AROSE SAVE BY THE
GIFT OF GOD.

II. Happy creature, which, though in itself

it was other than Thou, hath known no other

state than that as soon as it was made, it was,

without any interval of time, by Thy Gift, which

is borne over everything mutable, raised up by

that calling whereby Thou saidst, " Let there be

light, and there was light." Whereas in us

there is a difference of times, in that we were

darkness, and are made light ; ^ but of that it

1 is only said what it would have been had it not

been enlightened. And this is so spoken as if

it had been fleeting and darksome before ; that

Iso the cause whereby it was made to be other-

Iwise might appear, — that is to say, being turned

|to the unfailing Light it might become light.

-et him who is able understand this ; and let

lim who is not,^ ask of Thee. Why should he


' See De Trin. xv. 17-10.

* Ps. ix. 13.

* Luke ii. 14, Vulg.

*■ Compare De Civ. Dei, xi. 2S: "For the specific gravity of
dies is, as it were, their love, whether they are carried downwards
' their weight, or upwards by their levity."

■S Ps. Ixxxiv. 5.

' Ps. cxxii. 1.

"> Eph. V. 8.

,Et qui non potest, which words, however, some MSS. omit,
"ling, Qui potest iutcih'gat ; a te petal.


trouble me, as if I could enlighten any " man
that comtth into the world? "5

CHAP. XI. TH.\T THE SYMBOLS OF THE TRINLfY

IN MAN, TO BE, TO KNOW, AND TO WILL, ARE
NEVER THOROUGHLY EXAiHNED.

12. Which of US understandeth the Almighty
Trinity ? '° And yet which speaketh not of It,
if indeed it be It? Rare is that soul which,
while it speaketh of It, knows what it speaketh
of. And they contend and strive, but no one
without peace seeth that vision. I could wish
that men would consider these three things that
are in themselves. These three are far other
than the Trinity ; but I speak of things in which
they may exercise and prove themselves, and
feel how far other they be." But the three
things I speak of are. To Be, to Know, and to
\V\\\. For I Am, and I Know, and I Will ; I
Am Knowing and Willing ; and I Know myself
to Be and to Will ; and I ^Vill to Be and to
Know. In these three, therefore, let him who
can see how inseparable a life there is, — even
one life, one mind, and one essence ; finally,
how inseparable is the distinction, and yet a dis-
tinction. Surely a man hath it before him ; let
him look into himself, and see, and tell me. But

9 John i. g; see p. 76, note 2, and p. 181, note 2, above.

'° As Augustin constantly urges of God, " Cujus nulla scientia
est in anima, nisi scire quomodo eum nesciat " {De Ord. ii. 18), so
we may say of the Trinity. The objectors to the doctrine sometimes
speak as if it were irrational (Mansel's Bamptoi Lectures, lect. vi.,
notes 9, 10). But while the doctrine is aboTe reason, it is not ro«-
^yrtry thereto; and, as Dr. Newman observes in his Grammar of
Assent, v. 2 (a book which the student should remember has been
written since his union with the Roman Church), though the doctrine
be mysterious, and, when taken as a whole, transcends all our experi-
ence, there is that on which the spiritual life of the Christian can re-
pose in its " propositions taken one by one, and that not in the case
of intellectual and thoughtful minds only, but of all religious minds
whatever, in the case of a child or a peasant as well as of a philoso-
pher." With the above compare the words of Leibnitz in his " Dis-
cours de la Conformite de la Foi avec la Raison," sec. 56: " II en est
de meme des autres mysteres, oii les esprits moderes trouveront tou-
jours une explication sufifisante pour croire, et jamais autant qu'il en
faut pour comprendre. II nous sufifit d'un certain ce qice c'est (ti
ecTTi) ; mais le cojurneui (irw?) nous passe, et ne nous est point
necessaire" {CEiivres de Locke et Leibnitz) . See also p. 175, note
I, above, on the " incomprehensibility" of eternity.

" While giving illustrations of the Trinity like the above, he would
not have a man think " that he has discovered that which is above
these, Unchangeable." (See also De Trin. xv. 5, end.) He is very
fond of such illustrations. In his De Civ. Dei, xi. 26, 27, for ex-
ample, we have a parallel to this in our text, in the union of existence,
knowledge, and love in man; in his De Trin. ix. 4, 17, 18, we have
mind, knowLdge, and love; ibid. x. 19, memory, understanding, and
will; and ibid. xi. 16, memory, thought, and will. In his De Lib.
Arb. ii. 7, again, we have the doctrme illustrated by the union of
being, life, and knowledge in man. He also finds illustrations of the
doctrine in other created things, as in their measure, weight, and
number {De Trin. xi. 18), and their existence, figure, and order
{De Vera Relig. xiii.). The nature of these illustrations would at
first sight seem to involve him in the Sabellian heresy, which denied
the fulness of the Godhead to each of the three Persons of the Trin-
ity; but this is only in appearance. He does not use these illustra-
tions as presenting anything analogous to the union of the three
Persons in the Godhead, but as dimly illustrative of it. He declares
his belief in the Athanasian doctrine, which, as Dr. Newman observes
{Grammar of Assent, v. 1)," ma.y he said to be summed up in
this very formula on which St. Augustin lays so much stress, —
' Tres et Unus,' not merely ' Unum.' " Nothing can be clearer than
his words in his De Civ. Dei, xi. 24: " When we inquire regarding
each singly, it is said that each is God and Almighty; and when we
speak of all together, it is said that there are not three Gods, nor
three Almighties, but one God Almighty." Compare with this his De
Trin. vii., end of ch. 11, where the language is equally emphatic.
See also Mansel, as above, lect. vi. and notes 11 and 12.


194


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XIII.


when he discovers and can say anything of
these, let him not then think that he has discov-
ered that which is above these Unchangeable,
which Is unchangeably, and Knows unchange-
ably, and Wills unchangeably. And whether on
account of these three there is also, where they
are, a Trinity ; or whether these three be in
Each, so that the three belong to Each ; or
whether botli ways at once, wondrously, simply,
and yet diversely, in Itself a limit unto Itself,
yet illimitable ; whereby It is, and is known unto
Itself, and sufficeth to Itself, unchangeably the
Self-same, by the abundant magnitude of its
Unity, — who can readily conceive ? Who in
any wise express it? Who in any way rashly
pronounce thereon?

CHAP. XII. — ALLEGORICAL EXPLANATION OF GENE-
SIS, CHAP. I., CONCERNING THE ORIGIN OF THE
CHURCH AND ITS WORSHIP.

13. Proceed in thy confession, say to the Lord
thy God, O my faith. Holy, Holy, Holy, O Lord
my God, in Thy name have we been baptized,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in Thy name do
we baptize. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,' be-
cause among us also in His Christ did God make
heaven and earth, namely, the spiritual and car-
nal people of His Church.^ Yea, and our earth,
before it received the " form of doctrine," ^ was
invisible and formless, and we were covered with
the darkness of ignorance. For Thou correct-
est man for iniquity, + and " Thy judgments are
a great deep." s But because Thy Spirit was
" borne over the waters," ^ Thy mercy forsook
not our misery,'' and Thou saidst, " Let there be
light," " Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand."^ Repent ye, let there be light.9
And because our soul was troubled within us,'°
we remembered Thee, O Lord, from the land
of Jordan, and that mountain " equal unto Thy-
self, but little for our sakes ; and upon our being
displeased with our darkness, we turned unto Thee,
•" and there was light." And, behold, we were
sometimes darkness, but now light in the Lord.'^

' Matt, xxviii. 19.

2 He similarly interprets "heaven and earth" in his De Gen. ad
Lit. ii. 4. With this compare Chrysostom's illustration in his De
Paetiit. hom. 8. The Church is like the ark of Noah, yet different
from it. Into that ark as the animals entered, so they came forth.
The fo.x remained a fo.v, the hawk a hawk, and the serpent a serpent.
But with the spiritual ark it is not so, for in it evil dispositions are
changed. This illustration of Chrysostom is used with an effective
but rough eloquence by the Italian preacher Segneri, in his Qitare-
simale, serm iv. sec.

s Rom. vi. 17.

* Ps. xx.vix. II.
S Ps. x.vxvi. 6.

* Gen. i. 3.

7 See p. 47, note 10, above.

8 Matt. iii. 2.

9 " His putting repentance and light together is, for that baptism
was anciently called illumination, as Heb. vi. 4, Ps. xlii. 2." — W. W.
See also p. 118, note 4, part i, above, for the meaning of " illumina-
tion."

10 Ps. xlii. 6.

" That is, Christ. See p. 130, note 8, part 2, above; and compare
the De Div. Qutest. Ixxxiii. 6.
12 Eph. V. 8.


CHAP. XIII. THAT THE RENEWAL OF MAN IS NOT

COMPLETED IN THIS WORLD.

14. But as yet "by faith, not by sight," '^ for
" we are saved by hope ; but hope that is seen
is not hope." '•* As yet deep calleth unto deep '5
but in " the noise of Thy waterspouts." '^ And
as yet doth he that saith, I " could not speak
unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal," '^
even he, as yet, doth not count himself to have
apprehended, and forgetteth those things which
are behind, and reacheth forth to those things
which are before,'** and groaneth being bur-
dened ; '9 and his soul thirsteth after the living
Cxod, as the hart after the water-brooks, and
saith, "When shall I corae?"^° "desiring to be
clothed upon with his house which is from heav-
en ; " ^' and calleth upon this lower deep, saying,
" Be not conformed to this world, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind." ^2
And, " Be not children in understanding, how-
beit in malice be ye children," that in " under-
standing ye may be perfect ; " ^^ and " O foolish
Galatians, who hath bewitched you?"^-* But
now not in his own voice, but in Thine who
sentest Thy Spirit from above ; ^5 through Him
who " ascended up on high," ^^ and set open the
flood-gates of His gifts,^^ that the force of His
streams might make glad the city of God.^*^ For,
for Him doth " the friend of the bridegroom " ^9
sigh, having now the first-fruits of the Spirit laid
up with Him, yet still groaning within himself,
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption
of his body ; 3<^ to Him he sighs, for he is a mem-
ber of the Bride ; for Him is he jealous, for he
is the friend of the Bridegroom ; ^^ for Him is
he jealous, not for himself; because in the voice
of Thy " waterspouts," ''' not in his own voice,
doth he call on that other deep, for whom being
jealous he feareth, lest that, as the serpent be-
guiled Eve through his subtilty, so their minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is|
in our Bridegroom, Thine only Son.^' What
light of beauty will that be when " we shall se
Him as He is," ^^ and those tears be passed awa


'3 2 Cor. V 7.

■* Rom. viii. 24.

'5 The " deep" Augustin interprets (as do the majority of Patri9|
tic commentators), zii Ps. xli. 8, sec. 13, to be the heart of man; ani
the "deep" that calls unto it, is the preacher who has his ow(|
" deep" of infirmity, even as Peter had.

>f> Ps. xlii. 7.

'7 I Cor. iiL I.

18 Phil. iii. 13.

'9 2 Cor. V. 2, 4.

20 Ps. xlii I, 2.

2t 2 Cor. V. 2.

22 Rom. xii. 2.

23 I Cor. xiv. 20 (margin).
2'» Gal. iii. I.

25 Acts ii. 19.

26 Eph. iv. 8.

27 Mai. iii. 10.

28 Ps. xlvi. 4.

29 John iii. 29.
3° Rom. viii. 23.
3' 2 Cor. xi. 3, and i John iii. 3.
32 Hid. ver. 2.


Chap. XIII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


195


which " have been my meat day and night,
while they continually say unto me, Where is
thy God?'"

CH.-VP. XIV. TH.4T OUT OF THE CHILDREN OF THE

NIGHT AND OF THE D.\RKNES.S, CHILDREN OF
THE LIGHT AND OF THE DAY ARE MADE.

15. .-\nd SO say I too, O my God, where art
Thou? Behold where Thou art! In Thee I
breathe a little, when I pour out my soul by my-
self in the voice of joy and praise, the sound of
him that keeps holy-day.^ And yet it is " cast
down," because it relapses and becomes a deep,
or rather it feels that it is still a deep. Unto it
doth my faith speak which Thou hast kindled to
enlighten my feet in the night, " Why art thou
cast down, () my soul? and why art thou dis-
quieted in me? hope thou in God ;"3 His "word
is a lamp unto my feet." ■♦ Hope and endure
until the night, — the mother of the wicked, —
until the anger of the Lord be overpast,^ where-
of we also were once children who were some-
times darkness,^ the remains whereof we carry
about us in our body, dead on account of sin,^
" until the day break and the shadows flee
away."^ "Hope thou in the Lord." In the
morning I shall stand in Thy presence, and con-
template Thee ; 9 I shall for ever confess unto
Thee.'° In the morning I shall stand in Thy
presence, and shall see " the health of my coun-
tenance," " my God, who also shall quicken our
mortal bodies by the Spirit that dwelleth in us,'^
because in mercy He was borne over our inner
darksome and floating deep. Whence we have
in this pilgrimage received " an earnest" '^ that we
should now be light, whilst as yet we "are saved
by hope," '•♦ and are the children of light, and
the children of the day, — not the children of the
night nor of the darkness, '5 which yet we have
been.'*" Betwixt whom and us, in this as yet un-
certain state of human knowledge, Thou only
dividest, who provest our hearts ^^ and callest the
light day, and the darkness night. ''^ For who
discerneth us but Thou? But what have we that
we have not received of Thee ? '^ Out of the

» Ps. xlii. 3.
' 2 Ibid. ver. 4.

' 3 Ibid. ver. 5.

* Ps. cxix. 105.
5 Job xiv. 13.

* Eph. ii. 3, and v. 8.
' Rom. viii. 10.

^ Cant. ii. 17.

9 Ps. V. 3.

'° Ps. xxx. 12.

" Ps. xliii. 5.

'^ Rom. viii. 11.

'^ 2 Cor. i. 22.

•* Rom. viii. 24.

'5 Though ^the light, we are not yet in the light; and though, in
this grey dawn of the coming day, we have a foretaste of the vision
that shall be, we cannot hope, as he says in Ps. v. 4, to " see Him as
jjHe is" until the darkness of sin be overpast.

■'' Eph. V. 8, and i Thess. v. 5.

" Ps. vii. 9.

18 Gen. i. 5.

'9 I Cor. iv. 7.


same lump vessels unto honour, of which others
also are made to dishonour.^"


CHAP. XV. ALLEGORICAL EXPLANATION OF THE

FIRMAMENT AND UPPER WORKS, VER. 6.

16. Or who but Thou, our God, made for us
that firmament^' of authority over us in Thy
divine Scripture?" As it is said. For heaven
shall be folded up like a scroll ; ^^ and now it is
extended over us like a skin.^+ For Thy divine
Scripture is of more sublime authority, since
those mortals through whom Thou didst dispense
it unto us underwent mortality. And Thou
knowest, O Lord, Thou knowest, how Thou with
skins didst clothe men ^5 when by sin they be-
came mortal. Whence as a skin hast Thou
stretched out the firmament of Thy Book ; ^^ that
is to say. Thy harmonious words, which by the
ministry of mortals Thou hast spread over us.
For by their very death is that solid firmament
of authority in Thy discourses set forth by them
more sublimely extended above all things that
are under it, the which, while they were living
here, was not so eminently extended.^7 Thou
hadst not as yet spread abroad the heaven like
a skin ; Thou hadst not as yet noised every-
where the report of their deaths.

17. Let us look, O Lord, " upon the heavens,
the work of Thy fingers ; " ^® clear from our eyes
that mist with which Thou hast covered them.
There is that testimony of Thine which giveth
wisdom unto the litde ones.^'? Perfect, O my God,
Thy praise out of the mouth of babes and suck-
lings.3° Nor have we known any other books so
destructive to pride, so destructive to the enemy
and the defender,^' who resisteth Thy reconcilia-
tion in defence of his own sins.^^ I know not, O
Lord, I know not other such " pure " " words
which so persuade me to confession, and make
my neck submissive to Thy yoke, and invite me
to serve Thee for nought. Let me understand
these things, good Father, Grant this to me,
placed under them; because Thou hast estab-
lished these things for those placed under them.


20 Rom. ix. 21.

21 Gen. i. 6.

22 See sec. 33, below, and references there given.

23 Lsa. xxxiv. 4, and Rev. vi. 14.

24 Ps. civ. 2: in the Vidg. being, " extendens coelum sicut pel-
lent." The LXX. agrees with the V'ulg. in translating n^^"l'3,

" as a curtain," by " as a skin."

25 Gen. iii. 21. Skins he makes the emblems of mortality, as being
taken from dead animals. See p. 112, note 8, above.

26 That is, the firmament of Scripture was after man's sin stretched
over him as a parchment scroll, — stretched over him for his enlight-
enment by the ministry of mortal men. This idea is enlarged on in
Ps. viii. 4, sec. 7, etc., xviii. sec. 2, xxxii. 6, 7, and cxlvi. 8, sec. 15.

27 We have the same idea in Ps. ciii. .sec. 8: " Cum enim vive-
rent nondum erat externa pellis, nondum erat externum coelum, ut
tegeret orbem terrarum."

2S Ps. viii. 3.

29 Ps. xix. 7. See p. 62, note 6, above.

30 Ps. viii. 2.

3' He alludes to the Manichaeans. See notes, pp. 67, 81, and 87.

32 See part 2 of note 8 on p. 76, above.

33 Ps. XLX. 8.


196


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XIII,


18. Other "waters" there be "above" this
" firmament," I believe immortal, and removed
from earthly corruption. Let them praise Thy
Name, — those super-celestial people, Thine
angels, who have no need to look up at this
firmament, or by reading to attain the knowledge
of Thy Word, — let them praise Thee. For they
always behold Thy face,' and therein read with-
out any syllables in time what Thy eternal will
willeth. They read, they choose, they love.^
They are always reading ; and that which they
read never passeth away. For, by choosing and
by loving, they read the very unchangeableness
of Thv counsel. Their book is not closed, nor
is the scroll folded up,3 because Thou Thyself
art this to them, yea, and art so eternally ; be-
cause Thou hast appointed them above this firma-
ment, which Thou hast made firm over the weak-
ness of the lower people, where they might look
up and learn Thy mercy, announcing in time
Thee who hast made times. " For Thy mercy,
O Lord, is in the heavens, and Thy faithfulness
reacheth unto the clouds." ■♦ The clouds pass
away, but the heaven remaineth. The preachers
of Thy \V'ord pass away from this life into another ;
but Thy Scripture is spread abroad over the peo-
ple, even to the end of the world. Yea, both
heaven and earth shall pass away, but Thy \V^ords
shall not pass away.s Because the scroll shall
be rolled together,^ and the grass over which it
was spread shall with its goodliness pass away ;
but Thv Word remaineth for ever,^ which now
appeareth unto us in the dark image of the clouds,
and through the glass of the heavens, not as it
is ; 7 because we also, although we be the well-
beloved of Thy Son, yet it hath not yet appeared
what we shall be.** He looketh through the lat-
tice 9 of our flesh, and He is fair-speaking, and
hath inflamed us, and we run after His odours. '°
But " when He shall appear, then shall we be
like Him, for we shall see Him as He is." ^ As
He is, O Lord, shall we see Him, although the
time be not yet.

CHAP. XVI. THAT NO ONE BUT THE UNCHANGE-
ABLE LIGHT KNOWS HLMSELF.

19. For altogether as Thou art. Thou only
knowest, Who art unchangeably, and knovvest
unchangeably, and wiliest unchangeably. And


Thy Essence Knoweth and Willeth unchange-
ably ; and Thy Knowledge Is, and Willeth un-
changeably ; and Thy Will Is, and Knoweth
unchangeably. Nor doth it appear just to Thee,
that as the Unchangeable Light knoweth Itself,
so should It be known by that which is en-
lightened and changeable." Therefore unto Thee
is my soul as " land where no water is," '- because
as it cannot of itself enlighten itself, so it cannot
of itself satisfy itself For so is the fountain of
life with Thee, like as in Thy light we shall see
light.'3

CHAP. XVII. — ALLEGORICAL EXPLANATION OF THE


SEA AND THE FRUIT-BEARING EARTH
9 AND I I .


VERSES


Matt, xviii. 10.

" Legunt, eligunt, et diligunt."
Isa. xxxiv. 4.
Ps. xxxvi. 5.
Matt. xxiv. 35.

Isa. xl. 6-8. The law of storms, and that which reguLites the
motions of the stars or the ebbing and flowing of the tides, may-
change at the " end of the world." But the moral law can know no
change, for while the first is arbitrarj', the second is absohite. On
the difference between moral and natural law, see Candlish, Reason
and Revelation, " Conscience and the Bible."
7 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
^ I John iii. 2.
9 Cant. ii. 9.
>° Cant. i. 3.


20. Who hath gathered the embittered to-
gether into one society? For they have all the
same end, that of temporal and earthly happiness,
on account of which they do all things, although
they may fluctuate with an innumerable variety
of cares. Who, O Lord, unless Thou, saidst.
Let the waters be gathered together into one
place, and let the dry land appear,'** which
" thirsteth after Thee " ? 'S For the sea also is
Thine, and Thou hast made it, and Thy hands
prepared the dry land.'^ For neither is the bit-
terness of men's wills, but the gathering together
of waters called sea ; for Thou even curbest the
wicked desires of men's souls, and fi.xest their
bounds, how far they may be permitted to ad-
vance,'^ and that their waves may be broken
against each other ; and thus dost Thou make it
a sea, by the order of Thy dominion over all
things.

21. But as for the souls that thirst after Thee,
and that appear before Thee (being by other
bounds divided from the society of the sea),
them Thou waterest by a secret and sweet spring,
that the earth may bring forth her fruit, '^ and.


" See Dean M.tnsel on this place {Bam/>toH Lectures, lect. v.
note 18), who argues that revelation is clear and devoid of mystery
when viewed as intended " for our practical guidance," and not as a
matter of speculation. He says: "The utmost deficiency that can
be charged against human faculties amounts only to this, that we
cannot say that we know God as God knows Himself, — that the truth
of which our finite minds are susceptible may, for aught we know, be
but the passing shadow of some higher reality, which exists only in
the Infinite Intelligence." He shows also that this deficiency per-
tains to the human faculties as such, and that, whether they set them-
selves to consider the things of nature or revelation. See also p 193,
note 8, above, and notes, pp. 197, 198, below.

'^ Ps. Ixiii. I.

'^ Ps. xxxvi. 9.

'■• CJen. i. g. In his comment on Psalm Ixiv. 6 (sec. 9I, he inter-
prets " the sea," allegorically, of the wicked world. Hence were the
disciples called " fishers of men." If the fishers have taken us in
the nets of faith, we are to rejoice, because the net will be dragged
to the shore. On the providence of God, regulating the wickedness
of men, see p. 79, note 4, above.

'5 Ps. cxiiii. 6, and Ixiii. i.

'^ Ps. xcv. 5.

'^ Ps. civ. 9, and Job xxxviii. 11, 12.

'^ Gen. ill. As he interprets (see sec. 20, note, above) the sea
as the world, so he tells us in Ps. Ixvi. 6, sec. 8, that when the earth,
full of thorns, thirsted for the waters of heaven, God in His mercy
sent His apostles to preach the gospel, whereon the earth brought
f irih that fruit which fills the world; that is, the earth bringing forth
fruit represents the Church.


A


I


f


Chap. XVII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


197


Thou, O Lord God, so commanding, our soul
may bud forth works of mercy according to their
kind.' — loving our neighbour in the relief of
his bodily necessities, having seed in itself ac-
cording to its likeness, when from our infirmity
we compassionate even to the relieving of the
needy ; helping them in a like manner as we
would that help should be brought unto us if we
were in a like need ; not only in the things that
are easy, as in " herb yielding seed," but also in
the protection of our assistance, in our very
strength, like the tree yielding fruit ; that is, a
good turn in delivering him who suffers an injury
from the hand of the powerful, and in furnishing j
him with the shelter of protection by the mighty
strength of just judgment.

CHAP. XVIII. OF THE LIGHTS AND STARS OF

HE.4VEN — OF DAY AND NIGHT, VER. 1 4.

2 2. Thus, O Lord, thus, I beseech Thee, let
there arise, as Thou makest, as Thou givest joy
and ability, — let " truth spring out of the earth,
and righteousness look down from heaven," '
and let there be " lights in the firmament." ^
Let us break our bread to the hungry, and let us
bring the houseless poor to our house. ^ Let us
clothe the naked, and despise not those of our
own flesh. 3 The which fruits having sprung forth
from the earth, behold, because it is good ; ■♦ and
let our temporary light burst forth ; 5 and let us,
from this inferior fruit of action, possessing the
delights of contemplation and of the ^Vord of
Life above, let us appear as lights in the world,^
clinging to the firmament of Thy Scripture. For
therein Thou makest it plain unto us, that we
may distinguish between things intelligible and
things of sense, as if between the day and the
night ; or between souls, given, some to things
intellectual, others to things of sense ; so that
now not Thou only in the secret of Thy judg-
ment, as before the firmament was made, dividest
between the light and the darkness, but Thy
spiritual children also, placed and ranked in the
same firmament (Thy grace being manifest
throughout the world), may give light upon the
earth, and divide between the day and night,
and be for signs of times ; because " old things
have passed away," and " behold all things are
become new ; " ^ and " because our salvation is
nearer than when we believed ; " ^ and because
" the night is far spent, the day is at hand ; " ^
and because Thou wilt crown Thy year with
blessing,^ sending the labourers of Thy goodness


* Ps. IxXXV. II.

^ Gen. i 14.
3 Isa. Iviii. 7,

* Gen. i. 12.

5 Isa. Iviii. 8.

6 Phil. li. 15.

' 2 Cor. V. 17.

* Rom. xiii. 11, 12.
9 Ps. Uv. II.


into Thy harvest,'" in the sowing of which others
have laboured, sending also into another field,
whose harvest shall be in the end." Thus Thou
grantest the prayers of him that asketh, and
blessest the years of the just ; '- but Thou art the
same, and in Thy years which fail not '^ Thou
preparest a garner for our passing years. For
by an eternal counsel Thou dost in their proper
seasons bestow upon the earth heavenly blessings.
23. For, indeed, to one is given by the Spirit
the word of wisdom, as if the greater light, on
account of those who are delighted with the
light of manifest truth, as in the beginning of
the day ; but to another the word of knowledge
by the same Spirit, as if the lesser light ; '■* to
another faith ; to another the gift of healing ;
to another the working of miracles ; to another
prophecy ; to another the discerning of spirits ;
to another divers kinds of tongues. And all
these as stars. For all these worketh the one
and self-same Spirit, dividing to every man his
own as He willeth ; '5 and making stars appear
manifestly, to profit withal.'^ But the word of
knowledge, wherein are contained all sacra-
ments,'" which are varied in their periods like the
moon, and the other conceptions of gifts, which
are successively reckoned up as stars, inasmuch
as they come short of that splendour of wisdom
in which the fore-mentioned day rejoices, are
only for the beginning of the night. For they
are necessary to such as he Thy most prudent
servant could not speak unto as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal '^ — even he who speaketh
wisdom among those that are perfect. '9 But
the natural man, as a babe in Christ, — and a
drinker of milk, — until he be strengthened for
solid meat,^° and his eye be enabled to look upon


1° Matt. i.\. 38.

" Matt. xiii. 39.

1= Prov. X. 6.

'3 Ps. cii. 27.

'* Compare his De Trin. xil. 22-55, where, referring to i Cor.
xii. 8, he explains that " knowledge " has to do with action, or that
by which we use rightly things temporal; while wisdom has to do
with the contemplation of things eternal. See also in Ps. cxxxv.
sec. 8.

'5 I Cor. xii. 8-11.

'* I Cor. xii. 7.

'^ I Cor. xiii. 2. The Authorized Version and the Vulgate render
more correctly, "mysteries." From Palmer (see p. 118, note 3,
above), we learn that " the Fathers gave the name of sacraincnt or
mystery to everything which conveyed one signification or property
to unassisted reason, and another to foith; " while, at the same time,
they counted Baptism and the Lord's Supper as the two great sacra-
ments. The sacraments, then, used in this sense are " varied in their
periods," and Augustin, in Ps. Ixxiii. 2, speaks of distinguishing be-
tween the sacraments of the Old Testament and the sacraments of
the New. " Sacramenta novi Testamenti " he says, " dant salutem,
sacramenta veteris Testamenti promiserunt salvatorem." So also in
Ps. xlvi. he says: "Our Lord God varying, indeed, the sacraments
of the words, but commending imto us one faith, hath diffused through
the sacred Scriptures manifoldly and variously the faith in which we
live, and by which we live. For one and the same thing is said in
many ways, that it may be varied in the manner of speaking in order
to prevent aversion, but may be preserved as one with a view to
concord."

'^ I Cor. iii. I.

'9 I Cor. ii. 6.

2° I Cor. iii. 2, and Heb. v. 12. The allusion in our text is to
what is called the Disciplina Arcani o{ the early Church. Clement
of Alexandria, in his Stromata, enters at large into the matter of
esoteric teaching, and traces its use amongst the Hebrews, Greeks,


198


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XIII.


the Sun,' let him not dwell in his own deserted
night, but let him be contented with the light
of the moon and the stars. Thou reasonest
these things with us, our All-wise God, in Thy
Book, Thy firmament, that we may discern all
things in an admirable contemplation, although
as yet in signs, and in times, and in days, and in
years.

CHAP. XIX. — ALL MEN SHOULD BECOME LIGHTS IN
THE FIRMAMENT OF HEAVEN.

24. But first, " Wash you, make you clean ; " ^
put away iniquity fi-om your souls, and from be-
fore mine eyes, that the dry land may appear.
" Learn to do well ; judge the fatherless ; plead
for the widow," ^ that the earth may bring forth
the green herb for meat, and the tree bearing
fruit ; 4 and come let us reason together, saith
the Lord,5 that there may be lights in the firma-
ment of heaven, and that they may shine upon
the earth.'' That rich man asked of the good
Master what he should do to attain eternal life.7
Let the good Master, whom he thought a man,
and nothing more, tell him (but He is " good "
because He is God) — let Him tell him, that
if he would " enter into hfe " he must " keep
the commandments ; " ^ let him banish from
himself the bitterness of malice and wicked-
ness ; 9 let him not kill, nor commit adultery,

and Egyptians. Clement, like Chrysostom and other Fathers, sup-
ports this principle of interpretation on the authority of St. Paul in
Heb. V. and vi., referred to by Augustin above. He says (as quoted
by Bishop Kaye, Clement 0/ Alexandria, ch. iv. p. 183): " Babes
must be fed with milk, the perfect man with solid food; milk is cate-
chetical instruction, the first nourishment of the soul ; solid food, con-
templation penetrating into all mysteries (t) en-on-riicr) Secupt'a), the
blood and flesh of the Word, the comprehension of the Divine power
and essence." Augustin, therefore, when he speaks of being " con-
tented with the light of the moon and stars," alludes to the partial
knowledge imparted to the catechumen during his probationary period
before baptism. It was only as competentes, and ready for baptism,
that the catechumens were taught the Lord's Prayer and the Creed.
We have already adverted to this matter in note 4 on p. 89, and
need not now do more than refer the reader to Dr. Newman's A rians.
In ch. i. sec. 3 of that work, there are som^most interesting pages
on this subject, in its connection with the Catechetical School of
Alexandria. See also p. 118, note 8, above; Palmer, Origines
Liturgicce, iv. sec. 7: and note i, below.

' Those ready for strong meat were called " illuminated " (see p.
118, note 4, above), as their eyes were "enabled to look upon the
Sun." We have frequent traces in Augustin's writings of the Neo-
Platonic doctrine that the soul has a capacity to see God, even as the
eye the sun. In Serm. Ixxxviii. 6 he says: " Daretne tibi unde
videres solem quem fecit, et non tibi daret unde videres eum qui le
fecit, cum te ad imaginem suam fecerit? " And, referrmg to i John
lii. 2, he tells us in Ep. xcii. 3, that not with the bodily eye shall we
see God, but with the inner, which is to be renewed day by day :
" We shall, therefore, see Him according to the measure in which we
shall be like Him; because now the measure in which we do not see
Him is according to the measure of our unlikeness to Him." Com-
pare also Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypko, c. 4: " Plato, in-
deed, says, that the mind's eye is of such a nature, and has been
given for this end, that we may see that very Being who is the cause
of all when the mind is pure itself." Some interesting remarks on
this subject, and on the three degrees of divine knowledge as held by
the Neo-Platonists, will be found in John Smith's Select Discourses,
pp. 2 and 165 (Cambridge i860). On growth in grace, see note 4,
p. 140, above.

2 " He alludes to the sacrament of Baptism." — W. W.

3 Isa. i. 16, 19.
^ Gen. i. 11, 30.
s Isa. i. 18.

' Gen. i. 15.
7 Matt. xix. 16.
^ Ibid. ver. 17.
9 I Cor. V. 8.


nor steal, nor bear false witness ; that the dry
land may appear, and bud forth the honouring
of father and mother, and the love of our neigh-
bour.'° All these, saith he, have I kept." Whence,
then, are there so many thorns, if the earth be
fruitful? Go, root up the woody thicket of ava-
rice ; sell that thou hast, and be filled with fruit
by giving to the poor, and thou shalt have treas-
ure in heaven ; and follow the Lord " if thou
wilt be perfect," '- coupled with those amongst
whom He speaketh wisdom. Who knoweth what
to distribute to the day and to tlie night, that
thou also mayest know it, that for thee also
there may be lights in the firmament of heaven,
which will not be unless thy heart be there ; '^
which likewise also will not be unless thy treas-
ure be there, as thou hast heard from the good
Master. But the barren earth was grieved,''* and
the thorns choked the word. '5

25. But you, "chosen generation,"" you weak
things of the world," who have forsaken all
things that you might "follow the Lord," go
after Him, and " confound the things which are
mighty ; " '7 go after Him, ye beautiful feet,'^ and
shine in the firmament,"? that the heavens may
declare His glory, dividing between the light of
the perfect, though not as of the angels, and the
darkness of the little, though not despised ones.
Shine over all the earth, and let the day, light-
ened by the sun, utter unto day the word of
wisdom ; and let night, shining by the moon,
announce unto night the word of knowledge.^"
The moon and the stars shine for the night, but
the night obscureth them not, since they illu-
mine it in its degree. For behold God (as it
were) saying, " Let there be lights in the firma-
ment of the heaven." There came suddenly a
sound from heaven, as it had been the rushing
of a mighty wind, and there appeared cloven
tongue^ like as of fire, and it sat upon each of
them.^' And there w^ere made lights in the fir-
mament of heaven, having the word of life.^^
Run ye to and fro everywhere, .ye holy fires, ye
beautiful fires ; for ye are the light of the world,-^
nor are ye put under a bushel. ^-t He to whom
ye cleave is exalted, and hath exalted you. Run
ye to and fro, and be known unto all nations.

1° Matt. xix. 16-19.
" Ibid. ver. 20.
'- Ihid. ver. 21.
'3 Matt. vi. 21.
'* Matt. xix. 22.
'5 Matt, xiii 7, 22.
'* I Pet. ii. 9.
'7 I Cor. i. 27.
'8 Isa. lii. 7.
'9 Dan. xii. 3.

20 Ps. xix.

21 Acts ii. 3.

22 I John i. I.

23 That is, as having their light from Him who is their central Sun
(see p. 76, note 2, above). For it is true of all Christians in relation
to their Lord, as he says of John the Baptist {Serm. ccclxxxii. 7):
" Johannes lumen illuminatura: Christus Iimien illuminans." See
also note i, above.

24 Matt. V. 14.


Ill


««l"l


I


Chap. XX.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


199


CHAP. XX. CONCERNING REPIILES AND FLYING

CREATURES (VER. 20), THE SACRAMENT OF

B.\PTIS.M BEING REGARDED.

26. Let the sea also conceive and bring forth
your works, and let the waters bring forth the
moving creatures that have life.' For ye, who
" take forth the precious from the vile," ^ have
been made the mouth of God, through which
He saith, " Let the waters bring forth," not the
living creature which the earth bringeth forth,
but the moving creature having life, and the
fowls that fly above the earth. For Thy sacra-
ments, O God, by the ministry of Thy holy ones,
have made their way amid the billows of the
temptations of the world, to instruct the Gentiles
in Thy Name, in Thy Baptism. And amongst
these things, many great works of wonder have
been wrought, like as great whales ; and the
voices of Thy messengers flying above the earth,
near to the firmament of Thy Book ; that being
set over them as an authority, under which they
were to fly whithersoever they were to go. For
" there is no speech, nor language, where their
voice is not heard ; " seeing their sound ^ " hath
gone through all the earth, and their words to
the end of the world," because Thou, O Lord,
hast multiplied these things by blessing.^

27. Whether do 1 lie, or do I mingle and con-
found, and not distinguish between the clear
knowledge of these things that are in the fir-
mament of heaven, and the corporeal works in
the undulating sea and under the firmament of
heaven ? For of those things whereof the knowl-
edge is solid and defined, without increase by
generation, as it were lights of wisdom and

I knowledge, yet of these self-same things the

1 material operations are many and varied ; and

one thing in growing from another is multiplied

by Thy blessing, O God, who hast refreshed

Ithe fastidiousness of mortal senses ; so that in the

[knowledge of our mind, one thing may, through

|the motions of the body, be in many ways 5 set

)ut and expressed. These sacraments have the

Ijwaters brought forth ; ^ but in Thy Word. The

'ants of the people estranged from the eternity

if Thy truth have produced them, but in Thy


* Gen. i. 20.
^ Jer. XV. 19.

3 Ps. xix. 3, 4. The word " sound" in this verse (as given in the
.XX. and Vulg.), is in the Hebrew D?p, which is rightly rendered

Ip the Authorized Version a " line" or " rule." It may be noted, in
onnection with Augustin's interpretation, that the word " firma-
|ient"in the first verse of this psalm is the >''p1 of Gen. i. 7; trans-
ited in both places by the LXX. (mpiiatia. The " heavens " and the
1 firmament" are constantly interpreted by the Fathers as referring to
pe apostles and their firmness in teaching the word; and this is sup-
prted by reference to St. Paul's quotation of the text in Rom. x. 18:
iBut I say, Have they not heard? Yes, verily, theit sound went
|to all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world."

* Gen. i. 4.
5 See end of note 17, p. 197, above.

* " He alludes to Baptism in water, accompanied with the word
1 the gospel ; of the institution whereof man's misery was the occa-
bn." — W. W.


Gospel ; because the waters themselves have
c^st them forth, the bitter weakness of which
was the cause of these things being sent forth in
Thy Word.

28. Now all things are fair that Thou hast
made, but behold. Thou art inexpressibly fairer
who hast made all things ; from whom had not
Adam fallen, the saltness of the sea would never
have flowed from him, — the human race so pro-
foundly curious, and boisterously swelling, and
restlessly moving ; and thus there would be no
need that Thy dispensers should work in many
vvaters,7 in a corporeal and sensible manner,
mysterious doings and sayings. For so these
creeping and flying creatures now present them-
selves to my mind, whereby men, instructed,
initiated, and subjected by corporeal sacraments,
should not further profit, unless their soul had a
higher spiritual life, and unless, after the word
of admission, it looked forwards to perfection.**

CHAP. XXI. CONCERNING THE LIVING SOUL, BIRDS,

AND FISHES (VER. 24), THE SACRAMENT OF

THE EUCHARIST BEING REGARDED.

29. And hereby, in Thy Word, not the depth
of the sea, but the earth parted from the bitter-
ness of the waters,'' bringeth forth not the creep-
ing and flying creature that hath life,' but the
living soul itself. '° For now hath it no longer
need of baptism, as the heathen have, and as.
itself had when it was covered with the waters,.
— for no other entrance is there into the king-
dom of heaven," since Thou hast appointed that
this should be the entrance, — nor does it seek
great works of miracles by which to cause faith ;
for it is not such that, unless it shall have seen
signs and wonders, it will not believe,'^ when now
the faithful earth is separated from the waters-
of the sea, rendered bitter by infidelity ; and
" tongues are for a sign, not to those that believe,,
but to those that believe not." '^ Nor then dotb
the earth, which Thou hast founded above the-
waters,'^ stand in need of that flying kind which
at Thy word the waters brought forth. Send
Thy word forth into it by Thy messengers. For
we relate their works, but it is Thou who workest
in them, that in it they may work out a hving
soul. The earth bringeth it forth, because the


7 See sec. 20, note, above.

8 " He means that Baptism, which is the sacrament of initiation,
was not so profitable without the Lord's Supper, which ancients called
the sacrament of perfection or consummation." — W. W. Compare
also sec. 24, note, and p. 140, note 3, above.

9 See sec. 20, note, and sec. 21, note, above.
'° Gen. ii. 7.

't John iii. 5.

»2 John iv. 48.

'3 I Cor. xiv. 22.

'* " Fundasti super aquas," which is the Old Ver. of Ps. cxxxvi.
6. Augustin sometimes uses a version with " firmavit terram," which
corresponds to the LXX., but the Authorized Version renders the
Hebrew more accurately by " stretched out." In his comment on
this place he applies this text to baptism as being the entrance into
the Church, and in this he is followed by many mediaeval writers.


200


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XIII.


earth is the cause that they work these things in
the soul ; as the sea has been the cause that they
wrought upon the moving creatures that have
Hfe, and the fowls that fly under the firmament
of heaven, of which the earth hath now no need ;
although it feeds on the fish which was taken
out of the deep, upon that table which Thou
hast prepared in the presence of those that be-
lieve.' For therefore He was raised from the
deep, that He might feed the dry land ; and
the fowl, though bred in the sea, is yet multiplied
upon the earth. For of the first preachings of
the Evangelists, the infidelity of men was the
prominent cause ; but the faithful also are ex-
horted, and are manifoldly blessed by them day
by day. But the living soul takes its origin from
the earth, for it is not profitable, unless to those
already among the faithful, to restrain themselves
from the love of this world, that so their soul
may live unto Thee, which was dead while living
in pleasures,^ — in death-bearing pleasures, O
Lord, for Thou art the vital delight of the pure
heart.

30. Now, therefore, let Thy ministers work
upon the earth, — not as in the waters of infidel-
ity, by announcing and. speaking by miracles, and
sacraments, and mystic words ; in which igno-
rance, the mother of admiration, may be intent
upon them, in fear of those hidden signs. For
such is the entrance unto the fairti for the sons
of Adam forgetful of Thee, while they hide
themselves from Thy face,^ and become a dark-
some deep. But let Thy ministers work even
as on the dry land, separated from the whirlpools
of the great deep ; and let them be an example
unto the faithful, by living before them, and by
stimulating them to imitation. For thus do men
hear not with an intent to hear merely, but to
act also. Seek the Lord, and your soul shall
live,-* that the earth may bring forth the living
soul. " Be not conformed to this world." 5 Re-
strain yourselves from it ; the soul lives by avoid-
ing those things which it dies by affecting.
Restrain yourselves from the unbridled wildness
of pride, from the indolent voluptuousness of
luxury, and from the false name of knowledge ; '^
so that wild beasts may be tamed, the cattle sub-

' Ps. xxiii. 5. Many of the Fathers interpret this text of the
Lord's Supper, as Augustin does above. The fish taken out of the
deep, which is fed upon, means Christ, in accordance with the well-
known acrostic of I.\(-JV2. " If," he says in his De Civ. Dei, xviii.
23, "you join the initial letters of these five Greek words, 'Irjo-oO?
Xpio-Tos fe)eoy Yib? SioTijp, which mean, 'Jesus Christ the Son of
God, the Saviour,' they will make the word ix^"?. — tfi^' 'S; ' fish,' in
which word Christ is mystically understood, because He was able to
live, that is, to exist without sin in the abyss of this mortality as in
the depth of waters." So likewise we find I'ertullian saying in his De
Bapt. chap, i.: " Nos pisciculi, secundum IXwYN nostrum Jesum
Christum in aqua nascimur; nee aliter quam in aqua permanendo
salvi sumus." See Bishop Kaye's Tertullian, pp. 43, 44; and sec. 34,
below.

^ I Tim. V. 6.

3 Gen. iii, 8.

^ Ps. Ixix. 32.

S Rom. xii. 2.

* I Tim. vi. 20. See p. 153, note 7, above.


dued, and serpents harmless. For these are the
motions of the mind in allegory ; that is to say,
the haughtiness of pride, the delight of lust, and
the poison of curiosity are the motions of the
dead soul ; for the soul dies not so as to lose all
motion, because it dies by forsaking the fountain
of life,7 and so is received by this transitory
world, and is conformed unto it.

3 1 . But Thy Word, O God, is the fountain of
eternal life, and passeth not away ; therefore this
departure is kept in check by Thy word when it
is said unto us, " Be not conformed unto this
world," ^ so that the earth may bring forth a liv-
ing soul in the fountain of life, — a soul restrained
in Thy Word, by Thy Evangelists, by imitating
the followers of Thy Christ.^ For this is after
his kind ; because a man is stimulated to emula-
tion by his friend. '° "Be ye," saith he, "as I am,
for I am as you are." " Thus in the living soul
shall there be good beasts, in gentleness of action.
For Thou hast commanded, saying, Go on with
thy business in meekness, and thou shalt be
beloved by all men ; '^ and good cattle, which
neither if they eat, shall they over-abound, nor
if they do not eat, have they any want ; '^ and
good serpents, not destructive to do hurt, but
" wise " ^^ to take heed ; and exploring only so
much of this temporal nature as is sufficient that
eternity may be " clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are." '5 For these animals are
subservient to reason,'^ when, being kept in check
from a deadly advance, they live, and are good.

CHAP. XXII. HE EXPLAINS THE DIVINE IMAGE

(VER. 26) OF THE RENEWAL OF THE MIND.

32. For behold, O Lord our God, our Creator,
when our affections have been restrained from
the love of the world, by which we died by liv-
ing ill, and began to be a "living soul" by living
well ; '7 and Thy word which Thou spakest by
Thy apostle is made good in us, " Be not con-
formed to this world ; " next also follows that
which Thou presently subjoinedst, saying, " But
be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind,"^ — not now after your kind, as if follow-
ing your neighbour who went before you, nor as
if living after the example of a better man (for j
Thou hast not said, " Let man be made after his
kind," but, " Let us make man in our image,

7 Jer. ii. 13. See p. 133, note 2, and p. 129, note 8, above.

8 Rom. xii. 2.

9 I Cor. xi. I.

■° See p. 71, note 3, above.

" Gal. iv. 12.

•2 Ecclus. iii. 17, etc.

'3 I Cor. viii. 8.

'■i Matt. X. 16. ■

'5 Rom. i. 20. _ _ J

'^ In his De Gen. con. Manich. i. 20, he interprets the dominion
given to man over the beasts of his keeping in subjection the passions
of the soul, so as to attain true happiness.

■7 As Origen has it: " The good man is he who truly exists." See
p. 190, note 6, above; and compare the use made of the idea in Arch-
bishop Thomson's Bampton Lectures, lect. i.


Chap. XXII.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


20I


after our likeness"),' that we may prove what
Thy will is. For to this purpose said >that dis-
penser of Thine, — begetting children by the
gospel,- — that he might not always have them
" babes," whom he would feed on milk, and
cherish as a nurse ; ^ "be ye transformed," saith
He, " by the renewing of your mind, that he
may prove what is that good, and acceptable,
and perfect will of God."'* Therefore Thou say-
est not, " Let man be made," but, " Let us make
man." Nor sayest Thou, "after his kind," but,
after " our image " and " likeness." Because,
being renewed in his mind, and beholding and
apprehending Thy truth, man needeth not man
as his director 5 that he may imitate his kind ;
but by Thy direction proveth what is that good,
and acceptable, and perfect will of Thine. And
Thou teachest him, now made capable, to per-
ceive the Trinity of the Unity, and the Unity
of the Trinity. And therefore this being said in
the plural, " Let us make man," it is yet sub-
joined in the singular, "and God made man;"
and this being said in the plural, " after our like-
ness," is subjoined in the singular, " after the
image of God." ^ Thus is man renewed in
the knowledge of God, after the image of Him
that created him ; ^ and being made spiritual, he
judgeth all things, — all things that are to be
[judged, — " yet he himself is judged of no man." ^

DHAP. XXIII. THAT TO HAVE POWER OVER ALL

THINGS (VER. 26) IS TO JUDGE SPIRITUALLY OF
ALL.

33. But that he judgeth all things answers to
lis having dominion over the fish of the sea, and
)ver the fowls of the air, and over all cattle and
'ild beasts, and over all the earth, and over
[very creeping thing that creepeth upon the
larth. For this he doth by the discernment of
[is mind, whereby he perceiveth the things " of
le Spirit of God ; " ^ whereas, otherwise, man
leing placed in honour, had no understanding,
id is compared unto the brute beasts, and is
^,gijj.«ecome like unto them.'° In Thy Church, there-
ire, O our God, according to Thy grace which
Ihou hast accorded unto it, since we are Thv
)rkmanship created in good works," there are
>t only those who are spiritually set over, but
|ose also who are spiritually subjected to those
Lced over them ; for in this manner hast Thou
ide man, male and female,^ in Thy grace
iiritual, where, according to the sex of body,

I* Gen. i. 26.
I* I Cor. iv. 15.
|3 I Thess. ii. 7.

Rom. xii. 2.

Jer. xxxi. 34.

Gen. i. 27.

Col. iii. 10.

I Cor. ii. 15.

I Cor. ii 14.

Ps. xlix. 20.

Eph. ii. 10.


lAGE


liv-l


it 4*?


lio*


there is not male and female, because neither
Jew nor Greek, nor bond nor free.'^ Spiritual
persons, therefore, whether those that are set
over, or those who obey, judge spiritually ; not
of that spiritual knowledge which shines in the
firmament, for they ought not to judge as to an
authority so sublime, nor doth it behove them
to judge of Thy Book itself, although there be
something that is not clear therein ; because we
submit our understanding unto it, and esteem as
certain that even that which is shut up from our
sight is rightly and truly spoken. '3 For thus
man, although now spiritual and renewed in the
knowledge of God after His image that created
him, ought yet to be the " doer of the law, not
the judge." '•» Neither doth he judge of that dis-
tinction of spiritual and carnal men, who are
known to Thine eyes, O our God, and have not
as yet made themselves manifest unto us by
works, that by their fruits we may know them ; 'S
but Thou, O Lord, dost already know them, and
Thou hast divided and hast called them in
secret, before the firmament was made. Nor
doth that man, though spiritual, judge the rest-
less people of this world ; for what hath he to
do to judge them that are without,'^ knowing not
which of them may afterwards come into the
sweetness of Thy grace, and which continue in
the perpetual bitterness of impiety?

34. Man, therefore, whom Thou hast made
after Thine own image, received not dominion
over the lights of heaven, nor over the hidden
heaven itself, nor over the day and the night,
which Thou didst call before the foundadon of
the heaven, nor over the gathering together of
the waters, which is the sea ; but he received
dominion over the fishes of the sea, and the
fowls of the air, and over all cattle, and over
all the earth, and over all creeping things which
creep upon the earth. For He judgeth and
approveth what He findeth right, but disap-
proveth what He findeth amiss, whether in the
celebration of those sacraments by which are

«2 Gal. iii. 28.

'3 In his De Civ. Dei, xi. 3, he defines very distinctly (as he does
in other of his writings) the knowledge received ' by sight " — that
is, by experience, as distinguished from that which is received "by
faith" — that is, by revelation (2 Cor. v. 7). He, in common with
all the Fathers who had knowledge of the Pagan philosophy, would
feel how utterly that philosophy had failed to " find out" (Job xi. 7)
with certitude anything as to God and His character, — the Crea-
tion of the world, — ihe Atonement wrought by Christ, — the doc-
trine of the Resurrection, as distinguished from the Immortality of
the Soul, — our Immortal Destiny after death, or " the Restitution
0/ all things." As to the knowledge of God, see Justin Martyr's
experience in the schools of philosophy, Dialogue with Try/>ho, ch.
ii. ; and on the doctrine of Creation, see p. 165, note 4. On the " Res-
titution of all things," etc., reference may be made to Mansel's Gnos-
tics, who points out (Introd. p. 3) that " in the Greek philosophical
systems the idea of evil holds a very subordinate and insignificant
place, and that the idea of redemption seems not to be recognised at
all." He shows further {ibid. p. 4), that " there is no idea of the de-
livery of the creature from the bondage of corruption. The great
year of the Stoics, the commencement of the new cycle which takes
Its place after the destruction of the old world, is but a repetition of
the old evil." See also p. 164, note 2, above.

■< Jas. iv. II.

'5 Matt. viii. 20,

"> I Cor. V. 12.


202


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XIII.


initiated those whom Thy mercy searches out in
many waters ; or in that in which the Fish ' Itself
is exhibited, which, being raised from the deep,
the devout earth feedeth upon ; or in the signs
and expressions of words, subject to the authority
of Thy Book, — such signs as burst forth and
sound from the mouth, as it were flying under
the firmament, by interpreting, expounding, dis-
coursing, disputing, blessing, calling upon Thee,
so that the people may answer, Amen. The
vocal pronunciation of all which words is caused
by the deep of this world, and the blindness of
the flesh, by which thoughts cannot be seen, so
that it is necessary to speak aloud in the ears ;
thus, although flying fowls be multiplied upon
the earth, yet they derive their beginning from
the waters. The spiritual man judgeth also by
approving what is right and reproving what" he
finds amiss in the works and morals of the faith-
ful, in their alms, as if in " the earth bringing
forth fruit ;" and he judgeth of the "living soul,"
rendered living by softened affections, in chastity,
in fastings, in pious thoughts ; and of those things
which are perceived through the senses of the
body. For it is now said, that he should judge
concerning those things in which he has also the
power of correction.

CHAP. XXIV. — WHY GOD HAS BLESSED MEN, FISHES,
FLYING CREATURES, AND NOT HERBS AND THE
OTHER ANIMALS (VER. 28).

35. But what is this, and what kind of mystery
is it ? Behold, Thou blessest men, O Lord, that
they may " be fruitful and multiply, and replenish
the earth ; " - in this dost Thou not make a sign
unto us that we may understand something?
Why hast Thou not also blessed the light, which
Thou calledst day, nor the firmament of heaven,
nor the lights, nor the stars, nor the earth, nor
the sea? I might say, O our God, that Thou, |
who hast created us after Thine Image, — I
might say, that Thou hast willed to bestow this
gift of blessing especially upon man, hadst Thou
not in like manner blessed the fishes and the
whales, that they should be fruitful and multiply,
and replenish the waters of the sea, and that
the fowls should be multiplied upon the earth.
Likewise might I say, that this blessing belonged
properly unto such creatures as are propagated
from their own kind, if I had found it in the
shrubs, and the fruit trees, and beasts of the
earth. But now is it not said either unto
the herbs, or trees, or beasts, or serpents, " Be
fruitful and multiply ; " since all these also, as
well as fishes, and fowls, and men, do by propa-
gation increase and preserve their kind.

36. What, then, shall I say, O Thou Truth,
my Light, — " that it was idly and vainly said ? "

■ See sec. 29, note.
2 Gen. i. 28.


Not so, O Father of piety ; far be it from a
minister of Thy word to say this. But if I
understand not what Thou meanest by that
phrase, let my betters — that is, those more in-
telligent than I — use it better, in proportion as
Thou, O my God, hast given to each to under-
stand. But let my confession be also pleasing
before Thine eyes, in which I confess to Thee
that I believe, O Lord, that Thou hast not thus
spoken in vain ; nor will I be silent as to what
this lesson suggests to me. For it is true, nor
do I see what should prevent me from thus
understanding the figurative sayings ^ of Thy
books. For I know a thing may be manifoldly
signified by bodily expression which is under-
stood in one manner bv the mind ; and that
that may be manifoldly understood in the mind
which is in one manner signified by bodily ex-
pression. Behold, the single love of God and
of our neighbour, by what manifold sacraments
and innumerable languages, and in each several
language in how innumerable modes of speaking,
it is bodily expressed. Thus do the young of
the waters increase and multiply. Observe again,
whosoever thou art who readest ; behold what
Scripture delivers, and the voice pronounces in
one only way, " In the beginning God created
heaven and earth ; " is it not manifoldly under-
stood, not by any deceit of error, but by divers
kinds of true senses ? "^ Thus are the offspring
of men " fruitful " and do " multiply."

37. If, therefore, we conceive of the natures
of things, not allegorically, but properly, then
does the phrase, " be fruitful and multiply," cor-
respond to all things which are begotten of seed.
But if we treat those words as taken figuratively
(the which I rather suppose the Scripture in-
tended, which^ doth not, verily, superfluously
attribute this benediction to the offspring of
marine animals and man only), then do we find
that " multitude " belongs also to creatures both
spiritual and corporeal, as in heaven and in earth ;
and to souls both righteous and unrighteous, as
in light and darkness ; and to holy authors,
through whom the law has been furnished unto
us, as in the firmament 5 which has been firmly
placed betwixt waters and waters ; and to the jj
society of people yet endued with bitterness, as
in the sea ; and to the desire of holy souls, as in
the dry land ; and to works of mercy pertaining
to this present life, as in the seed-bearing herbs
and fruit-bearing trees ; and to spiritual gifts
shining forth for edification, as in the lights of
heaven ; and to affections formed unto temper-
ance, as in the living soul. In all these cases we
meet with multitudes, abundance, and increase ;
but what shall thus " be fruitful and multiply,"


3 See p. 92, note i, above.
* See p. 189, note 2, above.
S See p. 199, note 3, above.


Chap. XXIV.]


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


203


era!

•in?,
;of

!ain,

sin
■M
ider-
liven


itiiies

, tki

" cor-

iseei]

ativel

ire:

luou

■ing_ol

ive Si

ebol

le


lediitt
alii
ito
irnejj.


,M


that one thing may be expressed in many ways,
and one expression understood in many ways, we
discover not, unless in signs corporeally ex-
pressed, and in things mentally conceived. We
understand the signs corporeally pronounced as
the generations of the waters, necessarily occa-
sioned by carnal depth ; but things mentally
conceived we understand as human generations,
on account of the fruitfulness of reason. And
therefore do we believe that to each kind of
these it has been said by Thee, O Lord, " Be
fruitful and multiply." For in this blessing I
acknowledge that a power and faculty has been
granted unto us, by Thee, both to express in
many ways what we understand but in one, and
to understand in many ways what we read as
obscurely delivered but in one. Thus are the
waters of the sea replenished, which are not
moved but by various significations ; thus even
with the human offspring is the earth also replen-
ished, the dryness ' whereof appeareth in its
desire, and reason ruleth over it.

CHAP. XXV. HE EXPL.4rNS THE FRUITS OF THE

EARTH (VER. 29) OF WORKS OF MERCY.

38. I would also say, O Lord my God, what
the following Scripture reminds me of; yea, I
will say it without fear. For I will speak the
truth. Thou inspiring me as to what Thou wiliest
that I should say out of these words. For by
none other than Thy inspiration do I believe
that I can speak the truth, since Thou art the
Truth, but every man a liar.^ And therefore he
:hat " speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own ; " ^
herefore that I may speak the truth, I will speak
bf Thine. Behold, Thou hast given unto us for
bod " every herb bearing seed," which is upon '
:he face of all the earth, " and every tree in the '
hich is the fruit of a tree yielding seed." ■♦ Nor
|;o us only, but to all the fowls of the air, and
;o the beasts of the earth, and to all creeping
.hings ; 5 but unto the fishes, and great whales,
'hou hast not given these things. Now we were
aying, that by these fruits of the earth works
|»f mercy were signified and figured in an alle-
:ory, the which are provided for the necessities
f this life out of the fruitful earth. Such an
^arth was the godly Onesiphorus, unto whose
ouse Thou didst give mercy, because he fre-
uently refreshed Thy Paul, and was not ashamed
f his chain.^ This did also the brethren, and


afford him the fruit due unto him, when he saith,
" At my first answer no man stood with me, but
all men forsook me : I pray God that it may
not be laid to their charge." ^ For these fruits
are due to those who minister spiritual ^ doctrine,
through their understanding of the divine mys-
teries ; and they are due to them as men. They
are due to them, too, as to the living soul, sup-
plying itself as an example in all continency ;
and due unto them likewise as flying creatures,
for their blessings which are multiplied upon
the earth, since their sound went out into all
lands.'°

CHAP. XXVI. IN THE CONFESSING OF BENEFITS,

COINIPUTATION IS MADE NOT AS TO THE " GIFT,"
BUT AS TO THE " FRUIT," — -THAT IS, THE GOOD
AND RIGHT WILL OF THE GIVER.


itual Ji! hch fruit did they bear, who out of Macedonia
;htil "applied what was wanting unto him.? But how


dm


bth he grieve for certain trees, which did not


' See sec. 21, and note, above.
' Rom. ill. 4, and Ps. cxvi. 11.

* John viii. 44.

* Gen. i. 29.

* lii'ii ver. 30.

* 2 Tim. i. 16.
' 2 Cor. xi. 9.


39. But they who are delighted with them are
fed by those fruits ; nor are they delighted with
them " whose god is their belly." " For neither
in those that yield them are the things given the
fruit, but in what spirit they give them. There-
fore he who serves God and not his own belly,'^
I plainly see why he may rejoice ; I see it, and
I rejoice with him exceedingly. For he hath
received from the Philippians those things which
they had sent from Epaphroditus ; '^ but yet I
see why he rejoiced. For whereat he rejoices,
upon that he feeds ; for speaking in truth, " I
rejoiced," saith he, " in the Lord greatly, that
now at the last your care of me hath flourished
again, wherein ye were also careful," "* but it had
become wearisome unto you. These Philippians,
then, by protracted wearisomeness, had become
enfeebled, and as it were dried up, as to bringing
forth this fruit of a good work ; and he rejoiceth
for them, because they flourished again, not for
himself, because they ministered to his wants.
Therefore, adds he, " not that I speak in respect
of want, for I have learned in whatsoever state
I am therewith to be content. I know both how
to be abased, and I know how to abound ; every-
where and in all things I am instructed both
to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to
suffer need. I can do all things through Christ
which strengtheneth me." 's

40. Whereat, then, dost thou rejoice in all
things, O great Paul? Whereat dost thou re-
joice? Whereon dost thou feed, O man, re-


8 2 Tim. iv. i6.

9 " Rationalcm. An old epithet to most of the holy things. So,
reasonable serf ice, Rom. xii. i, AoyiKov yoiAa; i Pet. ii. 2, sincere
milk. Clem. Alex, calls Baptism so, Pedag. i. 6. And in Constitut.
Apost. vi. 23, the Eucharist is stj-led, a reasonable Sacrifice. The
word was used to distinguish Christian mysteries from Jewish.
Rationale est spiritiiale." — W. W.

'"^ Ps. xix. 4.
I' Phil. iii. 19.
'- Rom. xvi. 18.
" Phil. iv. 18.
'■* Ibid. ver. 10.
'5 Ibid. vers. 11-13.


204


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XIII.


newed in the knowledge of God, after the image
of Him that created thee, thou Hving soul of so
great continency, and thou tongue like flying
fowls, speaking mysteries, — for to such crea-
tures is this food due, — what is that which feeds
thee? Joy. Let us hear what follows. "Not-
withstanding," saith he, "ye have well done
that ye did communicate with my affliction." '
Hereat doth he rejoice, hereon doth he feed ;
because they have well done,^ not because his
strait was relieved, who saith unto thee, " Thou
hast enlarged me when I was in distress ; " 3 be-
cause he knew both " to abound and to suffer
need," •♦ in Thee Who strengthenest him. For,
saith he, " ye Philippians know also that in the
beginning of the gospel, when I departed from
Macedonia, no Church communicated with me
as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.
For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again
unto my necessity." 5 Unto these good works
he now rejoiceth that they have returned ; and
is made glad that they flourished again, as when
a fruitful field recovers its greenness.

41. Was it on account of his own necessities
that he said, "Ye have sent unto my necessity " ?
Rejoiceth he for that? Verily not for that. But
whence know we this? Because he himself
continues, " Not because I desire a gift, but I
desire fruit." ^ From Thee, O my God, have
I learned to distinguish between a " gift " and
"fruit." A gift is the thing itself which he
gives who bestows these necessaries, as money,
food, drink, clothing, shelter, aid ; but the fruit
is the good and right will of the giver. For the
good Master saith not only, " He that receiveth
a prophet," but addeth, " in the name of a
prophet." Nor saith He only, " He that re-
ceiveth a righteous man," but addeth, " in the
name of a righteous man." So, verily, the for-
mer shall receive the reward of a prophet, the
latter that of a righteous man. Nor saith He
only, " Whosoever shall give to drink unto one
of these little ones a cup of cold water," but
addeth, " in the name of a disciple ; " and so
concludeth, " Verily I say unto you, he shall in
no wise lose his reward." 7 The gift is to re-
ceive a prophet, to receive a righteous man, to
hand a cup of cold water to a disciple ; but the
fruit is to do this in the name of a prophet, in
the name of a righteous man, in the name of
a disciple. With fruit was Elijah fed by the
widow, who knew that she fed a man of God,
and on this account fed him ; but by the raven

I Phil. iv. 14.

^ Compare p. i6o, note 2, above.

3 Ps. iv. I.

< Compare his De Bono Conjug ch. xxi., where he points out
that while any may suffer neeH and abound, to know how to sufifer
belongs only to great souls, and to know how to abound to those
whom abundance does not corrupt.

5 Phil. iv. 15, 16.

6 Ibid. ver. 17.

7 Matt. X. 41, 42.


was he fed with a gift. Nor was the inner man ^
of Elijah fed, but the outer only, which might
also from want of such food have perished.

CHAP. XXVII. MANY ARE IGNORANT AS TO THIS,

AND ASK FOR MIRACLES, WHICH ARE SIGNIFIED
UNDER THE NAMES OF " FISHES " AND "WHALES."

42. Therefore will I speak before Thee, O
Lord, what is true, when ignorant men and infi-
dels (for the initiating and gaining of whom
the sacraments of initiation and great works of
miracles are necessary,^ which we believe to
be signified under the name of " fishes " and
" whales " ) undertake that Thy servants should
be bodily refreshed, or should be otherwise suc-
coured for this present hfe, although they may
be ignorant wherefore this is to be done, and to
what end ; neither do the former feed the latter,
nor the latter the former ; for neither do the
one perform these things through a holy and
right intent, nor do the other rejoice in the gifts
of those who behold not as yet the fruit. For
on that is the mind fed wherein it is gladdened.
And, therefore, fishes and whales are not fed on
such food as the earth bringeth not forth until it
had been separated and divided from the bitter-
ness of the waters of the sea.

CHAP. XXVIII. HE PROCEEDS TO THE LAST VERSE,

"ALL THINGS ARE VERY GOOD," THAT IS, THE

WORK BEING ALTOGETHER GOOD.


CH.


(nil


Ir;j


k;.


m


43. And Thou, O God, sawest everything that
Thou hadst made, and behold it was very good.'"
i So we also see the same, and behold all are very-
good. In each particular kind of Thy works,
when Thou hadst said, " Let them be made,"
and they were made, Thou sawest that it was
good. Seven times have I counted it written
that Thou sawest that that which Thou madest
was ." good ; " and this is the eighth, that Thou:
sawest all things that Thou hadst made, and
behold they are not only good, but also " veiy'j
good," as being now taken together. For indi-lj
vidually they were only good, but ' all taken to- \.
gether they were both good and very good. All
beautiful bodies also express this ; for a body
which consists of members, all of which are
beautiful, is by far more beautiful than the
several members individually are by whose well-
ordered union the whole is completed, though
these members also be severally beautiful."


8 I Kings xvii. See p. 133, note 2, above.

9 We have already referred (p. 69, note 5, above) to the cessation
of miracles. Augustin has a beautiful passage m 5^^w. ccxliv. 8,
on the evidence "which we have in the spread of Christianity — it
doing for us what miracles did for the early Church. Compare also
De Civ. Dei, xxii. 8. And he frequently alludes, as, for example, /«
Ps. cxxx., to "charity" being more desirable than the power of
working miracles.

10 Gen. i. 31.

" In his De Gen. con. Munich, i. 21, he enlarges to the same
eflfect on Gen. i. 31.


Iv,


1:11

ieiv
1loa


i


Chap. XXIX.] THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


tk
111


CHAP. XXIX. — .ALTHOUGH IT IS SAID EIGHT TIMES
THAT "GOD SAW THAT IT WAS GOOD," YET
TLME HAS NO REL-^VTION TO GOD AND HIS
WORD.

44. And I looked attentively to find whether

seven or eight times Thou sawest that Thy

works were good, when they were pleasing unto

Thee ; but in Thy seeing I found no times, by

which I might understand that thou sawest so

often what Thou madest. And I said, " O Lord,

is not this Tiy Scripture true, since Thou art

true, and being Truth hast set it forth ? Why,

then, dost Thou say unto me that in Thy seeing

there are no times, while this Thy Scripture tell-

eth me that what Thou madest each day, Thou

sawest to be good ; and when I counted them

I found how often?" Unto these thmgs Thou

repliest unto me, for Thou art my God, and

with strong voice tellest unto Thy servant in his

inner ear, bursting through my deafness, and

crying, " O man, that which My Scripture saith,

I say ; and yet doth that speak in time ; but

time has no reference to My Word, because My

Word e.xisteth in equal eternity with Myself.

Thus those things which ye see through My

Spirit, I see, just as those things which ye speak

through My Spirit, I speak. And so when ye

see those things in time, I see them not in time ;

as when ye speak them in time, I speak them

not in time."


not Thy works through Thy Spirit, nor recog-
nise Thee in them.

CHAP. XXXI. WE DO NOT SEE " TH.AT IT WAS

THE SPIRIT OF GOD,


GOOD BUT THROUGH
WHICH IS IN us.


46. But as for those who through Thy Spirit
see these things, Thou seest in them. A\'hen,
therefore, they see that these things are good,
Thou seest that they are good ; and whatsoever
things for Thy sake are pleasing, Thou art pleased
in them ; and those things which through Thy
Spirit are pleasing unto us, are pleasing unto
Thee in us. " For what man knoweth the things


CHAP. XXX. HE REFUTES THE OPINIONS OF THE

MAXICH.^.ANS AND THE GNOSTICS CONCERNING
THE ORIGIN OF THE WORLD.

45. And I heard, O Lord my God, and drank
up a drop of sweetness from Thy truth, and
understood that there are certain men to whom
Thy works are displeasing, who say that many
of them Thou madest being compelled by neces-
sity ; — such as the fabric of the heavens and
the courses of the stars, and that Thou madest
"^ them not of what was Thine, but, that they were
'Elsewhere and from other sources created ; that
liou mightest bring together and compact and
interweave, when from Thy conquered enemies
Thou raisedst up the walls of the universe, that
hey, bound down by this structure, might not
"»e able a second time to rebel against Thee.
5ut, as to other things, they say Thou neither
|nadest them nor compactedst them, — such as
11 flesh and all very minute creatures, and what-
ioever holdeth the earth by its roots ; but that
mind hostile unto Thee, and another nature
ot created by Thee, and in everywise contrary
nto Thee, did, in these lower places of the
^orld, beget and frame these things.' Infatu-
Ited are they who speak thus, since they see

U ' H^^''"des in the above statements to the heretical notions of
HieManichseans. Their speculations on these matters are enlarged
m m note 8 on p. 76.


of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in
him? Even so the things of God knoweth no
! man, but the Spirit of God. Now we," saith he,
I " have received not the spirit of the world, but
the Spirit which is of God, that we might know
the things that are freely given to us of God." ^
I And I am reminded to say, " Truly, ' the things
1 of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God ; '
I how, then, do we also know ' what things are
I given us by God '?" It is answered unto me,
"Because the things which we know by His
Spirit, even these 'knoweth no man, but the
Spirit of God.' For, as it is rightly said unto
those who were to speak by the Spirit of God,
' It is not ye that speak,' ^ so is it rightly said to
them who know by the Spirit of God, ' It is not
ye that know.' None the less, then, is it rightly
said to those that see by the Spirit of God, ' It
is not ye that see ; ' so whatever they see by the
Spirit of God that it is good, it is not they, but
God who 'sees that it is good.'" It is one
thing, then, for a man to suppose that to be bad
which is good, as the fore-named do ; another,
that what is good a man should see to be good
(as Thy creatures are pleasing unto many, be-
cause they are good, whom, however. Thou
j pleasest not in them when they wish to enjoy
; them rather than enjoy Thee); and another,
that when a man sees a thing to be good,
I God should in him see that it is good, — that
I in truth He may be loved in that which He
I made,-» who cannot be loved unless by the Holy
I Ghost, which He hath given. " Because the
; love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost which is given unto us ; " s by whom
we see that whatsoever in any degree is, is good.
Because it is from Him who Is not in any de-
gree, but He 'Is that He Is.

CHAP. XXXII. OF THE PARTICULAR WORKS OF

GOD, MOKE ESPECIALLY OF MAN.

47. Thanks to Thee, O Lord. We behold the
heaven and the earth, whether the corporeal


2 I Cor. ii. 12.

3 Matt. X. 20.

* See the end of note i, p. 74.
5 Rom. V. 5.


206


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[Book XIII.


part, superior and inferior, or the spiritual and
corporeal creature ; and in the embellishment
of these parts, whereof the universal mass of the
world or the universal creation consisteth, we
see light made, and divided from the darkness.
We see the firmament of heaven," whether the
primary body of the world between the spiritual '
upper waters and the corporeal lower waters, or '
— because this also is called heaven — this ex-
panse of air, through which wander the fowls of
heaven, between the waters which are in vapours
borne above them, and which in clear nights
drop down in dew, and those which being heavy '
flow along the earth. We behold the waters
gathered together through the plains of the sea ;
and the dry land both void and formed, so as to
be visible and compact, and the matter of herbs
and trees. We behold the lights shining from
above, — the sun to serve the day, the moon and
the stars to cheer the night ; and that by all
these, times should be marked and noted. We
behold on every side a humid element, fruitful
with fishes, beasts, and birds ; because the densi-
ty of the air, which bears up the flights of birds,
is increased by the exhalation of the waters.^
We behold the face of the earth furnished with
terrestrial creatures, and man, created after Thy
image and likeness, in that very image and like-
ness of Thee (that is, the power of reason and
understanding) on account of which he was set
over all irrational creatures. And as in his soul
there is one power which rules by directing,
another made subject that it might obey, so also
for the man was corporeally made a woman,^
who, in the mind of her rational understanding
should also have a like nature, in the sex, how-
ever, of her body should be in like manner sub-
ject to the sex of her husband, as the appetite
of action is subjected by reason of the mind, to
conceive the skill of acting rightly. These
things we behold, and they are severally good,
and all very good.

CHAP. XXXIII. — THE WORLD WAS CREATED BY
GOD OUT OF NOTHING.

48. Let Thy works praise Thee, that we may
love Thee ; and let us love Thee, that Thy
works may praise Thee, the which have begin-
ning and end from time, — rising and setting,
growth and decay, form and privation. They
have therefore their successions of morning and


* In his Retractations, ii. 6, he says: " Non satis considerate
dictum est; res enim in abdito est valde."

^ Compare De Gen. con. Manich. ii. 15.

3 " ' Concipiendam,' or the reading may be ' concupiscendam,'
according to St. Augustin's interpretation of G.en. iii. 16, in the De
Gen. con. iMntti'ch. ii. 15. ' As an instance hereof was woman made,
who is in the order of things made subject to the man; that what
appears more evidently in two human beings, the man and the
woman, may be contemplated in the one, man; viz. that the inward
man, as it were manly reason, should have in subjection the appetite
of the soul, whereby we act through the bodily members.' " — E. B. P.


evening, partly hidden, partly apparent ; for they
were made from nothing by Thee, not of Thee,
nor of any matter not Thine, or which was cre-
ated before, but of concreated matter (that is,
matter at the same time created by Thee), be-
cause without any interval of time Thou didst
form its formlessness. + For since the matter
of heaven and earth is one thing, and the form of
heaven and earth another. Thou hast made the
matter indeed of almost nothing, but the form
of the world Thou hast formed of formless mat-
ter ; both, however, at the same time, so that
the form should follow the matter with no inter-
val of delay.

CHAP. XXXIV. HE BRIEFLY REPEATS THE ALLE-
GORICAL INTERPRET.ATION OF GENESIS (CH. I.),
AND CONFESSES THAT WE SEE IT BY THE DI-
VINE SPIRIT.

49. We have also examined what Thou willedst
to be shadowed forth, whether by the crea-
tion, or the description of things in such an
order. And we have seen that things severally
are good, and all things very good, 5 in Thy
Word, in Thine Only-Begotten, both heaven and
earth, the Head and the body of the Church, in
Thy predestination before all times, without
morning and evening. But when Thou didst
begin to execute in time the things predesti-
nated, that Thou mightest make manifest things
hidden, and adjust our disorders (for our sins
were over us, and we had sunk into profound
darkness away from Thee, and Thy good Spirit
was borne over us to help us in due season),
Thou didst both justify the ungodly,^ and didst
divide them from the wicked ; and madest firm
the authority of Thy Book between those above,
who would be docile unto Thee, and those under,
who would be subject unto them ; and Thou
didst collect the society of unbelievers into one
conspiracy, in order that the zeal of the faithful
might appear, and that they might bring forth
works of mercy unto Thee, even distributing
unto the poor earthly riches, to obtain heavenly.
And after this didst Thou kindle certain lights
in the firmament. Thy holy ones, having the
word of life, and shining with an eminent
authority preferred by spiritual gifts ; and then
again, for the instruction of the unbelieving Gen-
tiles, didst Thou out of corporeal matter pro-
duce the sacraments and visible miracles, and
sounds of words according to the firmament be
Thy Book, by which the faithful should of
blessed. Next didst Thou form the living soul i
of the faithful, through affections ordered by the
vigour of continency ; and afterwards, the mind


* See p. 165, note 4, above.
5 Gen. i. 31.

* Rom. iv. 5.


Chap. XXXIV.] THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


207


subjected to Thee alone, and needing to imitate
no human authority,' Thou didst renew after
Thine image and Hkeness ; and didst subject its
rational action to the excellency of the under-
standing, as the woman to the man ; and to all
Thy ministries, necessary for the perfecting of
the faithful in this life. Thou didst will that, for
their temporal uses, good things, fruitful in the
future time, should be given by the same faith-
ful.- We behold all these things, and they are
very good, because Thou dost see them in us,
— Thou who hast given unto us Thy Spirit,
whereby we might see them, and in them love
Thee.

CHAP. XXXV. HE PRAYS GOD FOR THAT PEACE

OF REST WHICH HATH NO EVENING.

50. O Lord God, grant Thy peace unto us, —
for Thou hast supplied us with all things, — the
peace of rest, the peace of the Sabbath, which
hath no evening. For all this most beautiful
order of things, " very good " (all their courses
is to pass away, for in them


being finished),

there was morning and evening.


CHAP. XXXVI. THE SEVENTH DAY, WITHOUT

EVENING AND SETTING, THE EVIAGE OF ETERNAL
LIFE AND REST IN GOD.

51. But the seventh day is without any even-
ing, nor hath it any setting, because Thou hast
sanctified it to an everlasting continuance ; that
that which Thou didst after Thy works, which


were very good.


resting


on the seventh day.


although in unbroken rest Thou madest them,
that the voice of Thy Book may speak before-
hand unto us, that we also after our works
(therefore very good, because Thou hast given

■ See p. 165, note 2, above.

^ " The peace of heaven," says Augustin in his De Ci't'. Dei, xix.
1 17, " alone can be truly called and esteemed the peace of the reason-
I able creatures, consisting as it does in the perfectly ordered and har-
Imonious enjoyment of God, and of one another in God. When we
[shall have reached that peace, this mortal life shall give place to one
I that is eternal, and our body shall be no more this animal body which
Iby its corruption weighs down the soul, but a spiritual body feeling
1 no want, and in all its members subjected to the will." See p. iii,
I note 8 (end), above.


them unto us) may repose in Thee also in the
Sabbath of eternal life.

CHAP. XXXVII. OF REST IN GOD, WHO EVER

WORKETH, AND YET IS EVER AT REST.

52. For even then shalt Thou so rest in us, as
now Thou dost work in us ; and thus shall that
be Thy rest through us, as these are Thy works
through us. 3 But Thou, O Lord, ever workest,
and art ever at rest. Nor seest Thou in time,
nor movest Thou in time, nor restest Thou in
time ; and yet Thou makest the scenes of time,
and the times themselves, and the rest which
results from time.

CHAP. XXXVIII. OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN

THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD AND OF MEN, AND
OF THE REPOSE WHICH IS TO BE SOUGHT FROM
GOD ONLY.

53. We therefore see those things which Thou
madest, because they are ; but they are because
Thou seest them. And we see without that they
are, and within that they are good, but Thou
didst see them there, when made, where Thou
didst see them to be made. And we were at
another time moved to do well, after our hearts
had conceived of Thy Spirit ; but in the former
time, forsaking Thee, we were moved to do
evil ; but Thou, the One, the Good God, hast
never ceased to do good. And we also have
certain good works, of Thy gift, but not eternal ;
after these we hope to rest in Thy great hal-
lowing. But Thou, being the Good, needing
no good, art ever at rest, because Thou Thyself
art Thy rest. And what man will teach man to
understand this ? Or what angel, an angel ? Or
what angel, a man? Let it be asked of Thee,
sought in Thee, knocked for at Thee ; so, even
so shall it be received, so shall it be found, so
shall it be opened.* Amen.

3 Compare his De Gen. ad Lit. iv. 9: " For as God is properly
said to do what we do when He works in us, so is God properly said
to rest when by His gift we rest."

♦ Matt. vii. 7.


LETTERS


OF


ST. AUGUSTIN


TRANSLATED BY


THE REV. J. G. CUNNINGHAM, M.A.


PREFACE.


The importance of the letters of eminent men, as illustrations of their life, character, and
times, is too well understood to need remark. The Letters of Cicero and Pliny have given us a
more vivid conception of Roman life than the most careful history could have given ; the Letters
of Erasmus, Luther, and Calvin furnish us with the most trustworthy material for understanding
the rapid movement and fierce conflict of their age ; when we read the voluminous correspond-
ence of Pope and his compeers, or the unstudied beauties of Cowper's letters of friendship,""^we
seem to be in the company of living men ; and modern history has in nothing more distinctly
proved its sagacity, than by its diligence in publishing the Letters of Cromwell, of Washington,
of Chatham, and of other historical personages.

For biography, familiar letters are the most important material. In a man's published writ-
ings we see the general character of his mind, and we ascertain his opinions in so far as he
deemed it safe or advisable to lay these before a perhaps unsympathizing public ; in his letters
he reveals his whole character, his feelings as well as his judgments, his motives, his personal his-
tory, and the various ramifications of his interest. In his familiar correspondence we see the man
as he is known to his intimate friends, in his times of relaxation and unstudied utterance.' Few
men, in writing for the pubHc, can resist the tendency towards a constrained attitudinizing, or
throw off the fixed expression of one sitting for his portrait ; and it is only in conversation, spoken
or written, that we get the whole man revealed in a series of constantly varying and unconstrained
expressions. And even where, as in Augustin's case, we have an autobiography, we derive from
the letters many additional traits of character, much valuable illustration of opinions and progress.^

In their function of appendices to history they are equally valuable. It was a characteristic
remark of Horace Walpole's, that " nothing gives so just an idea of an age as genuine letters ;
nay, history waits for its last seal from them." A still greater authority, Bacon, in his marvellous
distribution of all knowledge, gives to letters the highest place among the "Appendices to
History." " Letters," he says, " are, according to all the variety of occasions, advertisements,
advices, directions, propositions, petitions commendatory, expostulatory, satisfactory ; of compli-
ment, of pleasure, of discourse, and all other passages of action. And such as are written from
wise men are, of all the words of man, in my judgment, the best ; for they are more natural than
orations and public speeches, and more advised than conferences or present speeches. So, again,
letters of affairs from such as manage them, or are privy to them, are of all others the best instruc-
tions for history, and to a diligent reader the best histories in themselves." ^ This is especially
true of the Letters of Augustin. A large number of them are ecclesiastical and theological, and
would. in our day have appeared as pamphlets, or would have been delivered as lectures. There
are none of his writings which do not receive some supplementary light from his letters. The
subjects of his more elaborate writings are here handled in an easier manner, and their sources,

' "Ut oculi aliis corporis sensibus prsestant, ita illustrium virorum Epistolae cseteris eorum scriptis passim antecellunt." — Benedictine
I Preface to the Ep. A ug.

^ " Si, dans le vaste naufrage des temps, par un malheur que la Providence n'a pas permis, les ouvrages proprement dits de Saint
I Augustin eussent p^ri et qu'il ne fut rest^ que ses lettres, nous aurions encore toute sa doctrine, tout son gdnie: les Lettres de Saint
\Augustiny c'esi tout Saint Augustin." — Poujoulat, Lettres de. S. Aug. vii.

* Advancement of Learning, p. 125.

2U


2 12 PREFACE.

motives, and origin are disclosed. Difficulties which his published works had occasioned are
here removed, new illustrations are noted, further developments and fresh complications of heresy
are alluded to, and the whole theological movement of the time is here reflected in a vivid and
interesting shape. No controversy of his age was settled without his voice, and it is in his letters
we chiefly see the vastness of his empire, the variety of subjects on which appeal was made to
him, and the deference with which his judgment was received. Inquiring philosophers, puzzled
statesmen, angry heretics, pious ladies, all found their way to the Bishop of Hippo. And while
he continually complains of want of leisure, of the multifarious business of his episcopate, of the
unwarranted demands made upon him, he yet carefully answers all. Sometimes he writes with
the courier who is to carry his letter impatiently chafing outside the door ; sometimes a promptly
written reply is carried round the whole known world by some faithless messenger before it
reaches his anxious correspondent ; but, amidst difficulties unthought of under a postal system,
his indefatigable diligence succeeds in diffusing intelligence and counsel to the most distant
inquirers.

In the present volume we have, as usual, followed the Benedictine edition. Among the many
labours which the Benedictine Fathers encountered in editing the works of Augustin, they under-
took the onerous task of rearranging the Epistles in chronological order. The manner in which
this task has been executed is eminently characteristic of their unostentatious patience and skill.
Their order has been universally adopted ; it is to this order that reference is made when any
writer cites a letter of Augustin's ; and therefore it matters less whether in each case the date
assigned by the Benedictine editors can be accepted as accurate. It will be seen that we have
not considered it desirable to translate all the letters. Of those addressed to Augustin we have
omitted a few which were neither important in themselves nor indispensable for the understanding
of his replies ; and, when any of his own letters is a mere repetition of what he has previously
written to another correspondent, we have contented ourselves, and, we hope, shall satisfy our
readers, with a reference to the former letter in which the arguments and illustrations now repeated
may be found.

No English translation of these Letters has previously appeared. The French have in this, as
in other patristic studies, been before us. Two hundred years ago a translation into the French
tongue was published, and this has lately been superseded by M. Poujoulat's four readable and
fairly accurate volumes.

THE EDITOR.

1872.

In the second volume of Letters in Clark's series the editor adds the following

PREFATORY NOTE.

Of the two hundred and seventy-two letters given in the Benedictine edition of Augustin's
works, one hundred and sixty are translated in this selection. In the former volume few were
omitted, and the reason for each omission was given in its own place. As the proportion of
untranslated letters is in this volume much larger, it may be more convenient to indicate briefly
here the general reasons which have guided us in the selection.

We have omitted —

I. Almost all the letters referring to the Donatist schism, as there is enough on this subject in
the works on the Donatist controversy (vol. iii. of this series) and in numerous earlier letters.
This excludes — 105, 106, 107, 108, 128, 129, 134, 141, 142, and 204.

II. Almost all the letters relating to Pelagianism, as the series contains three volumes of
Augustin's anti- Pelagian writings (vols. iv. xii. xv.). This excludes — 156, 157, 175, 176, 177,
178, 179, 181, 182, 183, 184, 184 ^I's, 186, 193, 194, 214, 215, 216, 217.


PREFACE.


21


III. Almost all the letters referring to the doctrine of the Trinity, as this has been already
given, partly in earlier letters, and more fully in the volume on the Trinity (vol. vii. of this series).
This excludes — 119, 120, 170, 174, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242.

IV. Almost all those which in design, style, and proHxity, are exegetical or doctrinal treatises
rather than letters. This excludes — 140, 147, 149, 152, 153, 154, 155, 162, 187, 190, 196, 197,
198, 199, 202 bis, 205.

V. Some of the letters written by others to Augustin. This excludes — 94, 109, 121, 160,
16S, 225, 226, 230, 270.

VI. A large number of miscellaneous smaller letters, as, in order to avoid going beyond the
limits of one volume, it was necessary to select only the more interesting and important of these.
This excludes — no, 112, 113, 114, 127, 161, 162, 171, 200, 206, 207, 221, 222, 223, 224, 233,
234, 235, 236, 243, 244, 247, 248, 249, 251, 252, 253, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262,
264, 265, 266, 267, 268.


I n-


1


I!"


CONTENTS OF THE LETTERS.


— « —

LETTER PAGE

I. — To Hermogenianus, 219

II. — To ZeNOBIUS, 220

III. — To Nebridius, 220

IV. — To Nebridius, 222

V. — Nebridius to Augustin, 223

VI. — Nebridius to Augustin 223

VII. — To Nebridius 224

VIII. — Nebridius to Augustin, 226

IX. — To Nebridius, 227

X. — To Nebridius 228

XL — To Nebridius, 228

XIII. — To Nebridius - 230

XIV. — To Nebridius, 231

XV. — To ROMANIANUS, 232

XVI. — Maximus to Augustin 233

XVII. — To Maximus, 234

XVIII. — To Ccelestinus 235

XIX. — To Gaius 236

XX. — To Antoninus, 236

XXI. — To Bishop Valerius, 237

XXII. — To Bishop Aurelius 239

XXIIL — To Maximin, 242

XXV. — Paulinus and Therasia to Augustin 245

XXVI. — To Licentius, 246

XXVII. — To Paulinus, ' 248

XXVIIL — To Jerome, 251

XXIX. — To Alypius, 253

XXX. — Paulinus and Therasia to Augustin 257

XXXI. — To Paulinus and Therasia, 258

XXXIII. — To Proculeianus, 260

XXXIV. — To Eusebius 262

XXXV. — To Eusebius 263

XXXVI. — To Casulanus 265

XXXVII.— To SiMPLiciANUS, 270

XXXVIII. — To Profuturus, 271

XXXIX. — Jerome to Augustin, 272

XL. — To Jerome, 272

XLI. — To Aurelius, 275

XLII. — To Paulinus and Therasia, 275

XLIII. — To Glorius, Eleusius, etc., 276

XLIV. — To Eleusius, Glorius, and the two Felixes 285

XLVI. — Publicola to Augustin, 290

XLVIL — To Publicola 292

XLVIIL — To Eudoxius 294

L. — To the Magistrates of Suffectum, 295

LI. — To Crispinus, 296

LIII. — To Generosus, 298

LIV. — To Januarius, 300

LV. — To Januarius, 303

215


2i6 CONTENTS OF THE LETTERS.

LETTER PAGE

LVIII. — To Pammachius, 316

LIX. — To VicTORiNUS, 317

LX. — To AuRELius, 317

LXL — To Theodorus 318

LXII. — To Severus 319

LXIII. — To Severus, ^ 319

LXIV. — To QuiNTiANUS, 321

LXV. — To Xantippus, 322

LXVL — To Crispinus, 323

LXVII. — To Jerome, 324

LXVIIL — Jerome to Augustin 324

LXIX. — To Castorius 325

LXXI. — To Jerome, 326

LXXII. — Jerome to Augustin, 328

LXXIIL — To Jerome 329

LXXIV. — To Pr^sidius, 333

LXXV. — Jerome to Augustin 333

LXXVI. — To the Donatists, 343

LXXVII. — To Felix and Hilarinus, 344

LXXVIII. — To the Clergy, etc., of the Church of Hippo, 345

LXXIX. — A Challenge to a Manich^an Teacher, 349

LXXXI. — Jerome to Augustin 349

LXXXII. — To Jerome 349

LXXXIIL — To Alypius, 361

LXXXIV. — To NovATUS, 363

LXXXV. — To Paulus, 364

LXXXVI. — To Cecilianus, 365

LXXXVIL — To Emeritus, 365

LXXXVIII. — To Januarius 369

LXXXIX. — To Festus, ^73

XC. — Nectarius to Augustin, 376

XCI. — To Nectarius, 376

XCII. — To the Lady Italica 380

--XCIII. — To Vincentius 382

XCV. — To Brother Paulinus and Sister Therasia, 401

XCVI. — To Olympius, 404

XCVIL — To Olympius 405

XCVIIL — To Boniface, 406

XCIX. — To the very devout Italica 410

C. — To Donatus, 411

CI. — To Memor 412

CII. — To Deogratias, • 414

cm. — To my Lord and Brother Augustin 425

CIV. — To Nectarius, 427

CXI. — To VicTORiANUS, 433

CXV. — To FORTUNATUS 436

CXVI. — To Generosus, 437

CXVII. — From Dioscorus to Augustin, 437

CXVIII. — Augustin to Dioscorus, 438

CXXII. — To his well-beloved Brethren the Clergy, etc., 450

CXXIII. — From Jerome to Augustin, 451

CXXIV. — To Albina, Pinianus, and Melania, 452

CXXV. — To Alypius 453

CXXVL — To Albina 455

CXXX. — To Proba 459

CXXXL — To Lady Proba, 469

CXXXII. — To VoLUSiANUS 470

*CXXXIII. — To Marcellinus 470

CXXXV. — To Bishop Augustin 471


CONTENTS OF THE LETTERS. 217

LETTER PAGE

CXXXVI. — Marcellinus to Augustin 472

CXXXVII. — To Lord Volusianus, 473

CXXXVIIL — To Marcellinus, 481

CXXXIX. — To Marcellinus, 488

CXLIII. — To Marcellinus, 490

CXLIV. — To THE Inhabitants of Cirta, 494

CXLV. — To Anastasius 495

CXLVI. — To Pelagius, 498

CXLVIIL — To FORTUNATIANUS 498

CL. — To Proba and Juliana, 503

CLI. — To C^CILIANUS, 504

CLVIII. — EvoDius TO Augustin, 509

CLIX. — To EvoDius, 513

CLXIII. — EvoDius TO Augustin 515

CLXIV. — To EvoDius, 515

CLXV. — To Marcellinus and Anapsychia, 523

CLXVI. — To Jerome, ' 523

CLXVII. — To Jerome, 532

CLXIX. — To EvoDius, 539

CLXXII. — Jerome to Augustin 543

CLXXIIL — To Donatus 544

CLXXX. — To OcEANUs 547

CLXXXVIIL — To Juliana, 548

CLXXXIX. — To Boniface, 552

CXCL — To SiXTUs, 554

CXCII. — To C^LESTINE, 555

CXCV. — Jerome to Augustin, 556

CCI. — Honorius Augustus and Theodosius Augustus to Aurelius, 556

CCII. — Jerome to Alypius and Augustin, 557

CCIII. — To Largus, . 557

CCVIII. — To Felicia, 558

CCIX. — To C/elestine, 560

CCX. — To Felicitas, Rusticus, etc., 562

CCXL — To THE Nuns 563

CCXIL — To Quintilianus, 568

CCXIII. — Augustin designates his Successor, 568

CCXVIII. — To Palatinus, 571

CCXIX. — To Proculus and Cylinus, 572

CCXX. — To Boniface 573

CCXXVIL — To Alypius, 576

CCXXVIII. — To HoNORATUS . 577

CCXXIX. — To Darius, 581

CCXXXI. — To Darius, 583

CCXXXII. — To THE People of Madaura, 585

CCXXXVII. — To Ceretius 587

CCXLV. — To PossiDius, 587

CCXLVL — To Lampadius, 588

CCL. — To AuxiLius 5S9

CCLIV. — To Benenatus, 591

CCLXIIL — To Sapida 591

CCLXIX. — To NoBiLius, 593


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


LETTER I.

(A.D. 386.)
TO HERMOGENIANUS ' AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.

I. I WOULD not presume, even in playful discus-
sion, to attack the philosophers of the Academy ; ^
for when could the authority of such eminent
men fail to move me, did I not believe their
views to be widely different from those com-
monly ascribed to them? Instead of confuting
them, which is beyond my power, I have rather
imitated them to the best of my ability. For it
seems to me to have been suitable enough to
the times in which they flourished, that whatever
issued pure from the fountainhead of Platonic
philosophy should be rather conducted into dark
and thorny thickets for the refreshment of a very
few me7i, than left to flow in open meadow-land,
where it would be impossible to keep it clear
and pure from the inroads of the vulgar herd.
I use the word herd advisedly ; for what is more
brutish than the opinion that the soul is material ?
For defence against the men who held this, it
appears to me that such an art and method of
concealing the truths was wisely contrived by
the new Academy. But in this age of ours,
when we see none who are philosophers, — for
I do not consider those who merely wear the
cloak of a philosopher to be worthy of that
[venerable name, — it seems to me that men
(those, at least, whom the teaching of the
Academicians has, through the subtlety of the
[terms in which it was expressed, deterred from
attempting to understand its actual meaning)
should be brought back to the hope of discover-
ng the truth, lest that which was then for the
;ime useful in eradicating obstinate error, should
pegin now to hinder the casting in of the seeds

i'lf true knowledge.
2. In that age the studies of contending schools
f philosophers were pursued with such ardour,
' Hermogeiiianus was one of the earliest and most intimate friends
Augustin, and his associate in Hterary and philosophical studies.
^ [Academy was a grove dedicated to the Attic hero Academos,
\ the banks of the Kephissos near Athens, where Plato taught,
ience it became the name of the Platonic school of philosophy. It
ad three branches, — the Older, the Middle, and the Younger Acade-
y. The study of Platonism was a preparatory step to the conver-
on of Augustin in 386. — P. S. ]
•3 We follow the reading " tegendi veri,"


that the one thing to be feared was the possibility
of error being approved. For every one who
had been driven by the arguments of the scepti-
cal philosophers from a position which he had
supposed to be impregnable, set himself to seek
some other in its stead, with a perseverance and
caution corresponding to the greater industry
which was characteristic of the men of that time,
and the strength of the persuasion then prevail-
ing, that truth, though deep and hard to be de-
ciphered, does lie hidden in the nature of things
and of the human mind. Now, however, such
is the indisposition to strenuous exertion, and
the indifference to the liberal arts, that so soon
as it is noised abroad that, in the opinion of the
most acute philosophers, truth is unattainable,
men send their minds to sleep, and cover them
up for ever. For they presume not, forsooth,
to imagine themselves to be so superior in dis-
cernment to those great men, that they shall find
out what, during his singularly long life, Car-
neades,'* with all his diligence, talents, and leisure,
besides his extensive and varied learning, failed
to discover. And if, contending somewhat
against indolence, they rouse themselves so far
as to read those books in which it is, as it were,
proved that the perception of truth is denied to
man, they relapse into lethargy so profound, that
not even by the heavenly trumpet can they be
aroused.

3. ^Vherefore, although I accept with the great-
est pleasure your candid estimate of my brief
treatise, and esteem you so much as to rely not
less on the sagacity of your judgment than on the
sincerity of your friendship, I beg you to give
more particular attention to one point, and to
write me again concerning it, — namely, whether
you approve of that which, in the end of the
third book, 5 I have given as my opinion, in a
tone perhaps of hesitation rather than of cer-
tainty, but in statements, as I think, more likely
to be found useful than to be rejected as incredi-
ble. But whatever be the value of those treatises


■* [Carneades of Gyrene (B.C. 214-129), the founder of the third
Academic school, who came to Rome u.c. 155, went further in the
direction of scepticism than Arcesilas, and taught that certain knowl-
edge was impossible. See Ueberweg, History 0/ Philosophy , i. 133,
136 (transl of Morris). — P. S.]

5 Augustin's work, De Academicis, b. iii. c. 20.

219


220


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


[the books against the Academicians], what I
most rejoice in is, not that I have vanquished
the Academicians, as you express it (using the
language rather of friendly partiality than of
truth), but that I have broken and cast away
from me the odious bonds by which I was kept
back from the nourishing breasts of philosophy,
through despair of attaining that truth which is
the food of the soul.

LETTER II.
(A.D. 3S6.)

TO ZENOBIUS AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.'

I. We are, I suppose, both agreed in main-
taining that all things with which our bodily
senses acquaint us are incapable of abiding un-
changed for a single moment, but, on the con-
trary, are moving and in perpetual transition,
and have no present reality, that is, to use the
language of Latin philosophy, do not exist.^
Accordingly, the true and divine philosophy ad-
monishes us to check and subdue the love of
these things as most dangerous and disastrous,
in order that the mind, even while using this
body, may be wholly occupied and warmly in-
terested in those things which are ever the same,
and wliich owe their attractive power to no
transient charm. Although this is all true, and
although my mind, without the aid of the senses,
sees you as you really are, and as an object which
may be loved without disquietude, nevertheless
I must own that when you are absent in body,
and separated by distance, the pleasure of
meeting and seeing you is one which I miss,
and which, therefore, while it is attainable, I
earnestly covet. This my infirmity (for such it
must be) is one which, if I know you aright,
you are well pleased to find in me ; and though
you wish every good thing for your best and
most loved friends, you rather fear than desire
that they should be cured of this infirmity. If,
however, your soul has attained to such strength
that you are able both to discern this snare, and
to smile at those who are caught therein, truly
you are great, and different from what I am.
For my part, as long as I regret the absence of
any one from me, so long do I wish him to re-
gret my absence. At the same time, I watch
and strive to set my love as little as possible on
anything which can be separated from me against
my will. Regarding this as my duty, I remind
you, in the meantime, whatever be your frame
of mind, that the discussion which I have begun
with you must be finished, if we care for each
other. For I can by no means consent to its


« Zenobius was the friend to whom Augustin dedicated his books
De Ordine. In book i. ch. i and 2, we have a dehghtful description
of the character of Zenobius.

2 Ut latine loquar, non esse.


being finished with Alypius, even if he wished
it. But he does not wish this ; for he is not the
man to join with me now in endeavouring, by as
many letters as we could send, to detain you
with us, when you decline this, under the pressure
of some necessity to us unknown.

LETTER III.

(A.D. 387.)
TO NEBRIDIUS AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.^

I. Whether I am to regard it as the effect
of what I may call your flattering language, or
whether the thing be really so, is a point which
I am unable to decide. For the impression
was sudden, and I am not yet resolved how far
it deserves to be believed. You wonder what
this can be. What do you think? You have
almost made me believe, not indeed that I am
happy — for that is the heritage of the wise
alone — but that I am at least in a sense happy :
as we apply the designation 7?ia}i to beings who
deserve the name only in a sense if compared
with Plato's ideal man, or speak of things which
we see as round or square, although they differ
widely from the perfect figure which is discerned
by the mind of a few. I read your letter beside
my lamp after supper : immediately after which
I lay down, but not at once to sleep ; for on my.
bed I meditated long, and talked thus with myself
— Augustin addressing and answering Augustin :
" Is it not true, as Nebridius affirms, that I am
happy?" "Absolutely true it cannot be, for
that I am still far from wise he himself would
not deny." " But may not a happy life be the
lot even of those who are not wise ? " " That is
scarcely possible ; because, in that case, lack of
wisdom would be a small misfortune, and not,
as it actually is, the one and only source of un-
happiness." " How, then, did Nebridius come
to esteem me happy? Was it that, after reading
these little books of mine, he ventured to pro-
nounce me wise ? Surely the vehemence of joy
could not make him so rash, especially seeing
that he is a man to whose judgment I well know
so much weight is to be attached. I have it
now : he wrote what he thought would be most
gratifying to me, because he had been gratified
by what I had written in those treatises ; and he
wrote in a joyful mood, without accurately
weighing the sentiments entrusted to his joyous
pen. What, then, would he have said if he had
read my Soliloquies ? He would have rejoiced
with much more exultation, and yet could find
no loftier name to bestow on me than this which
he has already given in calling me happy. All
at once, then, he has lavished on me the highest

3 The character of Nebridius, and the intimacy of friendship be-
tween him and Augustin, may be seen in the Confessions, b. ix. C. 3'


it
k
k


iiidi
lift


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


221


single


possible name, and has not resented a
word to add to my praises, if at any time he
were made by me more joyful than he is now.
See what joy does."

2. But where is that truly happy life? where?
ay, where? Oh ! if it were attained, one would
spurn the atomic theory of Epicurus. Oh ! if
it were attained, one would know that there is
nothing here below but the visible world. Oh !
if it were attained, one would know that in the
rotation of a globe on its axis, the motion of
points near the poles is less rapid than of those
which lie half way between them, — and other
such like things which we likewise know. But
now, how or in what sense can I be called happy,
who know not why the world is such in size as it
is, when the proportions of the figures according
to which it is framed do in no way hinder its
being enlarged to any extent desired ? Or how
might it not be said to me — nay, might we not
be compelled to admit that matter is infinitely
divisible ; so that, starting from any given base
(so to speak), a definite number of corpuscles
must rise to a definite and ascertainable quantity?
Wherefore, seeing that we do not admit that any
particle is so small as to be insusceptible of fur-
ther diminution, what compels us to admit that
any assemblage of parts is so great that it cannot
possibly be increased ? Is there perchance some
important truth in what I once suggested confi-
dentially to Alypius, that since number, as cog-
nisable by the understanding, is susceptible of
infinite augmentation, but not of infinite diminu-
tion,' because we cannot reduce it lower than to
the units, number, as cognisable by the senses
(and this, of course, just means quantity of ma-
terial parts or bodies), is on the contrary suscep-
tible of infinite diminution, but has a limit to its
augmentation? This may perhaps be the reason
why philosophers justly pronounce riches to be
found in the things about which the understand-
ing is exercised, and poverty in those things with
Iwhich the senses have to do. For what is poorer
han to be susceptible of endless diminution? and
hat more truly rich than to increase as much
s you will, to go whither you will, to return when
ou will and as far as you will, and to have as
he object of your love that which is large and
annot be made less ? For whoever understands
these numbers loves nothing so much as the unit ;
md no wonder, seeing that it is through it that
ill the other numbers can be loved by him. But
;o return : Why is the world the size that it is,


' Had Augustin been acquainted with the decimal notation, he
yould not have made this remark to Alypius; for in the decimal scale,
'hen the point is inserted, fractional parts go on diminishing accord-
hg to the number of cyphers between them and the point (e.g. .001),
irecisely as the integers increase according to the number of cyphers
etween them and the decimal point {e.g: 100.), — there being no
mit to the descending series on the right hand of the decimal point,
ny more than to the ascending series on the left hand of the same
omt.


seeing that it might have been greater or less ? I
do not know : its dimensions are what they are,
and I can go no further. Again : Why is the
world in the place it now occupies rather than in
another? Here, too, it is better not to put the
question ; for whatever the answer might be, other
questions would still remain. This one thing
greatly perplexed me, that bodies could be infi-
nitely subdivided. To this perhaps an answer has
been given, by setting over against it the converse
property of abstract number [viz. its suscepti-
bility of infinite multiplication].

3. But stay : let us see what is that indefinable
object^ which is suggested to the mind. This
world with which our senses acquaint us is surely
the image of some world which the understand-
ing apprehends. Now it is a strange phenomenon
which we observe in the images which mirrors
reflect to us, — that however great the mirrors be,
they do not make the images larger than the
objects placed before them, be they ever so small ;
but in small mirrors, such as the pupil of the eye,
although a large surface be placed over against
them, a very small image is formed, proportioned
to the size of the mirror.^ Therefore if the mir-
rors be reduced in size, the images reflected in
them are also reduced ; but it is not possible for
the images to be enlarged by enlarging the mir-
rors. Surely there is in this something which
might reward further investigation ; but mean-
while, I must sleep."* Moreover, if I seem to
Nebridius to be happy, it is not because I seek,
but because perchance I have found something.
What, then, is that something? Is it that chain
of reasoning which I am wont so to caress as if
it were my sole treasure, and in which perhaps I
take too much delight?

4. " Of what parts do we consist? " " Of soul
and body." "Which of these is the nobler?"
" Doubtless the soul." " What do men praise in
the body?" "Nothing that I see but comeU-
ness." "And what is comeliness of body?"
" Harmony of parts in the form, together with a
certain agreeableness of colour." " Is this come-
liness better where it is true or where it is illu-
sive? " " Unquestionably it is better where it is
true." "And where is it found true?" " In the
soul." " The soul, therefore, is to be loved more
than the body ; but in what part of the soul does
this truth reside?" "In the mind and under-
standing." " With what has the understanding
to contend?" "With the senses." " Must we
then resist the senses with all our might ? " " Cer-
tainly." " What, then, if the things with which
the senses acquaint us give us pleasure?" "We
must prevent them from doing so." "How?"

2 Nescio quid.

3 Augustin's acquaintance with the first principles of optics, and
with the properties of reflection possessed by convex, plane, and con-
cave mirrors, was very limited.

■• Wisely resolved.


222


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


" By acquiring the habit of doing without them,
and desiring better things." " But if the soul
die, what then?" "Why, then truth dies, or
intelligence is not truth, or intelligence is not a
part of the soul, or that which has some part im- j
mortal is liable to die : conclusions all of which '
I demonstrated long ago in my Soliloquies to
be absurd because impossible ; and I am firmly
persuaded that this is the case, but somehow
through the influence of custom in the experience
of evils we are terrified, and hesitate. But even
granting, finally, that the soul dies, which I do
not see to be in any way possible, it remains
nevertheless true that a happy life does not con-
sist in the evanescent joy which sensible objects
can yield : this I have pondered deliberately,
and proved."

Perhaps it is on account of reasonings such as
these that I have been judged by my own Nebrid-
ius to be, if not absolutely happy, at least in a
sense happy. Let me also judge myself to be
happy : for what do I lose thereby, or why should
I grudge to think well of my own estate ? Thus
I talked with myself, then prayed according to
my custom, and fell asleep.

5. These things I have thought good to write
to you. For it gratifies me that you should thank
me when I write freely to you whatever crosses
my mind ; and to whom can I more willingly
write nonsense ' than to one whom I cannot dis-
please ? But if it depends upon fortune whether
one man love another or not, look to it, I pray
you, how can I be justly called happy when I am
so elated with joy by fortune's favours, and avow-
edly desire that my store of such good things
may be largely increased? For those who are
most truly wise, and whom alone it is right to
pronounce happy, have maintained that fortune's
favours ought not to be the objects of either fear
or desire.

Now here I used the word " cupi : " ^ will you
tell me whether it should be " cupi " or " cupiri? "
And I am glad this has come in the way, for I
wish you to instruct me in the inflexion of this
verb " cupio," since, when I compare similar
verbs with it, my uncertainty as to the proper
inflexion increases. For " cupio " is like "/ugio,"
" sapio," "jacio," •' capio ; " but whether the in-
finitive mood is "/ugiri" or "/ugi," "■ sapiri" or
" sapi," I do not know. I might regard "j'aci"
and "capi"^ as parallel instances answering my
question as to the others, were I not afraid lest
some grammarian should " catch " and " throw "
me like a ball in sport wherever he pleased, by
reminding me that the form of the supines
"jactum" and "caplum" is different from that


• Ineptiam.

2 Present infinitive passive of cupere, to desire.

3 Infinitive passive of verbs signifying respectively to " throw "
and to " catch."


found in the other verbs '■'fugitum,'' " cupituin"
and " sapilum.'" As to these three words, more-
over, I am likewise ignorant whether the penulti-
mate is to be pronounced long and with circumflex
accent, or without accent and short. I would
like to provoke you to write a reasonably long
letter. I beg you to let me have what it will take
some time to read. For it is far beyond my
power to express the pleasure which I find in
reading what you write.


LETTER IV.

(a.d. 387.)

to nebridius augustin sends greeting.

1. It is very wonderful how completely I was
taken by surprise, when, on searching to discover
which of your letters still remained unanswered,
I found only one which held me as your debtor,
— that, namely, in which you request me to tell
you how far in this my leisure, which you sup-
pose to be great, and which you desire to share
with me, I am making progress in learning to
discriminate those things in nature with which the
senses are conversant, from those about which
the understanding is employed. But I suppose
it is not unknown to you, that if one becomes
more and more fully imbued with false opinions,
the more fully and intimately one exercises him-
self in them, the corresponding effect is still more
easily produced in the mind by contact with truth.
Nevertheless my progress, like our physical de-
velopment, is so gradual, that it is difficult to
define its steps distinctly, just as though there is
a very great difference between a boy and a young
man, no one, if daily questioned from his boy-
hood onward, could at any one date say that now
he was no more a boy, but a young man.

2. I would not have you, however, so to apply
this illustration as to suppose that, in the vigour
of a more powerful understanding, I have arrived
as it were at the beginning of the soul's manhood;
For I am yet but a boy, though perhaps, as we
say, a promising boy, rather than a good-for-
nothing. For although the eyes of my mind are
for the most part perturbed and oppressed by
the distractions produced by blows inflicted
through things sensible, they are revived and
raised up again by that brief process of reason-
ing : " The mind and intelligence are superior
to the eyes and the common faculty of sight;
which could not be the case unless the things
which we perceive by intelligence were more
real than the things which we perceive by the


to


faculty of sight." I pray you to help me in
examining whether any valid objection can be|
brought against this reasoning. By it. meanwhile, j
I find myself restored and refreshed ; and when, 1
after calling upon God for help, I begin to rise


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


223


to Him, and to those things which are in the
highest sense real, I am at times satisfied with
such a grasp and enjoyment of the things which
eternally abide, that I sometimes wonder at my
requiring any such reasoning as I have above
given to persuade me of the reality of those
things which in my soul are as truly present to
me as I am to myself

Please look over your letters yourself, for I
own that you will be in this matter at greater
pains than I, in order to make sure that I am
not perchance unwittingly still owing an answer
to any of them : for I can hardly believe that I
have so soon got from under the burden of debts
which I used to reckon as so numerous ; albeit,
at the same time, I cannot doubt that you have
had some letters from me to which I have as yet
received no reply.


LETTER V.

(a.d. 388.)

to augustin nebridius sends greeting.

Is it true, my beloved Augustin, that you are
spending your strength and patience on the affairs
of your fellow-citizens (in Thagaste), and that
the leisure from distractions which you so ear-
nestly desired is still withheld from you? Who,
I would like to know, are the men who thus take
advantage of your good nature, and trespass on
your time? I believe that they do not know
what you love most and long for. Have you no
friend at hand to tell them what your heart is set
upon ? Will neither Romanianus nor Lucinianus
I do this ? Let them hear me at all ev^ents. I will
proclaim aloud ; I will protest that God is the
supreme object of your love, and that your
heart's desire is to be His servant, and to cleave
to Him. Fain would I persuade you to come to
my home in the country, and rest here ; I shall
Inot be afraid of being denounced as a robber by
Ithose countrymen of yours, whom you love only
Itoo well, and by whom you are too warmly loved
lin return.

LETTER VI.

(a.d. 389.)

to augustin nebridius sends greeting.

I. Your letters I have great pleasure in keep-
ling as carefully as my own eyes. For they are
great, not indeed in length, but in the greatness
1^ bf the subjects discussed in them, and in the
Igreat ability with which the truth in regard to
'".hese subjects is demonstrated. They shall bring
•0 my ear the voice of Christ, and the teaching


I


of Plato and of Plotinus. To me, therefore,
they shall ever be pleasant lO hear, because of
their eloquent style ; easy to read, because of their
brevity ; and profitable to understand, because
of the wisdom which they contain. Be at pains,
therefore, to teach me everything which, to your
judgment, commends itself as holy or good.
As to this letter in particular, answer it when you
are ready to discuss a subtle problem in regard
to memory, and the images presented by the
imagination.' My opinion is, that although there
can be such images independently of memor}',
there is no exercise of memory independently
of such images.- You will say, What, then, takes
place when memory is exercised in recalling an
act of understanding or of thought ? I answer
this objection by saying, that such acts can be
recalled by memory for this reason, that in the
supposed act of understand-ng or of thought we
gave birth to something conditioned by space or
by time, which is of such a nature that it can be
reproduced by the imagination : for either we
connected the use of words with the exercise of
the understanding and with the thoughts, and
words are conditioned by time, and thus fall
within the domain of the senses or of the imagi-
native faculty ; or if we did not join words with
the mental act, our intellect at all events experi-
enced in the act of thinking something which
was of such a nature as could produce in the
mind that which, by the aid of the imaginative
faculty, memory could recall. These things I
have stated, as usual, without much considera-
tion, and in a somewhat confused manner : do
you examine them, and, rejecting what is false,
acquaint me by letter with what you hold as the
truth on this subject.

2. Listen also to this question : Why, I should
like to know, do we not afifirm that the phantasy
[imaginative faculty] derives all its images from
itself, rather than say that it receives these from
the senses ? For it is possible that, as the intel-
lectual faculty of the soul is indebted to the
senses, not for the objects upon which the intel-
lect is exercised, but rather for the admonition
arousing it to see these objects, in the same man-
ner the imaginative faculty may be indebted to
the senses, not for the images which are the ob-
jects upon which it is exercised, but rather for
the admonition arousing it to contemplate these
images. And perhaps it is in this way that we
are to explain the fact that the imagination per-
ceives some objects which the senses never per-
ceived, whereby it is shown that it has all its
images within itself, and from itself You will
answer me what you think of this question
also.


* Phaniasia.

2 Quatiivis non omm's phantasia cum memoria sit, ontnis
tamen tiieinoria, sine phaiitasia esse non possit.


224


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


LETTER VIL

(A.D. 389.)

TO NEBRIDIUS AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.

Chap. i. — Memory may be exercised independ-
ently of such images as are presented by the
imagination.

1. I shall dispense with a formal preface, and
to the subject on which you have for some time
wished to hear my opinion I shall address my-
self at once ; and this I do the more willingly,
because the statement must take some time.

It seems to you that there can be no exercise
of memory without images, or the apprehension
of some objects presented by the imagination,
which you have been pleased to call " phanta-
siae." For my part, I entertain a different opin-
ion. In the first place, we must observe that the
things which we remember are not always things
which are passing away, but are for the most
part things which are permanent. Wherefore,
seeing that the function of memory is to retain
hold of what belongs to time past, it is certain
that it embraces on the one hand things which
leave us, and on the other hand things from
which we go away. When, for example, I re-
member my father, the object which memory
recalls is one which has left me, and is now no
more ; but when I remember Carthage, the ob-
ject is in this case one which still exists, and
which I have left. In both cases, however,
memory retains what belongs to past time. For
I remember that man and this city, not by seeing
them now, but by having seen them in the past.

2. You perhaps ask me at this point, Why
bring forward these facts? And you may do
this the more readily, because you observe that
in both the examples quoted the object remem-
bered can come to my memory in no other way
than by the apprehension of such an image as
you affirm to be always necessary. For my
purpose it suffices meanwhile to have proved in
this way that memory can be spoken of as em-
bracing also those things which have not yet
passed away : and now mark attentively how
this supports my opinion. Some men raise a
groundless objection to that most famous theory
invented by Socrates, according to which the
things that we learn are not introduced to our
minds as new, but brought back to memory by
a process of recollection ; supporting their ob-
jection by affirming that memory has to do only
with things which have passed away, whereas, as
Plato himself has taught, those things which we
learn by the exercise of the understanding are
permanent, and being imperishable, cannot be
numbered among things which have passed away :
the mistake into which they have fallen arising
obviously from this, that they do not consider


that it is only the mental act of apprehension by
which we have discerned these things which
belongs to the past ; and that it is because we
have, in the stream of mental activity, left these
behind, and begun in a variety of ways to attend
to other things, that we require to return to them
by an effort of recollection, that is, by mem-
ory. If, therefore, passing over other examples,
we fix our thoughts upon eternity itself as some-
thing which is for ever permanent, and consider,
on the one hand, that it does not require any
image fashioned by the imagination as the vehi-
cle by which it may be introduced into the
mind ; and, on the other hand, that it could
never enter the mind otherwise than by our re-
membering it, — we shall see that, in regard to
some things at least, there can be an exercise of
memory without any image of the thing remem-
bered being presented by the imagination.

Chap. ii. — The mind is destitute of images pre-
sented by the imagination, so long as it has
not been infortned by the senses of external
things.

3. In the second place, as to your opinion
that it is possible for the mind to form to itself
images of material things independently of the
services of the bodily senses, this is refuted by
the following argument : — If the mind is able,
before it uses the body as its instrument in per-
ceiving material objects, to form to itself the


images


of these ; and if, as no sane man can


doubt, the mind received more reliable and cor-
rect impressions before it was involved in the
illusions which the senses produce, it follows
that we must attribute greater value to the im-
pressions of men asleep than of men awake,
and of men insane than of those who are free
from such mental disorder : for they are, in
these states of mind, impressed by the same
kind of images as impressed them before they ^
were indebted for information to these most de-S|'^
ceptive messengers, the senses ; and thus, either
the sun which they see must be more real than
the sun which is seen by men in their sound
judgment and in their waking hours, or that
which is an illusion must be better than what is
real. But if these conclusions, my dear Nebrid-
ius, are, as they obviously are, wholly absurd, 1 810
it is demonstrated that the image of which you i liitlj
speak is nothing else than a blow inflicted by 1 Sirlej
the senses, the function of which in connection I iiiljj
with these images is not, as you write, the mere I »en;
suggestion or admonition occasioning their for- i %.
mation by the mind within itself, but the actual iN' .
bringing in to the mind, or, to speak more defi- 1
nitely, impressing upon it of the illusions to
which through the senses we are subject. The
difficulty which you feel as to the question how


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


225


it comes to pass that we can conceive in thought,
faces and forms which we have never seen, is
one which proves the acuteness of your mind.
I shall therefore do what may extend this letter
beyond the usual length ; not, however, beyond
the length which you will approve, for I be-
lieve that the greater the fulness with which I
write to you, the more welcome shall my letter
be.

4. I perceive that all those images which you
as well as many others call phantasicc, may be
most conveniently and accurately divided into
three classes, according as they originate with
the senses, or the imagination, or the faculty of
reason. Examples of the first class are when
the mind forms within itself and presents to
me the image of your face, or of Carthage, or of
our departed friend Verecundus, or of any other
thing at present or formerly existing, which I
have myself seen and perceived. Under the
second class come all things which we imagine
to have been, or to be so and so : e.g. when, for
the sake of illustration in discourse, we ourselves
I suppose things which have no existence, but
which are not prejudicial to truth; or when we
call up to our own minds a lively conception of
the things described while we read history, or
hear, or compose, or refuse to beUeve fabulous
Inarrations. Thus, according to my own fancy,
land as it may occur to my own mind, I picture
Ito myself the appearance of /Eneas, or of Medea
[with her team of winged dragons, or of Chremes,
)r Parmeno.' To this class belong also those
things which have been brought forward as true,
either by wise men wrapping up some truth in
|the folds of such inventions, or by foolish men
juilding up various kinds of superstition ; e.g.
|:he Phlegethon of Tartarus, and the five caves
)f the nation of darkness,^ and the North Pole
|upporting the heavens, and a thousand other
jrodigies of poets and of heretics. Moreover,
|»re often say, when carrying on a discussion.
Suppose that three worlds, such as the one
irhich we inhabit, were placed one above an-
other;" or, "Suppose the earth to be enclosed
ithin a four-sided figure," and so on : for all
jch things we picture to ourselves, and imagine
icording to the mood and direction of our
loughts. As for the third class of images, it
to do chiefly with numbers and measure ;
Jhich are found partly in the nature of things,
when the figure of the entire world is discov-
Ired, and an image consequent upon this dis-
5ve^ is formed in the mind of one thinking
)on it ; and partly in sciences, as in geometri-
|il figures and musical harmonies, and in the
inite variety of numerals : which, although


I* Dramatis personce in Terence.
I * Referring to Manichaean notions.


they are, as I think, true in themselves as ob-
jects of the understanding, are nevertheless the
causes of illusive exercises of the imagination,
the misleading tendency of which reason itself
can only with difficulty withstand ; although it
is not easy to preserve even the science of rea-
soning free from this evil, since in our logical
divisions and conclusions we form to ourselves,
so to speak, calculi or counters to facilitate the
process of reasoning.

5. In this whole forest of images, I believe
that you do not think that those of the first class
belong to the mind previous to the time when
they find access through the senses. On this
we need not argue any further. As to the other
two classes a question might reasonably be raised,
were it not manifest that the mind is less liable
to illusions when it has not yet been subjected
to the deceptive influence of the senses, and of
things sensible ; and yet who can doubt that
these images are much more unreal than those
with which the senses acquaint us? For the
things which we suppose, or believe, or picture
to ourselves, are in every point wholly unreal ;
and the things which we perceive by sight and
the other senses, are, as you see, far more near
to the truth than these products of imagination.
As to the third class, whatever extension of body
in space I figure to myself in my mind by means
of an image of this class, although it seems as
if a process of thought had produced this image
by scientific reasonings which did not admit of
error, nevertheless I prove it to be deceptive,
these same reasonings serving in turn to detect
its falsity. Thus it is wholly impossible for me
to believe [as, accepting your opinion, I must
believe] that the soul, while not yet using the
bodily senses, and not yet rudely assaulted
through these fallacious instruments by that
which is mortal and fleeting, lay under such
ignominious subjection to illusions.

Chap. hi. — Objection answered.

6. " Whence then comes our capacity of con-
ceiving in thought things which we have never
seen? " What, think you, can be the cause of
this, but a certain faculty of diminution and ad-
dition which is innate in the mind, and which it
cannot but carry with it whithersoever it turns
(a faculty which may be observed especially in
relation to numbers) ? By the exercise of this
faculty, if the image of a crow, for example,
which is very familiar to the eye, be set before
the eye of the mind, as it were, it may be
brought, by the taking away of some features
and the addition of others, to almost any image
such as never was seen by the eye. By this
faculty also it comes to pass, that when men's
minds habitually ponder such things, figures of


226


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


this kind force their way as it were unbidden into
their thoughts. Therefore it is possible for the
mind, by talking away, as has been said, some
things from objects which the senses have
brought within its knowledge, and by adding
some things, to produce in the exercise of imagi-
nation that which, as a whole, was never within
the observation of any of the senses ; but the
parts of it had all been within such observation,
though found in a variety of different things :
e.g., when we were boys, born and brought up
in an inland district, we could already form some
idea of the sea, after we had seen water even in
a small cup ; but the flavour of strawberries and
of cherries could in no wise enter our concep-
tions before we tasted these fruits in Italy.
Hence it is also, that those who have been born
blind know not what to answer when they are
asked about light and colours. For those who
have never perceived coloured objects by the
senses are not capable of having the images of
such objects in the mind.

7. And let it not appear to you strange, that
though the mind is piesent in and intermingled
with all those images which in tlie nature of
things are figured or can be pictured by us,
these are not evolved by the mind from within
itself before it has received them through the
senses from without. For we also find that,
along with anger, joy, and other such emotions,
we ]Droduce changes in our bodily aspect and
complexion, before our thinking faculty even
conceives that we have the power of produ-
cing such images [or indications of our feeling].
These follow upon the experience of the emo-
tion in those wonderful ways (especially deserv-
ing your attentive consideration), which consist
in the repeated action and reaction of hidden
numbers ' in the soul, without the intervention
of any image of illusive material things. Whence
I would have you understand — perceiving as
you do that so many movements of the mind
go on wholly independently of the images in
question — that of all the movements of the
mind by which it may conceivably attain to the
knowledge of bodies, every other is more likely
than the process of creating forms of sensible
things by unaided thought, because I do not
think that it is capable of any such conceptions
before it uses the body and the senses.

Wherefore, my well beloved and most amiable
brother, by the friendship which unites us, and
by our faith in the divine law itself,- I would
warn you never to link yourself in friendship
with those shadows of the realm of darkness,
and to break off without delay whatever friend-
ship may have been begun between you and


' Numeri actitantur occulti.
2 Pro ipsius divini juris Jide.


them. That resistance to the sway of the bod-
ily senses which it is our most sacred duty to
practise, is wholly abandoned if we treat with
fondness and flattery the blows and wounds
which the senses inflict upon us.


LETTER VIII.

(a.d. 389.)

to augustin nebridius sends greeting.

I. As I am in haste to come to the subject
of my letter, I dispense with any preface or in-
troduction. When at any time it pleases higher
(by which I mean heavenly) powers to reveal
anything to us by dreams in our sleep, how is
j this done, my dear Augustin, or what is the
method which they use ? \\'hat, I say, is their
method, i.e. by what art or magic, by what
j agency or enchantments, do they accomplish
j this ? Do they by their thoughts influence our
minds, so that we also have the same images
presented in our thoughts? Do they bring be-
fore us, and exhibit as actually done in their
I own body or in their own imagination, the things
! which we dream ? But if they actually do these
things in their own body, it follows that, in order
to our seeing what they thus do, we must be en-
dowed with other bodily eyes beholding what
passes within while we sleep. If, however, they
are not assisted by their bodies in producing
the effects in question, but frame such things in
their own imaginative faculty, and thus impress
our imaginations, thereby giving visible form to
what we dream ; why is it, I ask, that I cannot
compel your imagination to reproduce those
dreams which I have myself first formed by my
imagination? I have undoubtedly the faculty
of imagination, and it is capable of presenting
to my own mind the picture of whatever I
please ; and yet I do not thereby cause any
dream in you, although I see that even our bod-
ies have the power of originating dreams in us.
For by means of the bond of sympathy uniting
it to the soul, the body compels us in strange^v
ways to repeat or reproduce by imagination any-
thing which it has once experienced. I'hus
often in sleep, if we are thirsty, we dream that
we drink ; and if we are hungry, we seem to our-
selves to be eating ; and many other instances
there are in which, by some mode of exchange,
so to speak, things are transferred through the ;
imagination from the body to the soul.

Be not surprised at the want of elegance and
subtlety with which these questions are here
stated to you ; consider the obscurity in which
the subject is involved, and the inexperience of
the writer ; be it yours to do your utmost to
supply his deficiencies.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


227


LETTER IX.
(a.d. 3S9.)

TO NEBRIDIUS AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.


I. Although


you know my mind well, you
are perhaps not aware how much I long to en-
joy your society. This great blessing, however,
Ood will some day bestow on me. I have read
your letter, so genuine in its utterances, in which
you complain of your being in solitude, and, as
it were, forsaken by your friends, in whose soci-
ety you found the sweetest charm of life. But
what else can I suggest to you than that which
I am persuaded is already your exercise ? Com-
mune with your own soul, and raise it up, as far
as you are able, unto God. For in Him you
hold us also by a firmer bond, not by means of
bodily images, which we must meanwhile be
content to use in remembering each other, but
by means of that faculty of thought through
which we realize the fact of our separation from
each other.

2. In considering your letters, in answering
all of which I have certainly had to answer ques-
tions of no small difficulty and importance, I
was not a little stunned by the one in which you
ask me by what means certain thoughts and
dreams are put into our minds by higher powers
or by superhuman agents.' The question is a
great one, and, as your own prudence must con-
vince you, would require, in order to its being
satisfactorily answered, not a mere letter, but a
full oral discussion or a whole treatise. I shall
try, however, knowing as I do your talents, to
throw out a few germs of thought which may
shed light on this question, in order that you
may either complete the exhaustive treatment
of the subject by your own efforts, or at least
not despair of the possibility of this important
matter being investigated with satisfactory results.

3. It is my opinion that every movement of
the mind affects in some degree the body. We
know that this is patent even to our senses, dull
and sluggish though they are, when the move-
ments of the mind are somewhat vehement, as
when we are angry, or sad, or joyful. Whence
we may conjecture that, in like manner, when
thought is busy, although no bodily effect of the
mental act is discernible by us, there may be
some such effect discernible by beings of aerial
or etherial essence whose perceptive faculty is in
the highest degree acute, — so much so, that,
in comparison with it, our faculties are scarcely
worthy to be called perceptive. Therefore these
footprints of its motion, so to speak, which the
mind impresses on the body, may perchance
not only remain, but remain as it were with the


force of a habit ; and it may be that, when these
are secretly stirred and played upon, they^bear
thoughts and dreams into our mintls, according
to the pleasure of the person moving or touch-
ing them : and this is done with marvellous
facility. For if, as is manifest, the attainments
of our earth-born and sluggish bodies in the
department of exercise, e.g. in the playing of
musical instruments, dancing on the tight-rope,
etc., are almost incredible, it is by no means un-
reasonable to suppose that beings which act with
the powers of an aerial or etherial body upon
our bodies, and are by the constitution of their
natures able to pass unhindered through these
bodies, should be capable of much greater c[uick-
ness in moving whatever they wish, while we,
though not perceiving what they do, are never-
theless affected by the results of their activity.
We have a somewhat parallel instance in the fact
that we do not perceive how it is that super-
fluity of bile impels us to more frequent out-
bursts of passionate feeling; and yet it does
produce this effect, while this superfluity of bile
is itself an effect of our yielding to such pas-
sionate feelings.

4. If, however, you hesitate to accept this ex-
ample as a parallel one, wlien it is thus cursorily
stated by me, turn it over in your thoughts as
fully as you can. The mind, if it be continually
obstructed by some difficulty in the way of doing
and accomplishing what it desires, is thereby
made continually angry. For anger, so far as I
can judge of its nature, seems to me to be a
tumultuous eagerness to take out of the way
those things which restrict our freedom of action.
Hence it is that usually we vent our anger not
only on men, but on such a thing, for example,
as the pen with which we write, bruising or
breaking it in our passion ; and so does the
gambler with his dice, the artist with his pencil,
and every man with the instrument which he
may be using, if he thinks that he is in some
way thwarted by it. Now medical men them- )J
selves tell us that by these frequent fits of anger
bfle is increased. But, on the other hand, when
the bile is increased, we are easily, and almost [
without any provocation whatever, made angry.
Thus the effect which the mind has by its move-
ment produced upon the body, is capable in its
turn of moving the mind again.

5. These things might be treated at very great
length, and our knowledge of the subject might
be brought to greater certainty and fulness by a
"Jarse induction from relevant facts. But take
along with this letter the one which I sent you
lately concerning images and memory,^ and study
it somewhat more carefully ; for it was manifest
to me, from your reply, that it had not been fully


' Damom'ius.


2 See Letter VII.


228


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


understood. When, to the statements now be-
fore you, you add the portion of that letter in
which I spoke of a certain natural faculty where-
by the mind does in thought add to or take from
any object as it pleases, you will see that it is
possible for us both in dreams and in waking
thoughts to conceive the images of bodily forms
which we have never seen.

LETTER X.

(a.d. 389.)

to nebridius augustin sends greeting.

1. No question of yours ever kept me so dis-
turbed while reflecting upon it, as the remark
which I read in your last letter, in which you
chide me for being indifferent as to making
arrangements by which it may be possible for us
to live together. A grave charge, and one which,
were it not unfounded, would be most perilous.
But since satisfactory reasons seem to prove that
we can live as we would wish to do better here
than at Carthage, or even in the country, I am
wholly at a loss, my dear Nebridius, what to do
with you. Shall such a conveyance as may best
suit your state of health be sent from us to you ?
Our friend Lucinianus informs me that you can
be carried without injury in a palanquin. But I
consider, on the other hand, how your mother,
who could not bear your absence from her when
you were in health, will be much less able to
bear it when you are ill. Shall I myself then
come to you? This I cannot do, for there are
some here who cannot accompany me, and whom
I would think it a crime for me to leave. For
you already can pass your time agreeably when
left to the resources of our own mind ; but in
their case the object of present efforts is that
they may attain to this. Shall I go and come fre-
quently, and so be now with you, now with them ?
But this is neither to live together, nor to live as
we would wish to do. For the journey is not a
short one, but so great at least that the attempt
to perform it frequently would prevent our gain-
ing the wished-for leisure. To this is added the
bodily weakness through which, as you know, I
cannot accomplish what I wish, unless I cease
wholly to wish what is beyond my strength.

2. To occupy one's thoughts throughout life
with journeyings which you cannot perform tran-
quilly and easily, is not the part of a man whose
thoughts are engaged with that last journey which
is called death, and which alone, as you under-
stand, really deserves serious consideration. God
has indeed granted to some few men whom He
has ordained to bear rule over churches, the capa-
city of not only awaiting calmly, but even desiring
eagerly, that last journey, while at the same time
they can meet without disquietude the toils of
those other journeyings ; but I do not believe


that either to those who are urged to accept such
duties through desire for worldly honour, or to
those who, although occupying a private station,
covet a busy life, so great a boon is giv-en as that
amid bustle and agitating meetings, and journey-
ings hither and thither, they should acquire that
familiarity with death which we seek : for both
of these classes had it in their power to seek
edification ' in retirement. Or if this be not
true, I am, I shall not say the most foolish of all
men, but at least the most indolent, since I find
it impossible, without the aid of such an interval
of relief from care and toil, to taste and relish
that only real good. Believe me, there is need
of much withdrawal of oneself from the tumult
of the things which are passing away, in order
that there may be formed in man, not through in-
sensibility, not through presumption, not through
vainglory, not through superstitious blindness,
the ability to say, " I fear nought." By this means
also is attained that enduring joy with which no
pleasurable excitement found elsewhere is in any
degree to be compared.

3. But if such a life does not fall to the lot of
man, how is it that calmness of spirit is our oc-
casional experience? Wherefore is this experi-
ence more frequent, in proportion to the devotion
with which any one in his inmost soul worships
God? Why does this tranquillity for the most
part abide with one in the business of life, when
he goes forth to its duties from that sanctuary?
Why are there times in which, speaking, we do
not fear death, and, silent, even desire it ? I say
to you — for I would not say it to every one —
to you whose visits to the upper world I know
well. Will you, who have often felt how sweetly
the soul lives when it dies to all mere bodily
affections, deny that it is possible for the whole
Hfe of man to become at length so exempt from
fear, that he may be justly called wise? Or will
you venture to afiirm that this state of mind on
which reason leans has ever been your lot, except
when you were shut up to commune with your
own heart? Since these things are so, you see
that it remains only for you to share with me the
labour of devising how we may arrange to live
together. You know much better than I do what
is to be done in regard to your mother, whom
your brother Victor, of course, does not leave
alone. I will write no more, lest I turn your mind
away from considering this proposal.

LETTER XL

(a.d. 389.)

to nebridius augustin sends greeting.

I. When the question, which has long been
brought before me by you with something even

J Text, " deificari" for " adificari" (?).


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


229


of friendly chiding, as to the way in which we
might live together, was seriously disturbing my
mind, and I had resolved to write to you, and
to beg an answer from you bearing exclusively
on this subject, and to employ my pen on no
other theme pertaining to our studies, in order
that the discussion of this matter between us
might be brought to an end, the very short and
indisputable conclusion stated in your letter lately
received at once delivered me from all further
solicitude ; your statement being to the effect
that on this matter there ought to be no further
deliberation, because as soon as it is in my power
to come to you, or in your power to come to
me, we shall feel alike constrained to improve
the opportunity. My mind being thus, as I have
said, at rest, I looked over all your letters, that I
might see what yet remained unanswered. In
these I have found so many questions, that even
if they were easily solved, they would by their
mere number more than exhaust the time and
talents of any man. But they are so difficult,
that if the answering of even one of. them were
laid upon me, I would not hesitate to confess
myself heavily burdened. The design of this
introductory statement is to make you desist for
a little from asking new questions until I am free
from debt, and that you confine yourself in your
answer to the statement of your opinion of my
replies. At the same time, I know that it is to
my own loss that I postpone for even a little
while the participation of your divine thoughts.

2. Hear, therefore, the view which I hold con-
cerning the mystery of the Incarnation which the
religion wherein we have been instructed com-
mends to our faith and knowledge as having been
accomplished in order to our salvation ; which
question I have chosen to discuss in preference
to all the rest, although it is not the most easily
answered. For those questions which are pro-
posed by you concerning this world do not ap-
pear to me to have a sufficiently direct reference
to the obtaining of a happy life ; and whatever
pleasure they yield when investigated, there is
reason to fear lest they take up time which ought
to be devoted to better things. With regard,
then, to the subject which I have at this time
undertaken, first of all I am surprised that you
were perplexed by the question why not the
Father, but the Son, is said to have become in-
I carnate, and yet were not also perplexed by the
same question in regard to the Holy Spirit. For
the union of Persons in the Trinity is in the
Catholic faith set forth and believed, and by a
few holy and blessed ones understood, to be so
linseparable, that whatever is done by the Trinity
jmust be regarded as being done by the Father,
land by the Son, and by the Holy Spirit together ;
land that nothing is done by the Father which is
|not also done by the Son and by the Holy Spirit ;


and nothing done by the Holy Spirit which is
not also done by the Father and by the Son ; and
nothing done by the Son which is not also done
by the Father and by the Holy Spirit. From
which it seems to follow as a consequence, that
the whole Trinity assumed human nature ; for if
the Son did so, but the Father and the Spirit did
not, there is something in which they act sepa-
rately.' Why, then, in our mysteries and sacred
symbols, is the Incarnation ascribed only to the
Son ? This is a very great question, so difticult,
and on a subject so vast, that it is impossible
either to give a sufficiently clear statement, or to
support it by satisfactory proofs. I venture, how-
ever, since I am writing to you, to indicate rather
than explain what my sentiments are, in order
that you, from your talents and our intimacy,
through which you thoroughly know me, may for
yourself fill up the outline.

3. There is no nature, Nebridius — and, indeed,
there is no substance — which does not contain
in itself and exhibit these three things : first, that
it is ; next, that it is this or that; and third, that
as far as possible it remains as it is. The first of
these three presents the original cause of nature
from which all things exist ; the second presents
the form- according to which all things are fash-
ioned and formed in a particular way ; the third
presents a certain permanence, so to speak, in
which all things are. Now, if it be possible that
a thing can be, and yet not be tJiis or that, and
not remain in its own generic form ; or that a
thing can be this or that, and yet not be, and not
remain in its own generic form, so far as it is
possible for it to do so ; or that a thing can remain
in its own generic form according to the force
belonging to it, and yet not be, and not be this
or that, — then it is also possible that in that
Trinity one Person can do something in which
the others have no part. But if you see that
whatever is must forthwith be this or that, and
must remain so far as possible in its own generic
form, you see also that these Three do nothing
in which all have not a part. I see that as yet
I have only treated a portion of this question,
which makes its solution difficult. But I wished
to open up briefly to you — if, indeed, I have
succeeded in this — how great in the system of
Catholic truth is the doctrine of the inseparability
of the Persons of the Trinity, and how difficult
to be understood.

4. Hear now how that which disquiets your
mind may disquiet it no more. The mode of
existence (Species — the second of the three
above named) which is properly ascribed to the
Son, has to do with training, and with a certain
art, if I may use that word in regard to such
things, and with the exercise of intellect, by

* Align id prater invicem faciunt.
2 Species.


230


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


which the mind itself is moulded in its thoughts
upon things. Therefore, since by that assump-
tion of human nature the work accomplished
was the effective presentation to us of a certain
training in the right way of living, and exempli-
fication of that which is commanded, under the
majesty and perspicuousness of certain sentences,
it is not without reason that all this is ascribed
to the Son. For in many things which I leave
your own reflection and prudence to suggest,
although the constituent elements be many,
some one nevertheless stands out above the
rest, and therefore not unreasonably claims a
right of possession, as it were, of the whole for
itself: as, e.g., in the three kinds of questions
above mentioned,' although the question raised
be whether a thing is or not, this involves neces-
sarily also both what it is (this or that), for of
course it cannot be at all unless it be something,
and whether it ought to be approved of or dis-
approved of, for whatever is is a fit subject for
some opinion as to its quality ; in like manner,
when the question raised is what a thing is, this
necessarily involves both that it is, and that its
quality may be tried by some standard ; and in
the same way, when the question raised is what
is the quality of a thing, tliis necessarily involves
that that thing is, and is something, since all
things are inseparably joined to themselves ; —
nevertheless, the question in each of the above
cases takes its name not from all the three, but
from the special point towards which the inquirer
directed his attention. Now there is a certain
training necessary for men, by which they might
be instructed and formed after some model. We


cannot say, however, regarding that which is
accomplished in men by this training, either that
it does not exist, or that it is not a thing to be
desired \i.e. we cannot say what it is, without
involving an affirmation both of its existence
and of its quality'] ; but we seek first to know
tiihat it is, for in knowing this we know that by
which we may infer that it is something, and in
which we may remain. Therefore the first thing
necessary was, that a certain rule and pattern of
training be plainly exhibited ; and this was done
by the divinely appointed method of the Incar-
nation, which is properly to be ascribed to the
Son, in order that from it should follow both our
knowledge, through the Son, of the Father Him-
self, i.e. of the one first principle whence all
things have their being, and a certain inward and
ineffable charm and sweetness of remaining in
that knowledge, and of despising all mortal
things, — a gift and work which is properly as-
cribed to the Holy Spirit. Wherefore, although
in all things the Divine Persons act perfectly in
common, and without possibility of separation,

^ An sit, quid sit, quale sit.


nevertheless their operations behoved to be ex-
hibited in such a way as to be distinguished from
each other, on account of the weakness which
is in us, who have fallen from unity into variety.
For no one ever succeeds in raising another to
the height on which he himself stands, unless
he stoop somewhat towards the level which that
other occupies.

You have here a letter which may not indeed
put an end to your disquietude in regard to this
doctrine, but which may set your own thoughts
to work upon a kind of solid foundation ; so
that, with the talents which I well know you to
possess, you may follow, and, by the piety in
which especially we must be stedfast, may appre-
hend that which still remains to be discovered.


LETTER XH.
(a.d. 389.)

Omitted, as only a fragment of the text of the letter is
preserved.

LETTER Xni.

(a.d. 389.)

to nebridius augustin sends greeting.

1. I do not feel pleasure in writing of the
subjects which I was wont to discuss ; I am not
at liberty to write of new themes. I see that
the one would not suit you, and that for the
other I have no leisure. For, since I left you,
neither opportunity nor leisure has been given
me for taking up and revolving the things which
we are accustomed to investigate together. The
winter nights are indeed too long, and they are
not entirely spent in sleep by me ; but when I
have leisure, other subjects [than those which
we used to discuss] present themselves as having
a prior claim on my consideration.^ ^What, then,
am I to do? Am I to be to you as one dumb,
who cannot speak, or as one silent, who will not
speak? Neither of these things is desired, either
by you or by me. Come, then, and hear what
the end of the night succeeded in eliciting from
me during the time in which it was devoted to
following out the subject of this letter.

2. You cannot but remember that a question
often agitated between us, and which kept us
agitated, breathless, and excited, was one con-
cerning a body or kind of body, which belongs
perpetually to the soul, and which, as you recol-
lect, is called by some its vehicle. It is manifest
that this thing, if it movies from place to place,
is not cognisable by the understanding. But
whatever is not cognisable by the understanding
cannot be understood. It is not, however, utterly

^ We leave untranslated the words " quEe diffirinando sunt otio
necessaria," the text here being evidently corrupt.


i


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


231


impossible to form an opinion approximating
to the truth concerning a thing which is outside
the province of the intellect, if it lies within the
province of the senses. But when a thing is
beyond the province of the intellect and of the
senses, the speculations to which it gives rise
are too baseless and trifling ; and the thing of
which we treat now is of this nature, if indeed
it exists. Why, then, I ask, do we not finally
dismiss this unimportant question, and with
prayer to God raise ourselves to the supreme
serenity of the Highest existing nature ?

3. Perhaps you may here reply: "Although
bodies cannot be perceived by the understand-
ing, we can perceive with the understanding
many things concerning material objects ; e.g.
we know that matter exists. For who will deny
this, or affirm that in this we have to do with
the probable rather than the true ? Thus, though
matter itself lies among things probable, it is a
most indisputable truth that something like it
exists in nature. Matter itself is therefore pro-
nounced to be an object cognisable by the senses ;
but the assertion of its existence is pronounced
to be a truth cognisable by the intellect, for it
cannot be perceived otherwise. And so this
unknown body, about which we inquire, upon
which the soul depends for its power to move
from place to place, may possibly be cognisable
by senses more powerful than we possess, though
not by ours ; and at all events, the question
whether it exists is one which may be solved by
our understandings."

4. If you intend to say this, let me remind
you that the mental act we call understanding is
done by us in two ways : either by the mind and
reason within itself, as when we understand that
the intellect itself exists ; or by occasion of sug-
gestion from the senses, as' in the case above
mentioned, when we understand that matter
exists. In the first of these two kinds of acts
we understand through ourselves, i.e. by asking
instruction of God concerning that which is
within us ; but in the second we understand by
asking instruction of God regarding that of which
intimation is given to us by the body and the
senses. If these things be found true, no one
can by his understanding discover whether that

I body of which you speak exists or not, but the
person to whom his senses have given some
I intimation concerning it. If there be any living
'■ creature to which the senses give such intima-
tion, since we at least see plainly that we are
not among the number, I regard the conclusion
established which I began to state a little ago,
that the question [about the vehicle of the soul]
is one which does not concern us. I wish you
would consider this over and over again, and
take care to let me know the product of your
consideration.


LETTER XIV.

(a.d. 389.)

to nebridius augustin sends greeting.

1. I have preferred to reply to your last let-
ter, not because I undervalued your earlier ques-
tions, or enjoyed them less, but because in
answering you I undertake a greater task than
you think. For although you enjoined me to
send you a superlatively long ' letter, I have not
so much leisure as you imagine, and as you know
I have always wished to have, and do still wish.
Ask not why it is so : for I could more easily
enumerate the things by which I am hindered,
than explain why I am hindered by them.

2. You ask why it is that you and I, though
separate individuals, do many things which are
the same, but the sun does not the same as the
other heavenly bodies. Of this thing I must
attempt to explain the cause. Now, if you and
I do the same things, the sun also does many
things which the other heavenly bodies do : if in
some things it does not the same as the others,
this is equally true of you and me. I walk, and you
walk ; it is moved, and they are moved : I keep
awake, and you keep awake ; it shines, and they
shine : I discuss, and you discuss ; it goes its
round, and they go their rounds. And yet there
is no fitness of comparison between mental acts
and things visible. If, however, as is reason-
able, you compare mind with mind, the heavenly
bodies, if they have any mind, must be regarded
as even more uniform than men in their thoughts
or contemplations, or whatever term may more
conveniently express such activity in them. More-
over, as to the movements of the body, you will
find, if you reflect on this with your wonted at-
tention, that it is impossible for precisely the
same thing to be done by two persons. When
we walk together, do you think that we both
necessarily do the same thing? Far be such
thought from one of your wisdom ! For the
one of us who walks on the side towards the
north, must either, in taking the same step as
the other, get in advance of him, or walk more
slowly than he does. Neither of these things is
perceptible by the senses ; but you, if I am not
mistaken, look to what we know by the under-
standing rather than to what we learn by the
senses. If, however, we move from the pole
towards the south, joined and clinging to each
other as closely as possible, and treading on a
sheet of marble or even ivory smooth and level,
a perfect identity is as unattainable in our mo-
tions as in the throbbings of our pulses, or in
our figures and faces. Put us aside, and place
in our stead the sons of Glaucus, and you gain

' The phrase used by Nebridius had been " longior quant lotigis-
sima," which Augustin here quotes, and afterwards playfully alludes
to in sec. 3.


232


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


nothing by this substitution : for even in these
twins so perfectly resembling each other, the
necessity for the motions of each being peculiarly
his own, is as great as the necessity for their
birth as separate individuals.

3. You will perhaps say : " The difference in
this case is one which only reason can discover ;
but the difference between the sun and the other
heavenly bodies is to the senses also patent."
If you insist upon my looking to their difference
in magnitude, you know how many things may
be said as to the distances by which they are
removed from us, and into how great uncertainty
that which you speak of as obvious may thus be
brought back. I may, however, concede that
the actual size corresponds with the apparent
size of the heavenly bodies, for I myself believe
this ; and I ask you to show me any one whose
senses were incapable of remarking the prodi-
gious stature of Nsevius, exceeding by a foot that
of the tallest man.' By the way, I think you i
have been just too eager to discover some man
to match him ; and when you did not succeed
in the search, have resolved to make me stretch '
out my letter so as to rival his dimensions.^ If
therefore even on earth such variety in size may
be seen, I think that it need not surprise us to
find the like in the heavens. If, however, the
thing which moves your surprise is that the light
of no other heavenly body than the sun fills the
day, who, I ask you, has ever been manifested
to men so great as that Man whom God took
into union with Himself, in another way entirely
than He has taken all other holy and wise men
who ever lived? for if you compare Him with
other men who were wise. He is separated from
them by superiority greater far than that which
the sun has above the other heavenly bodies.
This comparison let me charge you by all means
attentively to study ; for it is not impossible that
to your singularly gifted mind I may have sug-
gested, by this cursory remark, the solution of a
question which you once proposed to me con-
cerning the humanity of Christ.

4. You also ask me whether that highest Truth
and highest Wisdom and Form (or Archetype)
of things, by whom all things were made, and
whom our creeds confess to be the only-begotten
Son of God, contains the idea^ of mankind in
general, or also of each individual of our race.
A great question. My opinion is, that in the
creation of man there was in Him the idea only
of man generally, and not of you or me as indi-
viduals ; but that in the cycle of time the idea
of each individual, with all the varieties distin-
guishipg men from each other, lives in that pure


' The text contains the word " sex " here, which is omitted in the
translation. The reading is uncertain.
- See note on sec. i.
3 Ratio.


Truth. This I grant is very obscure ; yet 1 know
not by what kind of illustration light may be shed
upon it, unless perhaps we betake ourselves to
those sciences which lie wholly within our minds.
In geometry, the idea of an angle is one thing,
the idea of a square is another. As often, there-
fore, as I please to describe an angle, the idea
of the angle, and that alone, is present to my
mind ; but I can never describe a square unless
I fix my attention upon the idea of four angles
at the same time. In like manner, every man,
considered as an individual man, has been made
according to one idea proper to himself; but in
the making of a nation, although the idea ac-
cording to which it is made be also one, it is the
idea not of one, but of many men collectively.
If, therefore, Nebridius is a part of this universe,
as he is, and the whole universe is made up of
parts, the God who made the universe could not
but have in His plan the idea of all the parts.
Wherefore, since there is in this idea of a very
great number of men, it does not belong to man
himself as such ; although, on the other hand,
all the individuals are in wonderful ways reduced
to one. But you will consider this at your
convenience. I beg you meanwhile to be con-
tent with what I have written, although I have
already outdone Naevius himself.


LETTER XV.

(a.d. 390.) 1

to romanianus augustin sends greeting.

1. This letter indicates a scarcity of paper,*
but not so as to testify that parchment is plenti-
ful here. My ivory tablets I used in the letter
which I sent to your uncle. You will more
readily excuse this scrap of parchment, because
what I wrote to him could not be delayed, and
I thought that not to write to you for want of
better material would be most absurd. But if
any tablets of mine are with you, I request you
to send them to meet a case of this kind. I
have written something, as the Lord has deigned
to enable me, concerning the Catholic religion,
which before my coming I wish to send to you,
if my paper does not fail me in the meantime.
For you will receive with indulgence any kind
of writing from the office of the brethren who
are with me. As to- the manuscripts of which
you speak, I have entirely forgotten them, except
the books ' de Oratore ; but I could not have
written anything better than that you should take
such of them as you please, and I am still of the
same mind ; for at this distance I know not what
else I can do in the matter.

2. It gave me very great pleasure that in your

* Charta.


w


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


233


last letter you desired to make me a sharer of
your joy at home ; but

" Wouldst thou have me forget how soon the deep,
So tranquil now, may wear another face,
And rouse these slumbering waves ? " '

Yet I know you would not have me forget this,
nor are you yourself unmindful of it. Where- 1
fore, if some leisure is granted you for more 1
profound meditation, improve this divine bless-
ing. For when these things fall to our lot, we
should not only congratulate ourselves, but show
our gratitude to those to whom we owe them ;
for if in the stewardship of temporal blessings
we act in a manner that is just and kind, and ,
with the moderation and sobriety of spirit which .
befits the transient nature of these possessions, ;
— if they are held by us without laying hold on I
us, are multiplied without entangling us, and [
serve us without bringing us into bondage, — j
such conduct entitles us to the recompense of
eternal blessings. For by Him who is the Truth
it was said : " If ye have not been faithful in
that which is another man's, who will give you
that which is your own?" Let us therefore dis-
engage ourselves from care about the passing
things of time ; let us seek the blessings that are
imperishable and sure ; let us soar above our
worldly possessions. The bee does not the less
need its wings when it has gathered an abundant
i store ; for if it sink in the honey it dies.


LETTER XVL

(a.d. 390.)

from maximus of ]madaur--\ to augustin.

I. Desiring to be frequently made glad by
Icommunications from you, and by the stimulus
jof your reasoning with which in a most pleasant
Iway, and without violation of good feeling, you
recently attacked me, I have not forborne from
''replying to you in the same spirit, lest you should
call my silence an acknowledgment of being in
;the wrong. But I beg you to give these sen-
tences an indulgent kindly hearing, if you judge
|chem to give evidence of the feebleness of old age.
Grecian mythology tells us, but without sufifi-
pient warrant for our believing the statement,
pat Mount Olympus is the dwelling-place of the
rods. But we actually see the market-place of
)ur town occupied by a crowd of beneficent
leities ; and we approve of this. Who could
'ver be so frantic and infatuated as to deny that
there is one supreme God, without beginning,
'ithout natural offspring, who is, as it were, the
Jreat and mighty Father of all ? The powers of
his Deity, diffused throughout the universe which


I


' " Mene salis placidi vultum fliictusque quietos
Ignorare jubes ? " — ^i'«. v. 848, 849.


He has made, we worship under many names,
as we are all ignorant of His true name, the
name God ^ being common to all kinds of reli-
gious belief. Thus it comes, that while in diverse
supplications we approach separately, as it were,
certain parts of the Divine Being, we are seen
in reality to be the worshippers of Him in whom
all these parts are one.

2. Such is the greatness of your delusion in
another matter, that I cannot conceal the im-
patience with which I regard it. For who can
bear to find IMygdo honoured above that Jupiter
who hurls the thunderbolt ; or San?e above Juno,
Minerva, Venus, and Vesta ; or the arch-martyr
Namphanio (oh horror !) above all the immortal
gods together? Among the immortals, Lucitas
also is looked up to with no less religious rever-
ence, and others in an endless list (having names
abhorred both by gods and by men), who, when
they met the ignominious end which their char-
acter and conduct had deserved, put the crown-
ing act upon their criminal career by affecting
to die nobly in a good cause, though conscious
of the infamous deeds for which they were con-
demned. The tombs of these men (it is a folly
almost beneath our notice) are visited by crowds
of simpletons, who forsake our temples and de-
spise the memory of their ancestors, so that the
prediction of the indignant bard is notably ful-
filled : " Rome shall, in the temples of the gods,
swear by the shades of men." ^ To me it almost
seems at this time as if a second campaign of
Actium had begun, in which Egyptian monsters,
doomed soon to perish, dare to brandish their
weapons against the gods of the Romans.

3. But, O man of great wisdom, I beseech you,
lay aside and reject for a little while the vigour
of your eloquence, which has made you every-
where renowned ; lay down also the arguments
of Chrysippus, which you are accustomed to use
in debate ; leave for a brief season your logic,
which aims in the forthputting of its energies to
leave nothing certain to any one ; and show me
plainly and actually who is that God whom you
Christians claim as belonging specially to you,
and pretend to see present among you in secret
places. For it is in open day, before the eyes
and ears of all men, that we worship our gods
with pious supplications, and propitiate them by
acceptable sacrifices ; and we take pains that
these things be seen and approved by all.

4. Being, however, infirm and old, I withdraw
myself from further prosecution of this contest,
and willingly consent to the opinion of the rheto-
rician of Mantua, " Each one is drawn by that
which pleases himself best." ■♦

2 Detis.

3 " Inque Deum templis jurabit Roma per umbras."

LuCAN, Pkarsalia, vii. 459.

< Virg. Eclog. ii. 65: "Trahit sua quemque voluptas."


234


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


After this, O excellent man, who hast turned ]
aside from my faith, I have no doubt that this
letter will be stolen by some thief, and destroyed
by fire or otherwise. Shoukl this happen, the
paper will be lost, but not my letter, of which
I will always retain a copy, accessible to all re-
ligious persons. May you be preserved by the
gods, through whom we all, who are mortals on
the surface of this earth, with apparent discord
but real harmony, revere and worship Him who
is the common Father of the gods and of all
mortals.

LETTER XV IL

(a.d. 390.)

to maximus of madaura.

I. Are we engaged in serious debate with each
other, or is it your desire that we merely amuse
ourselves? For, from the language of your let-
ler, I am at a loss to know whether it is due to
the weakness of your cause, or through the
courteousness of your manners, that you have
preferred to show yourself more witty than
weighty in argument. For, in the first place, a
comparison was drawn by you between Mount
Olympus and your market-place, the reason for
which I cannot divine, unless it was in order to
remind me that on the said mountain Jupiter
pitched his camp when he was at war with his
father, as we are taught by history, which your
religionists call sacred ; and that in the said
market-place Mars is represented in two images,
the one unarmed, the other armed, and that a
statue of a man placed over against these restrains
with three extended fingers the fury, of their
demonship from the injuries which he would
willingly inflict on the citizens. Could I then
ever believe that by mentioning that market-place
you intended to revive my recollection of such
divinities, unless you wished that we should pur-
sue the discussion in a jocular spirit rather than
in earnest? But in regard to the sentence in
which you said that such gods as these are mem-
bers, so to speak, of the one great God, I ad-
monish you by all means, since you vouchsafe
such an opinion, to abstain very carefully from
profane jestings of this kind. For if you speak
of the One God, concerning whom learned and
unlearned are, as the ancients have said, agreed,
do you affirm that those whose savage fury — or,
if you prefer it, whose power — the image of a
dead man keeps in check are members of Him ?
I might say more on this point, and your own
judgment may show you how wide a door for
the refutation of your views is here thrown open.
But I restrain myself, lest I should be thought
by you to act more as a rhetorician than as one
earnestly defending truth.


2. As to your collecting of certain Carthagin-
ian names of deceased persons, by which you
think reproach may be cast, in what seems to you
a witty manner, against our religion, I do not
know whether I ought to answer this taunt, or to
pass it by in silence. For if to your good sense
these things appear as trifling as they really are,
I have not time to spare for such pleasantry. If,
however, they seem to you important, I am sur-
prised that it did not occur to you, who are apt
to be disturbed by absurdly-sounding names, that
your religionists have among their priests Eucad-'
dires, and among their deities Abaddires. I do
not suppose tliat these were absent from your
mind when you were writing, but that, with your
courtesy and genial humour, you wished for the
unbending of our minds, to recall to our recol-
lection what ludicrous things are in your super-
stition. For surely, considering that you are an
African, and that we are both settled in Africa,
you could not have so forgotten yourself when
writing to Africans as to think that Punic names
were a fit theme for censure. For if we inter-
pret the signification of these words, what else
does Namphanio mean than " man of the good
foot," i.e. whose coming brings with it some good
fortune, as we are wont to say of one whose com-
ing to us has been followed by some prosperous
event, that he came with a lucky foot? And if
the Punic language is rejected by you, you virtu-
ally deny what has been admitted by most learned
men, that many things have been wisely preserved
from oblivion in books written in the Punic tongue.
Nay, you ought even to be ashamed of having
been born in the country in which the cradle of
this language is still warm, i.e. in which this Ian-,
guage was originally, and until very recently, the
language of the people. If, however, it is not
reasonable to take offence at the mere sound of
names, and you admit that I have given correctly
the meaning of the one in question, you have
reason for being dissatisfied with your friend
Virgil, who gives to your god Hercules an invita-
tion to the sacred rites celebrated by Evander in
his honour, in these terms, " Come to us, and to j
these rites in thine honour, with auspicious foot." '
He wishes him to coiri^ " with auspicious foot ; "
that is to say, he wishes Hercules to come as j
a Namphanio, the name about which you are |
pleased to make much mirth at our expense.
But if you have a penchant for ridicule, you have
among yourselves ample material for witticisms
— the god Stercutius, the goddess Cloacina, the
Bald Venus, the gods Fear and Pallor, and the
goddess P'ever, and others of the same kind
without number, to whom the ancient Roman
idolaters erected temples, and judged it right to
offer worship ; which if you neglect, you are neg-

■ Virg. /Eneid, viii. 302: " Et nos et tua dexter adi pede sacra
i secundo."


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


235


lecting Roman gods, thereby making it manifest
that you are not thoroughly versed in the sacred
rites of Rome ; and yet you despise and pour
contempt on Punic names, as if you were a dev-
otee at the altars of Roman deities.

. In truth, however, I believe that perhaps
you do not value these sacred rites any more
than we do, but only take from them some lui-
accountable pleasure in your time of passing
through this world : for you have no hesitation
about taking refuge under Virgil's wing, and de-
fending vourself with a line of his :

" Each one is drawn l:)y that which pleases himself best." '

If, then, the authority of Maro pleases you, as
you indicate that it does, you will be pleased with
such lines as these : " First Saturn came from
lofty Olympus, fleeing before the arms of Jupiter,
an exile bereft of his realms," ^ — and other such
statements, by which he amis at making it under-
stood that Saturn and your other gods like him
were men. For he had read much history, con-
firmed by ancient authority, which Cicero also
had read, who makes the same statement in his
dialogues, in terms more explicit than we would
venture to insist upon, and labours to bring it to
the knowledge of men so far as the times in
which he lived permitted.

4. As to your statement, that your religious
services are to be preferred to ours because you
worship the gods in public, but we use more re-
tired places of meeting, let me first ask you how
you could have forgotten your Bacchus, whom
you consider it right to exhibit only to the eyes
of the few who are initiated. You, however,
think that, in making mention of the public
celebration of your sacred rites, you intended
only to make sure that we would place before
our eyes the spectacle presented by your magis-
trates and the chief men of the city when in-
toxicated and raging along your streets ; in which
solemnity, if you are possessed by a god, you
surely see of what nature he must be who
prives men of their reason. If, however,
Qiadness is only feigned, what
Keeping of things
.)oast of as public, or what good purpose is served
3y so base an imposition ? Moreover, why do
S.'0u not foretell future events in your songs, if you
jire endowed with the prophetic gift ? or why do

ou rob the bystanders, if you are in your sound
ind?

5. Since, then, you have recalled to our re-
embrance by your letter these and other things
hich I think it better to pass over meanwhile,
hy may not we make sport of your


.^..^^., ,>...^^ say you to
hidden in a service which


de-
this

this
you


gods,


' " Trahit sua quemque voluptas."
* " Primus ab sethereo venit Saturnis (llympo
Arma Jovis fugiens et regnis exsul ademptis."

?En. viii. 319, 320,


which, as every one who knows your mind, and
has read your letters, is well aware, are made
sport of abundantly by yourself? Therefore, if
you wish us to discuss these subjects in a way
becoming your years and wisdom, and, in fact,
as may be justly required of us, in connection
with our purpose, by our dearest friends, seek
some topic worthy of being debated between
us ; and be careful to say on behalf of your gods
such things as may prevent us from supposing
that you are intentionally betraying your own
cause, when we find you rather bringing to our
remembrance things which may be said against
them than alleging anything in their defence.
In conclusion, however, lest this should be un-
known to you, and you might thus be brought
unwittingly into jestings which are profane, let
me assure you that by the Christian Catholics
(by whom a church has been set up in your
own town also) no deceased person is wor-
shipped, and that nothing, in short, which has
been made and fashioned by God is worshipped
as a divine power. This worship is rendered by
them only to God Himself, who framed and
fashioned all things. ^

These things shall be more fully treated of,
with the help of the one true God, whenever I
learn that you are disposed to discuss them
seriously.

LETTER XVIIL

(a.d. 390.)

to ccelestinus augustin sends greeting.

I. Oh how I wish that I could continually say
one thing to you ! It is this : Let us shake off
the burden of unprofitable cares, and bear only
those which are useful. For I do not know
whether anything like complete exemption from
care is to be hoped for in this world. I wrote
to you, but have received no reply. I sent you
as many of my books against the Manichccans as
1 could send in a finished and revised condition,
and as yet nothing has been communicated to
me as to the impression they have made on
your'' judgment and feelings. It is now a fitting
opportunity for me to ask them back, and for
you to return them. I beg you therefore not to
lose time in sending them, along with a letter
from yourself, by which I eagerly long to know
what you are doing with them, or with what
further help you think that you require still to
be furnished in order to assail that error with
success.

3 We give the original of this important sentence: " Scias a
Christianis catholici-^ (quorum in vestro oppido etiani ecclesia consti-
tuta est) nuihnn coli morluorum, nihi' denique ut numen adorari
quod sit factum et conditum a Deo, sed unum ipsum Deum qui fecit
et conchdit omnia."

•> 'I'he sense here obviously requires " z/^i/?-?'" instead of " «of-
tri^' which is in the text.


236


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


2. As I know you well, I ask you to accept
and ponder the following brief sentences on a
great theme. There is a nature which is sus-
ceptible of change with respect to both place
and time, namely, the corporeal. There is an-
other nature which is in no way susceptible of
change with respect to place, but only with re- ^
spect to lime, namely, the spiritual. And there '
is a third Nature which can be changed neither
in respect to place nor in respect to time : that
is, God. Those natures of which I have said
that they are mutable in some respect are called
creatures ; the Nature which is immutable is
called Creator. Seeing, however, that we affirm
the existence of anything only in so far as it
continues and is one (in consequence of which,
unity is the condition essential to beauty in
every form), you cannot fail to distinguish, in
this classification of natures, which exists in the
highest possible manner ; and which occupies
the lowest place, yet is within the range of ex-
istence ; and which occupies the middle place,
greater than the lowest, but coming short of the
highest. That highest is essential blessedness ; i
the lowest, that which cannot be either blessed ]
or wretched ; and the intermediate nature lives
in wretchedness when it stoops towards that
which is lowest, and in blessedness when it turns
towards that which is highest. He who believes
in Christ does not sink his affections in that
which is lowest, is not proudly self-sufficient in ,
that which is intermediate, and thus he is quali- ]
fied for union and fellowship with that which is
highest ; and this is the sum of the active life
to which we are commanded, admonished, and
by holy zeal impelled to aspire.

LETTER XIX.

(a.d. 390.)

to gaius augustin sends greeting.

I. Words cannot express the pleasure with
which the recollection of you filled my heart
after I parted with you, and has often filled my
heart since then. For I remember that, not-
withstanding the amazing ardour which pervaded
your inquiries after truth, the bounds of proper
moderation in debate were never transgressed
by you. I shall not easily find any one who is
more eager in putting questions, and at the same
time more patient in hearing answers, than you
approved yourself. Gladly therefore would I
spend much time in converse with you ; for the
time thus spent, however much it might be,
would not seem long. But what avails it to dis-
cuss the hindrances on account of which it is
difficult for us to enjoy such converse ? Enough
that it is exceedingly difficult. Perhaps at some
future period it may be made very easy ; may


God grant this ! Meanwhile it is otherwise. I
have given to the brother by whom I have sent
this letter the charge of submitting all my writ-
ings to your eminent wisdom and charity, that
they may be read by you. For nothing written
by me will find in you a reluctant reader ; for I
know the goodwill which you cherish towards
me. Let me say, however, that if, on reading
these things, you approve of them, and perceive
them to be true, you must not consider them to
be mine otherwise than as given to me ; and you
are at liberty to turn to that same source whence
proceeds also the power given you to appreciate
their truth. For no one discerns the truth of
that which he reads from anything which is in
the mere manuscri])t, or in the writer, but rather
by something within himself, if the light of truth,
shining with a clearness beyond what is men's
common lot, and very far removed from the
darkening influence of the body, has penetrated
his own mind. If, however, you discover some
things which are false and deserve to be rejected,
I would have you know that these things have
fallen as dew from the mists of human frailty,
and these you are to reckon as truly mine. I
would exhort you to persevere in seeking the
truth, were it not that I seem to see the mouth
of your heart already opened wide to drink it
in. I would also exhort you to cling with manly
tenacity to the truth which you have learned,
were it not that you already manifest in the
clearest manner that you possess strength of
mind and fixedness of purpose. For all that
lives within you has, in the short time of our
fellowship, revealed itself to me, almost as if
the bodily veil had been rent asunder. And
surely the merciful providence of our God can
in no wise permit a man so good and so re-
markably gifted as you are to be an alien from
the flock of Christ.

LETTER XX.

(a.d. 390.)

to antoninus augustin sends greeting.

I. As letters are due to you by two of us, a
part of our debt is repaid with very abundant
usury when you see one of the two in person;
and since by his voice you, as it were, hear my
own, I might have refrained from writing, had I
not been called to do it by the urgent request
of the very person whose journey to you seemed
to me to make this unnecessary. Accordingly I
now hold converse with you even more satisfac-
torily than if I were personally with you, because |((,
you both read my letter, and you listen to the
words of one in whose heart you know that I | ij
dwell. I have with great joy studied and pon- \ up^
dered the letter sent by your Hohness, because |||jj


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


237


it exhibits both your Christian spirit unsullied by
the guile of an evil age, and your heart full of
kindly feeling towards myself.

2. I congratulate you, and I give thanks to
our God and Lord, because of the hope and
faith and love which are in you ; and I thank
you, in Him, for thinking so well of me as to be-
lieve me to be a faithful servant of God, and for
the love which with guileless heart you cherish
towards that which you commend in me ; al-
though, indeed, there is occasion rather for con-
gratulation than for thanks in acknowledging your
goodwill in this thing. For it is profitable for
yourself that you should love for its own sake
that goodness which he of course loves who loves
another because he believes him to be good,
whether that other be or be not what he is sup-
posed to be. One error only is to be carefully
ivoided in this matter, that we do not think
therwise than truth demands, not of the indi-
idual, but of that which is true goodness in
an. But, my brother well-beloved, seeing that
I'ou are not in any degree mistaken either in
elieving or in knowing that the great good for
|nen is to serve God cheerfully and purely, when
ou love any man because you believe him to
[hare this good, you reap the reward, even
jtiough the man be not what you suppose him
D be. Wherefore it is fitting that you should
this account be congratulated ; but the per-
bn whom you love is to be congratulated, not
jecause of his being for that reason loved, but
jecause of his being truly (if it is the case)
eh an one as the person who for this reason
ives him esteems him to be. As to our real
aracter, therefore, and as to the progress we
ay have made in the divine life, this is seen by
im whose judgment, both as to that which is
|)od in man, and as to each man's personal
aracter, cannot err. For your obtaining the
Iward of blessedness so far as this matter is
■ncerned, it is sufiicient that you embrace
|2 with your whole heart because you believe me
be such a servant of God as I ought to be.
1) you, however, I also render inany thanks for
,s, that you encourage me wonderfully to as-
•e after such excellence, by your praising me as
|[ had already attained it. Many more thanks
sjl shall be yours, if you not only claim an
iierest in my prayers, but also cease not to
p y for me. For intercession on behalf of a
bither is more acceptable to God when it is
o;rcd as a sacrifice of love.

15. I greet very kindly your little son, and I
P'y that he may grow up in the way of obedi-
e; e to the salutary requirements of God's law.
I esire and pray, moreover, that the one true
fa'h and worship, which alone is catholic, may
p;sper and increase in your house ; and if you
ttiik any labour on my part necessary for the


promotion of this end, do not scruple to claim
my service, relying upon Him who is our com-
mon Lord, and upon the law of love which we
must obey. This especially would I recommend
to your pious discretion, that by reading the
word of God, and by serious conversation with
your partner,' you should either plant the seed
or foster the growth in her heart of an intelli-
gent fear of God. For it is scarcely possible
that any one who is concerned for the soul's wel-
fare, and is therefore without prejudice resolved
to know the will of the Lord, should fail, when
enjoying the guidance of a good instructor,
to discern the difference which exists between
every form of schism and the one Catholic
Church.

LETTER XXL

(a.d. 391.)

to my lord bishop valerius, most blessed
and venerable, my father most warmly
cherished with true love in the sight of
the lord, augustin, presbyter, sends greet-
ing in the lord.

1. Before all things I ask your pious wisdom
to take into consideration that, on the one hand,
if the duties of the office of a bishop, or pres-
byter, or deacon, be discharged in a perfunctory
and time-serving manner, no work can be in
this life more easy, agreeable, and likely to se-
cure the favour of men, especially in our day,
but none at the same time more miserable, de-
plorable, and worthy of condemnation in the
sight of God ; and, on the other hand, that if
in the ofifice of bishop, or presbyter, or deacon,
the orders of the Captain of our salvation.be
observed, there is no work in this life more diffi-
cult, toilsome, and hazardous, especially in our
day, but none at the same time more blessed in
the sight of God.^ But what the proper mode
of discharging these duties is, I did not learn
either in boyhood or in the earlier years of man-
hood ; and at the time when I was beginning to
learn it, I was constrained as a just correction
for my sins (for I know not what else to think)
to accept the second place at the helm, when as
yet I knew not how to handle an oar.

2. But I think that it was the purpose of my
Lord hereby to rebuke me, because I presumed,
as if entitled by superior knowledge and excel-
lence, to reprove the faults of many sailors before
I had learned by experience the nature of their
work. Therefore, after I had been sent in among
them to share their labours, then I began to feel
the rashness of my censures ; although even be-
fore that time I judged this office to be beset

' Infirmiori vast iuo.

2 [A most noble sentence, which contains, as in a nutshell, a
whole system of pastoral theology. — P. S.]


tl


2.^.8


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


with many dangers. And hence the tears which
some of my brethren perceived me shedding in
the city at the time of my ordination, and be-
cause of which they did their utmost with the
best intentions to console me, but with words
which, through their not knowing the causes of
my sorrow, did not reach my case at aU.' But
my experience has made me reahze these things
much more both in degree and in measure than
I had done in merely thinking of them : not
that I have now seen any new waves or storms
of which I had not previous knowledge by ob-
servation, or report, or reading, or meditation ;
but because I had not known my own skill or
strength for avoiding or encountering them, and
had estimated it to be of some value instead of
none. The Lord, however, laughed at me, and
was pleased to show me by actual experience
what I am.

3. But if He has done this not in judgment,
but in mercy, as I confidently hope even now,
when I have learned my infirmity, my duty is to
study with diligence all the remedies which the
Scriptures contain for such a case as mine, and
to make it my business by prayer and reading to
secure that my soul be endued with the health
and vigour necessary for labours so responsible.
This I have not yet done, because I have not
had time ; for I was ordained at the very time
when I was thinking of having, along with oth-
ers, a season of freedom from all other occupa-
tion, that we might acquaint ourselves with the
divine Scriptures, and was intending to make
such arrangements as would secure unbroken
leisure for this great work. Moreover, it is true
that I did not at any earlier period know how
great was my unfitness for the arduous work
which now disquiets and crushes my spirit. But
if I have by experience learned what is neces-
sary for a man who ministers to a people in the
divine sacraments and word, only to find myself
prevented from now obtaining what I have
learned that I do not possess, do you bid me
perish, father Valerius? Where is your charity?
Do you indeed love me? Do you indeed love
the Church to which you have appointed me,
thus unqualified, to minister? I am well as-
sured that you love both ; but you think me
qualified, whilst I know myself better ; and yet
I would not have come to know myself if I had
not learned by experience.

4. Perhaps your Holiness replies : I wish to
know what is lacking to fit you for your office.
The things which I lack are so many, that I
could more easily enumerate the things which
I have than those which I desire to have. I
may venture to say that I know and unreserved-

' They thought Augustin was disappointed at being made only
presbyter and not colleague of Valerius as bishop. See Possidius,
A ug. V'ita, c. 4.


ly believe the doctrines pertaining to our salva-
tion. But my difficulty is in the question how
I am to use this truth in ministering to the sal-
vation of others, seeking what is profitable not
for myself alone, but for many, that they may
be saved. And perhaps there may be, nay, be-
yond all question there are, written in the sacrec
books, counsels by the knowledge and accept-
ance of which the man of God may so discharge
his duties to the Church in the things of God,
or at least so keep a conscience void of offence
in the midst of ungodly men, whether living or
dying, as to secure that that life for which alone
humble and meek Christian hearts sigh is not
lost. But how can this be done, except, as the
Lord Himself tells us, by asking, seeking, knock-
ing, that is, by praying, reading, and weeping?
For this I have by the brethren made the re-
quest, which in this petition I now renew, that
a short time, say till Easter, be granted me by
your unfeigned and venerable charity.

5. For what shall I answer to the Lord my
Judge ? , Shall I say, " I was not able to acquire
the things of which I stood in need, because I
was engrossed wholly with the affairs of the
Church " ? What if He thus reply : '' Thou
wicked servant, if property belonging to the
Church (in the collection of the fruits of which
great labour is expended) were suffering loss
under some oppressor, and it was in thy power
to do something in defence of her rights at the
bar of an earthly judge, wouldst thou not, leavinj
the field which I have watered with my blood,
go to plead the cause with the consent of all,
and even with the urgent commands of some?
And if the decision given were against the Church,
wouldst thou not, in prosecuting an appeal, go
across the sea ; and would no complaint be
heard summoning thee home from an absence
of a year or more, because thy object was to
prevent another from taking possession of land
required not for the souls, but for the bodies of
the poor, whose hunger might nevertheless be
satisfied in a way much easier and more accept-
able to me by my living trees, if these were cul-j
tivated with care? Wherefore, then, dost thoul
allege that thou hadst not time to learn how to
cultivate my field?" Tell me, I beseech yo|^
what could I reply ? Are you perchance will:
that I should say, "The aged Valerius is to
blame ; for, believing me to be instructed in all
things necessary, he declined, with a determina-ij
tion proportioned to his love for me, to give me
permission to learn what I had not acquired"?

6. Consider all these things, aged Valerius;;
consider them, I beseech you, by the goodnessi! t^ij
and severity of Christ, by His mercy and judg-i
ment, by Him who has inspired you with suchf
love for me that I dare not displease you, even)'
when the advantage of my soul is at stake.


ke

ipi

«.

«ai

le

itcep

Jt,

it CO
I TO'

i
to


\


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


239


You, moreover, appeal to God and to Christ to
bear witness to me concerning your innocence
and charity, and the sincere love which you bear
to me, just as if all these were not things about
which I may myself willingly take my oath. I
therefore appeal to the love and affection which
you have thus avouched. Have pity on me, and
grant me, for the purpose for which I have asked
it, the time w'hich I have asked ; and help me
with your prayers, that my desire may not be in
vain, and that my absence may not be without
fruit to the Church of Christ, and to the profit
of my brethren and fellow-servants. I know
that the Lord will not despise your love inter-
ceding for me, especially in such a cause as this ;
and accepting it as a sacrifice of sweet savour.
He will restore me to you, perhaps, within a
period shorter than I have craved, thoroughly
furnished for His service by the profitable coun-
sels of His written word.


. LETTER XXn.

(a.d. 392.)

to bishop aurelius, augustin, presbyter, sexds
greeting.

Chap. i. — i . When, after long hesitation, I

knew not how to frame a suitable reply to the

j letter of your Holiness (for all attempts to ex-

I press my feelings were baffled by the strength of

affectionate emotions which, rising spontaneously, I

were by the reading of your letter much more

vehemently inflamed), I cast myself at last upon

God, that He might, according to my strength,

so work in me that I might address to you such

[an answer as should be suitable to the zeal for

jthe Lord and tlie care of His Church which we

[have in common, and in accordance with your

[dignity and the respect which is due to you from

|me. And, first of all, as to your belief that you

ire aided by my prayers, I not only do not de-

:line this assurance, but I do even willingly

iccept it. For thus, though not through my

Kayers, assuredly in yours, our Lord will hear

le. As to your most benignant approval of

the conduct of brother Alypius in remaining in

connection with us, to be an example to the

jrethren who desire to withdraw themselves from

[his world's cares, I thank you more warmly than

irords can declare. May the Lord recompense

Ihis to your own soul ! The whole company,

lerefore, of brethren which has begun to grow

|ip together beside me, is bound to you by grati-

ide for this great favour ; in bestowing which,

[ou, being far separated from us only by dis-

mce on the surface of the earth, have consulted

|ur interest as one in spirit very near to us.

therefore, to the utmost of our power we give

iurselves to prayer that the Lord may be pleased


to uphold along with you the flock which has
been committed to you, and may never anywhere
forsake you, but be present as your help in all
times of need, showing in His dealings with Hir
Church, through your discharge of priestly func-
tions, such mercy as spiritual men with tears and
groanings implore Him to manliest.

2. Know, therefore, most blessed lord, vener-
able for the superlative fulness of your charity,
that I do not despair, but rather cherish lively
hope that, by means of that authority which you
wield, and which, as we trust, has been com-
mitted to your spirit, not to your flesh alone, our
Lord and God may be able, through the respect
due to councils ' and to yourself, to bring healing
to the many carnal blemishes and disorders which
the African Church is suffering in the conduct of
many, and is bewailing in the sorrow of a few
of her members. For whereas the apostle had in
one passage briefly set forth as fit to be hated
and avoided three classes of vices, from which
there springs an innumerable crop of vicious
courses, only one of these — that, namely, which
he has placed second — is very strictly punished
by the Church ; but the other two, viz. the first'
and third, appear to be tolerable in the estima-
tion of men, and so it may gradually come to
pass that they shall even cease to be regarded as
vices. The words of the chosen vessel are these :
" Not in rioting and drunkenness, not in cham-
bering and wantonness, not in strife and envying :
but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make
not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts
thereof." ^

3. Of these three, then, chambering and wan-
tonness are regarded as crimes so great, that any
one stained with these sins is deemed unworthy
not merely of holding office in the Church, but
also of participation in the sacraments ; and
rightly so. But why restrict such censure to this
form of sin alone? For rioting and drunken-
ness are so tolerated and allowed by public
opinion, that even in services designed to honour
the memory of the blessed martyrs, and this not
only on the annual festivals (which itself must
be regarded as deplorable by every one who
looks with a spiritual eye upon these things), but
every day, they are openly practised. Were this
corrupt practice objectionable only because of its
being disgraceful, and not on the ground of im-
piety, we might consider it as a scandal to be
tolerated with such amount of forbearance as is
within our power. And yet, even in that case,
what are we to make of the fact that, when the
same apostle had given a long list of vices, among
which he mentioned drunkenness, he concluded
with the warning that we should not even eat bread


' We adopt the conjectural reading " conciliurum."
sec. 4, p. 240.

2 Rom. xiii. 13, 14.


Compare


240


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


with those who are guilty of such things ? ' But
let us, if it must be so, bear with these things in
the luxury and disorder of families, and of those
convivial meetings which are held within the
walls of private houses ; and let us take the body
of Christ in communion with those with whom
we are forbidden to eat even the bread which
sustains our bodies ; but at least let this out-
rageous insult be kept far away from the tombs
of the sainted dead, from the scenes of sacra-
mental privilege, and from the houses of prayer.
For who may venture to forbid in private life ex-
cesses which, when they are practised by crowds
in holy places, are called an honouring of the
martyrs ?

4. If Africa were the first country in which an
attempt were made to put down these things, her
example would deserve to be esteemed worthy
of miitation by all other countries ; ^ but when,
both throughout the greater part of Italy and in
all or almost all the churches beyond the sea, these
practices either, as in some places, never ex-
isted, or, as in other places where they did exist,
have been, whether they were recent or of long
standing, rooted out and put down by the dili-
gence and the censures of bishops who were
holy n^en, entertaining true views concerning the
life to come ; — when this, I say, is the case, do
we hesitate as to the possibility of removing this
monstrous defect in our morals, after an example
has been set before us in so many lands ? More-
over, we have as our bishop a man belonging to
those parts, for which we give thanks earnestly
to God ; although he is a man of such modera-
tion and gentleness, in fine, of such prudence
and zeal in the Lord, that even had he been a
native of Africa, the persuasion would have been
wrought in him by the Scriptures, that a remedy
must be applied to the wound which this loose
and disorderly custom has inflicted. But so wide
and deep is the plague caused by this wicked-
ness, that, in my opinion, it cannot be com-
pletely cured without interposition of a council's
authority. If, however, a beginning is to be
made by one church, it seems to me, that as it
would be presumptuous for any other church to
attempt to change what the Church of Carthage
still maintained, so would it also be the height
of effrontery for any other to wish to persevere
in a course which the Church of Carthage had
condemned. And for such a reform in Carthage,
what better bishop could be desired than the
prelate who, while he was a deacon, solemnly
denounced these practices?

5. But that over which you then sorrowed you
ought now to suppress, not harshly, but as it is


' I Cor. V. II.

2 Manifestly the correct punctuation here is : Hc^c si frimn
Africa tentaret auferre, a cceteris terris itnitatione digna esse
dcberet.


written, " in the spirit of meekness." ^ Pardon
my boldness, for your letter revealing to me your
true brotherly love gives me such confidence,
that I am encouraged to speak as freely to you
as I would to myself. These offences are taken
out of the way, at least in my judgment, by other
'•• methods than harshness, severity, and an impe-
rious mode of dealing, — namely, rather by teach-
I ing than by commanding, rather by advice than
by denunciation.'* Thus at least we must deal
with the multitude; in regard to the*sins of a
I few, exemplary severity must be used. And if we
do employ threats, let this be done sorrowfully,
supporting our threatenings of coming judgment
by the texts of Scripture, so that the fear which
men feel through our words may be not of us in
: our own authority, but of God Himself. Thus
I an impression shall be made in the first place
1 upon those who are spiritual, or who are nearest
to that state of mind ; and then by means of the
most gentle, but at the same time most importu-
nate exhortations, the opposition of the rest of
the multitude shall be broken down.s

6. Since, however, these drunken revels and
luxurious feasts in the cemeteries are wont to be
regarded by the ignorant and carnal multitude as
not only an honour to the martyrs, but also a
solace to the dead, it appears to me that they
might be more easily dissuaded from such scan-
dalous and unworthy practices in these places, if,
besides showing that they are forbidden by Scrip-
ture, we take care, in regard to the offerings for
the spirits of those who sleep, which indeed we
are bound to believe to be of some use, that they
be not sumptuous beyond what is becoming re-
spect for the memory of the departed, and that
they be distributed without ostentation, and cheer-
fully to all who ask a share of them ; also that
they be not sold, but that if any one desires to
offer any money as a religious act, it be given on
the spot to the poor. Thus the appearance of
neglecting the memory of their deceased friends,
which might cause them no small sorrow of heart,
shall be avoided, and that which is a pious and
honourable act of religious service shall be cele-
brated as it should be in the Church. This majf:
suffice meanwhile in regard to rioting and drunk-
enness.

Chap. it. — 7. As to "strife and deceit,"^ what #ire
right have I to speak, seeing that these vices
prevail more seriously among our own order than
among our congregations? Let me, however,
say that the source of these evils is pride, and a
desire for the praises of men, which also frequent-
ly produces hypocrisy. This is successfully re-


3 Gal. VI. I.

< Magis monendo quant mznando.

5 One may see in Letter XXIX. how admirably Augustin illus-
trated in his own practice the directions here given.

6 " De contentions et dolo" is Augustin's translation of the words
in Rom. xiii. 13.


*I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


241


sisted only by him who is penetrated with love
and fear of God, through the multiplied declara-
tions of the divine books ; provided, however,
that such a man exhibit in himself a pattern
both of patience and of humility, by assuming as
his due less praise and honour than is offered to
him : at the same time neither accepting all nor
refusing all that is rendered to him by those who
honour him ; and as to the portion which he
does accept, receiving it not for his own sake,
seeing that he ought to live wholly in the sight
of God and to despise human applause, but for
the sake of those whose welfare he cannot pro-
mote if by too great self-abasement he lose his
place in their esteem. For to this pertains that
word, " Let no man despise thy youth ; " ' while
he who said this says also in another place, " If
I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant
of Christ." ^

8. It is a great matter not to exult in the
honours and praises which come from men, but
to reject all vain pomp ; and, if some of this be
necessary, to make whatever is thus retained
contribute to the benefit and salvation of those
who confer the honour. For it has not been
said in vain, " God will break the bones of those
who seek to please men." ^ For what could be
feebler, what more destitute of the firmness and
strength which the bones here spoken of figura-

Eively represent, than the man who is prostrated
)y the tongue of slanderers, although he knows
hat the things spoken against him are false?
The pain arising from this thing would in no wise
•end the bowels of his soul, if its bones had not
een broken by the love of praise. I take for
anted your strength of mind : therefore it is
,0 mvself that I sav those things which I am now
I tating to you. Nevertheless you are willing, I
;|eHeve, to consider along with me how important
nd how difficult these things are. For the man
ho has not declared war against this enemy has
|o idea of its power ; for if it be comparatively
y to dispense with praise so long as it is de-
Hed to him, it is difficult to forbear from being
ptivated with praise when it is offered. And
t the hanging of our minds upon God ought
be so great, that we would at once correct
ose with whom we may take that liberty, when
are by them undeservedly praised, so as to
event them from either thinking us to possess
at is not in us, or regarding that as ours which
longs to God, or commending us for things
ich, though we have them, and perhaps have
m in abundance, are nevertheless in their na-
e not worthy of commendation, such as are
those good things which we have in common
Mh the lower animals or with wicked men. If,


however, we are deservedly praised on account of
what God has given us, let us congratulate those
to whom what is really good yields pleasure ; but
let us not congratulate ourselves on the fact of
our pleasing men, but on the fact of our being
(if it is the case) such in the sight of God as we
are in their esteem, and because praise is given
not to us, but to God, who is the giver of all
things which are truly and justly praised. These
things are daily repeated to me by myself, or
rather by Him from whom proceed all profitable
instructions, whether they are found in the read-


ing


of the divine word or are suggested from


, or your
such reme-


' I Tim. iv, 12.

? Gal. i. iQ.

' Ps. lU. 6, Sept.


within to the mind ; and yet, although strenu-
ously contending with my adversary, I often re-
ceive wounds from him when I am unable to put
away from myself the fascinating power of the
praise which is offered to me.

9. These things I have written, in order that,
if they are not now necessary for your Holiness
(your own thoughts suggesting to you other and
more useful considerations of this kind
Holiness being above the need of
dies), my disorders at least may be known to you,
and you may know that which may move you to
deign to plead with God for me as my infirmity
demands : and I beseech you, by the humanity
of Him who hath commanded us to bear each
other's burdens, that you offer such intercession
most importunately on my behalf. There are
many things in regard to my life and conversa-
tion, of which I will not write, which I would
confess with tears if we were so s-ituated that
nothing was required but my mouth and your
ears as the means of communication between my
heart and your heart. If, however, the aged Sat-
urninus, venerated by us and beloved by all here
with unreserved and unfeigned affection, whose
brotherly love and devotion to you I observed
when I was with you, — if he, I say, is pleased
to visit us so soon as he finds it convenient, what-
ever converse we may be able to enjoy with that
holy and spiritually- minded man shall be esteemed
by us very little, if at all, different from personal
conference with your Excellency. With entrea-
ties too earnest for words to express their urgen-
cy, I beg you to condescend to join us in asking
and obtaining from him this favour. For the
people of Hippo fear much, and far more than
they ought, to let me go to so great a distance
from them, and will on no account trust me
by myself so far as to permit me to see the
field given by your care and generosity to the
brethren, of which, before your letter came,
we had heard through our brother and fellow-
servant Parthenius, from whom we have also
learned many other things which we longed
to know. The Lord will accomplish the ful-
filment of all the other things which we still
desiderate.


J


242


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


LETTER XXIII.
(a.d. 392.)

TO MAXIMIN, MY WELL-BELOVED LORD AND
BROTHER, WORTHY OF HONOUR, AUGUSTIN,
PRESBYTER OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH, SENDS
GREETING IN THE LORD.

I. Before entering on the subject on which
I have resolved to write to your Grace, I shall
briefly state my reasons for the terms used in
the title of this letter, lest these should surprise
either yourself or any other person. I have
written "to my lord," because it is written:
"Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty;
only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh,
but by love serve one another." ' Seeing, there-
fore, that in this duty of writing to you I am
actually by love serving you, I do only what is
reasonable in calling you " my lord," for the
sake of that one true Lord who gave us this
command. Again, as to my having written "well-
beloved," God knoweth that I not only love you,
but love you as I love myself; for I am well
aware that I desire for you the very blessings
which I am fain to make my own. As to my
adding the words " worthy of honour," I did not
mean, by adding this, to say that I honour your
episcopal office, for to me you are not a bishop ;
and this I trust you will take as spoken with no
intention to give off'ence, but from the convic-
tion that in our mouth Yea should be Yea, and
Nay, Nay : for neither you nor any one who
knows us can fail to know that you are not my
bishop, and I am not your presbyter. " Worthy
of honour " I therefore willingly call you on this
ground, that I know you to be a man ; and I
know that man was made in the image and like-
ness of God, and is placed in honour by the
very order and law of nature, if by understand-
ing the things which he ought to understand he
retain his honour. For it is written, " Man being
placed in honour did not understand : he is
compared to the brutes devoid of reason, and is
made like unto them." ^ Why theii may I not
address you as worthy of honour, inasmuch as
you are a man, especially since I dare not de-
spair of your repentance and salvation so long as
you are in this life ? Moreover, as to my calling
you " brother," you are well acquainted with the
precept divinely given to us, according to which
we are to say, "Ye are our brethren," even to
those who deny that they are our brethren ; and
this has much to do with the reason whiclr has
made me resolve to write to you, my brother.
Now that the reason for my making such an in-
troduction to my letter has been given, I bespeak
your calm attention to what follows.


1 Gal. V. 13.

2 Ps. xlix. 12, version of the LXX.


2. When I was in your district, and was with
all my power expressing my abhorrence of the
sad and deplorable custom followed by men
who, though they boast of the name of Chris-
tians, do not hesitate to rebaptize Christians,
there were not wanting some who said in praise
of you, that you do not conform to this custom.
I confess that at first I did not believe them ;
but afterwards, considering that it was possible
for the fear of God to take possession of a hu-
man soul exercised in meditation upon the life
to come, in such a way as to restrain a man from
most manifest wickedness, I believed their state-
ment, rejoicing that by holding such a resolution
you showed yourself averse to complete aliena-
tion from the Catholic Church. I was even on
the outlook for an opportunity of conversing
with yt)u, in order that, if it were possible, the
small difference which still remained between us
might be taken away, when, behold, a few daysj^
ago it was reported to me that you had rebap-
tized a deacon of ours belonging to Mutugenna !
I was deeply grieved both for his melancholy
fall and for your sin, my brother, which surprised;
and disappointed me. For I know what the
Catholic Church is. The nations are Christ^s
inheritance, and the ends of the earth are His
possession. You also know what the Catholic ,
Church is ; or if you do not know it, apply your
attention to discern it, for it may be very easily
known by those who are willing to be taught.;||^;
Therefore, to rebaptize even a heretic who has
received in baptism the seal of holiness which
the practice ^ of the Christian Church has transjj
mitted to us, is unquestionably a sin ; but to re-^
baptize a Catholic is one of the worst of crimes-
As I did not, however, believe the report, be
cause I still retained my favourable impression
of you, I went in person to Mutugenna. The
miserable man himself I did not succeed in
finding, but I learned from his parents that he^
had been made one of your deacons. Nevew
theless I still think so favourably of you, that
will not beUeve that he has been rebaptized.
- Wherefore, my beloved brother, I beseech


you by the divine and human natures of our
Lord Jesus Christ, have the kindness to reply to
this letter, telling me what has been done, and
so to write as knowing that I intend to read your
letter aloud to our brethren in the church, ihis
I have written, lest, by afterwards doing that
which you did not expect me to do, I should
give offence to your Charity, and give you occa-
sion for making a just complaint against me to
our common friends. What can reasonably pre-
vent you from answering this letter I do not see.
For if you do rebaptize, you have nothing to
apprehend from your colleagues when you write


3 Disciplina.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


243


that you are doing that which they would com-
mand you to do even if you were unwilHng ; and
if you, moreover, defend this by the best argu-
ments known to you, as a thing which ought to
be done, your colleagues, so far from being dis-
pleased on this account, will praise you. But if
,^ou do not rebaptize, hold fast your Christian
iberty, my brother Maximin ; hold it fast, I im-
plore you : fixing your eye on Christ, fear not
ie censure, tremble not before the power of
any man. Fleeting is the honour of this world,
and fleeting are all the objects to which earthly
ambition aspires. Neither thrones ascended by
ights of steps,' nor canopied pulpits,^ nor pro-
cessions and chantings of crowds of consecrated
drgins, shall be admitted as available for the
efence of those who have now these honours,
vhen at the judgment-seat of Christ conscience
lall begin to lift its accusing voice, and He who
the Judge of the consciences of men shall
Tonounce the final sentence. What is here
steemed an honour shall then be a burden :
rhat uplifts men here, shall weigh heavily on
lem in that day. Those things which mean-
hile are done for the Church's welfare as tokens
f respect to us, shall then be vindicated, it may
Ie, by a conscience void of offence ; but they will
[/•ail nothing as a screen for a guilty conscience.
4. If, then, it be indeed the case that, under
e promptings of a devout and pious mind,
|)u abstain from dispensing a second baptism,
lid rather accept the baptism of the Catholic
urch as the act of the one true Mother, who
all nations both offers a welcome to her bosom,
t they may be regenerated, and gives a moth-
s nourishment to them when they are regen-
|ited, and as the token of admission into Christ's
16 possession, which reaches to the ends of the
th ; if, I say, you indeed do this, why do you
|t break forth into a joyful and independent
fession of your sentiments? Why do you
e under a bushel the lamp which might so
fitably shine? Why do you not rend and
t from you the old sordid livery of your
Iven-hearted bondage, and go forth clad in
panoply of Christian boldness, saying, " I
w but one baptism consecrated and sealed
11 the name of the Father, and the Son, and
Holy Ghost : this sacrament, wherever I find
am bound to acknowledge and approve ; I
liot destroy what I discern to be my Lord's ;
|) not treat with dishonour the banner of my
|g"? Even the men who parted the raiment
Christ among them did not rudely rend in
es the seamless robe ; ^ and they were men
had not then any faith in Christ's resurrec-
nay, they were witnessing His death. If,


is;


mbsidie gradat(^.
V-athedrce velatce,
lohn xix. 24.


then, persecutors forbore from rending the ves-
ture of Christ when He was hanging upon the
cross, why should Christians destroy the sacra-
ment of His institution now when He is sitting
in heaven upon His throne ? Had I been a Jew
in the time of that ancient people, when there
was nothing better that I could be, I would
undoubtedly have received circumcision. That
" seal of the righteousness which is by faith "
was of so great importance in that dispensation
before it was abrogated •* by the Lord's coming,
that the angel would have strangled the infant-
child of Moses, had not the child's mother,
seizing a stone, circumcised the child, and by
this sacrament averted impending death. 5 This
sacrament also arrested the waters of the Jordan,
and made them flow back towards their source.
This sacrament the Lord Himself received in
infancy, although He abrogated it when He was
crucified. For these signs of spiritual blessings
were not condemned, but gave place to others
which were more suitable to the later dispensa-
tion. For as circumcision was abolished by the
first coming of the Lord, so baptism shall be
abolished by His second coming. For as now,
since the liberty of faith has come, and the yoke
of bondage has been removed, no Christian re-
ceives circumcision in the flesh ; so then, when
the just are reigning with the Lord, and the
wicked have been condemned, no one shall be
baptized, but the reality which both ordinances
prefigure — namely, circumcision of the heart
and cleansing of the conscience — shall be eter-
nally abiding. If, therefore, I had been a Jew
in the time of the former dispensation, and there
had come to me a Samaritan who was willing to
become a Jew, abandoning the error which the
Lord Himself condemned when He said, " Ye
worship ye know not what ; we know what we
worship, for salvation is of the Jews ; "^ — if, I
say, a Samaritan whom Samaritans had circum-
cised had expressed his willingness to become a
Jew, there would have been no scope for the
boldness which would have insisted on the repe-
tition of the rite ; and instead of this, we would
have been compelled to approve of that which
God had commanded, although it had been done
by heretics. But if, in the flesh of a circumcised
man, I could not find place for the repetition of
the circumcision, because there is but one mem-
ber which is circumcised, much less is place
found in the one heart of man for the repetition
of the baptism of Christ. Ye, therefore, who
wish to baptize twice, must seek as subjects of
such double baptism men who have double
hearts.

^ Evaciiaretur.

5 Ex IV, 24, 25. Augustin believes that the angel sought to
slay, not Moses, but the child, for which he gives reasons in his
QucBstiones in Exodutn. See Rosenraiiller, Sckolia.

6 John iv. 22.


244


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


5. Publish frankly, therefore, that you are
doing what is right, if it be the case that you do
not rebaptize ; and write me to that effect, not
only without fear, but with joy. Let no Councils
of your party deter you, my brother, from this
step : for if this displease them, they are not
worthy to have you among them ; but if it please
them, we trust that there shall soon be peace
between you and us, through the mercy of our
Lord, who never forsakes those who fear to dis-
please Him, and who labour to do what is ac-
ceptable in His sight ; and let not our honours
— a dangerous burden, of which an account
must yet be given — be a hindrance, making it
unhappily impossible for our people who believe
in Christ, and who share with one another in
daily bread at home, to sit down at the same
table of Christ. Do we not grievously lament
that husband and wife do in most cases, when
marriage makes them one flesh, vow mutual
fidelity in the name of Christ, and yet rend
asunder Christ's own body by belonging to
separate communions? If, by your moderate
measures and wisdom, and by your exercise of
that love which we all owe to Him who shed
His blood for us, this schism, which is such a
grievous scandal, causing Satan to triumph and
many souls to perish, be taken out of the way
in these parts, who can adequately express how
illustrious is the reward which the Lord prepares
for you, in that from you should proceed an
example which, if imitated, as it may so easily
be, would bring health to all His other members,
which throughout the whole of Africa are lying
now miserably exhausted? How much I fear
lest, since you cannot see my heart, I appear to
you to speak rather in irony than in the sincerity
of love ! But what more can I do than present
my words before your eye, and my heart before
God?

6. Let us put away from between us those vain
objections which are wont to be thrown at each
other by the ignorant on either side. Do not
on }'our part cast up to me the persecutions of
Macarius. I, on mine, will not reproach you
with the excesses of the Circumcelliones. If
you are not to blame for the latter, neither am
I for the former ; they pertain not to us. The
Lord's floor is not yet purged — it cannot be
without chaff ; be it ours to pray, and to do what
in us lies that we may be good grain. I could
not pass over in silence the rebaptizing of our
deacon ; for I know how much harm my silence
might do to myself. For I do not propose to
spend my time in the empty enjoyment of eccle-
siastical dignity ; but I propose to act as mind-
ful of this, that to the one Chief Shepherd I
must give account of the sheep committed unto
me. If you would rather that I should not thus
write to you, you must, my brother, excuse me


on the ground of my fears ; for I do fear greatly,
lest, if I were silent and concealed my senti-
ments, others might be rebaptized by you. I
have resolved, therefore, with such strength and
opportunity as the Lord may grant, so to manage
this discussion, that by our peaceful conferences,
all who belong to our communion may know
how far apart from heresy and schism is the
position of the Catholic Church, and with what
care they should guard against the destruction
which awaits the tares and the branches cut off
from the Lord's vine. If you willingly accede
to such conference with me, by consenting to
the public reading of the letters of both, I shall
unspeakably rejoice. If this proposal is displeas-
ing to you, what can I do, my brother, but read j
our letters, even without your consent, to the
Catholic congregation, with a view to its instruc- j
tion? But if you do rfot condescend to write
me a reply, I am resolved at least to read my
own letter, that, when your misgivings as to your
procedure are known, others may be ashamed to
be rebaptized.

7. I sh-all not, however, do this in the presence
of the soldiery, lest any of you should think that
I wish to act in a violent way, rather than as the
interests of peace demand ; but only after their
departure, that all who hear me may understand,
that I do not propose to compel men to embrace
the communion of any party, but desire the
truth to be made known to persons who, in tlieir
search for it, are free from disquieting apprehen-
sions. On our side there shall be no appeal to
men's fear of the civil power ; on your side, let
there be no intimidation by a mob of Circum-
celliones. Let us attend to the real matter in
debate, and let our arguments appeal to reason
and to the authoritative teaching of the Divine
Scriptures, dispassionately and calmly, so far as^
we are able ; let us ask, seek, and knock, tl
we may receive and find, and that to us the doc
may be opened, and thereby may be achieve^
by God's blessing on our united efforts s^jiA^,!
prayers, the first step towards the entire remova'
from our district of that impiety which is such
a disgrace to Africa. If you do not believe thai |

I am willing to postpone the discussion unti
after the soldiery have left, you may delay youi 1
answer until they have gone ; and if, while thej,L,
are still here, I should wish to read my own leiHIjL^;;
to the people, the production of the letter win
of itself convict me of breaking my word. Ma^
the Lord in His mercy prevent me from actin|
in a way so contrary to morality, and to the goo\
resolutions with which, by laying His yoke 0^
me. He has been pleased to inspire me ! i

8. My bishop would perhaps have preferrc' f^^^"',
to send a letter himself to your Grace, if he ha
been here ; or my letter would have been writtei; .

if not by his order, at least with his sanctioijL/'*'


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


245


r>ut in his absence, seeing that the rebaptizing
I >f this deacon is said to have occurred recently,
I have not by delay allowed the feelings caused
1 )V the action to cool down, being moved by the
jiomptings of the keenest anguish on account
of what I regard as really the death of a brother.
This my grief the compensating joy of recon-
ciliation between us and )ou may perhaps be
appointed to heal, through the help of the mercy
and providence of our Lord. May the Lord
our God grant thee a calm and conciliatory
spirit, my dearly beloved lord and brother !


LETTER XXIV.

This letter, written in 394 to Alypius by Paulinus,
owes its place in the collection of Augnstin's letters to
|the notice of the treatises written by Augustin against
the Manichseans, and its connection with the following
letter addressed by Paulinus to Augustin himself. It is
Dbviously one of those which, in making a selection of
etters, may be safely omitted.


,sioiii'
dels;!'


me' '


LETTER XXV.

(a.d. 394.)

I'O AUGusxnsr, our lord and brother beloved

AND VENERABLE, FROM PAULINUS AND THERASIA,
SINNERS.

I. The love of Christ which constrains us,
ind which unites us, though separated by dis-
iince, in the bond of a common faith, has itself:
mboldened me to dismiss my fear and address
letter to you ; and it has given you a place in
liy inmost heart by means of your writings —
b full of the stores of learning, so sweet with
blestial honey, the medicine and the nourish-
ment of my soul. These I at present have in
|ve books, which, through the kindness of our
jiessed and venerable Bishop Alypius, I received,
pt only as a means of my own instruction, but
r the use of the Church in many towns. These
oks I am now reading : in them I take great
light : in them I find food, not that which
prisheth, but that which imparts the substance
eternal life through our faith, whereby we are
our Lord Jesus Christ made members of His
dy ; for the writings and examples of the
Ithful do greatly strengthen that faith which,
»t looking at things seen, longs after things not
en with that love which accepts implicitly all
ings which are according to the truth of the
impotent God. O true salt of the earth, by
lich our hearts are preserved from being cor-
pted by the errors of the world ! O light
irthy of your place on the candlestick of the
liurch, diffusing widely in the Catholic towns
p brightness of a flame fed by the oil of the
■en-branched lamp of the upper sanctuary,
also disperse even the thick mists of heresy,


and rescue the light of truth from the confusion
of darkness by the beams of your luminous
demonstrations.

2. You see, my brother beloved, esteemed,
and welcomed in Christ our Lord, with what
intimacy I claim to know you, with what amaze-
ment I admire and with what love I embrace
you, seeing that I enjoy daily converse with you
by the medium of your writings, and am fed by
the breath of your mouth. For your mouth I
may justly call a pipe conveying living water,
and a channel from the eternal fountain ; for
Christ has become in you a fountain of " living
water springing up into eternal life."' Through
desire for this my soul thirsted within me, and
my parched ground longed to be flooded with
the fulness of your river. Since, therefore, you
have armed me completely by this your Penta-
teuch against the Manichseans, if you have pre-
pared any treatises in defence of the Catholic
faith against other enemies (for our enemy, with
his thousand pernicious stratagems, must be de-
feated by weapons as various as the artifices by
which he assails us), I beg you to bring these
forth from your armoury for me, and not refuse to
furnish me with the " armour of righteousness."
For I am oppressed even now in my work with
a heavy burden, being, as a sinner, a veteran in
the ranks of sinners, but an untrained recruit
in the service of the King eternal. The wisdom
of this world I have unhappily hitherto regarded
with admiration, and, devoting myself to litera-
ture which I now see to be unprofitable, and
wisdom which I now reject, I was in the sight
of God foolish and dumb. When I had become
old in the fellowship of my enemies, and had


laboured in vain in my thoughts, I lifted mme
eyes to the mountains, looking up to the precepts
of the law and to the gifts of grace, whence my
help came from the Lord, who, not requiting
me according to mine iniquity, enlightened my
blindness, loosed my bonds, humbled me who
had been sinfully exalted, in order that He
might exalt me when graciously humbled.

3. Therefore I follow, with halting pace in-
deed as yet, the great examples of the just, if I
may through your prayers apprehend that for
which I have been apprehended by the com-
passion of God. Guide, therefore, this infant
creeping on the ground, and by your steps teach
him to walk. For I would not have you judge
of me by the age which began with my natural
birth, but by that which began with my spiritual
new birth. For as to the natural life, my age is
that which the cripple, healed by the apostles by
the power of their word at the gate Beautiful,
had attained.^ But with respect to the birth of
my soul, mine is as yet the age of those infants

■ John iv. 14.

2 Acts iii. 7 and iv. 22.


246


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


who, being sacrificed by the death-blows which
were aimed at Christ, preceded with blood worthy
of such honour the offering of the Lamb, and
were the harbingers of the passion of the Lord.'
Therefore, as I am but a babe in the word of
God, and as to spiritual age a sucking child,
satisfy my vehement desire by nourishing me
Avith your words, the breasts of faith, and wis-
dom, and love. If you consider only the office
which we both hold, you are my brother ; but
if you consider the ripeness of your understand-
ing and other powers, you are, though my junior
in years, a father to me ; because the possession
of a venerable wisdom has promoted you, though
lyoung, to a maturity of worth, and to the honour
which belongs to those who are old. Foster and
strengthen me, then, for I am, as I have said,
but a child in the sacred Scriptures and in
ispiritual studies ; and seeing that, after long
Icontendings and frequent shipwreck, I have but
[little skill, and am even now with difficulty rising
above the waves of this world, do you, who have
already found firm footing on the shore, receive
me into the safe refuge of your bosom, that, if
it please you, we may together sail towards the
harbour of salvation. Meanwhile, in my efforts
to escape from the dangers of this life and the
abyss of sin, support me by your prayers, as by
a plank, that from this world I may escape as
one does from a shipwreck, leaving all behind.

4. I have therefore been at pains to rid my-
self of all baggage and garments which might
impede my progress, in order that, obedient to
the command and sustained by the help of
Christ, I may swim, unhindered by any clothing
for the flesh or care for the morrow, across the
sea of this present life, which, swelling with
waves and echoing with the barking of our sins,
like the dogs of Scylla, separates between us
and God. I do not boast that I have accom-
plished this : even if I might so boast, I would
glory only in the Lord, whose it is to accomplish
what it is our part to desire ; but my soul is in
earnest that the judgments of the Lord be her
chief desire. You can judge how far he is on
the way to efficiently performing the will of God,
who is desirous that he may desire to perform it.
Nevertheless, so far as in me lies, I have loved
the beauty of His sanctuary, and, if left to my-
self, would have chosen to occupy the lowest
place in the Lord's house. But to Him who
was pleased to separate me from my mother's
womb, and to draw me away from the friendship
of flesh and blood to His grace, it has seemed
good to raise me from the earth and from the
gulf of misery, though destitute of all merit,
and to take me from the mire and from the
dunghill, to set me among the princes of His

' Matt. ii. 16.


people, and appoint my place in the same rank
with yourself; so that, although you excel me
in worth, I should be associated with you as
your equal in office.

5. It is not therefore by my own presump-
tion, but in accordance with the pleasure and
appointment of the Lord, that I appropriate the
honour of which I own myself unworthy, claim-
ing for myself the bond of brotherhood with
you ; for I am persuaded, from the holiness of
your character, that you are taught by the truth
" not to mind high things, but to condescend to
men of low estate." Therefore I hope that you
will readily and kindly accej^t the assurance of
the love which in humiUty we bear to you, and
which, I trust, you have already received through
the most blessed priest Alypius, whom (with his
permission) we call our father. For he doubt-
less has himself given you an example of loving
us both while we are yet strangers, and above
our desert ; for he has found it possible, in the
spirit of far-reaching and self-diffusing genuine
love, to behold us by affection, and to come in
contact with us by writing, even when we were
unknown to him, and severed by a wide interval
both of land and sea. He has presented us
with the first proofs of his affection to us, and
evidences of your love, in the above-mentioned
gift of books. And as he was greatly concerned
that we should be constrained to ardent love for
you, when known to us, not by his testimony
alone, but more fully by the eloquence and the
faith seen in your own writings ; so do we believe
that he has taken care, with equal zeal, to bring
you to imitate his example in cherishing a very
warm love towards us in return. O brother in
Christ, beloved, venerable, and ardently longed
for, we desire that the grace of God, as it is with
you, may abide for ever. We salute, with the
utmost affection of cordial brotherhood, your
whole household, and every one who is in the
Lord a companion and imitator of your holiness.
We beg you to bless, in accepting it, one loaf
which we have sent to your Charity, in token
of our oneness of heart with you.


LETTER XXV I.

(a.d. 395.)

to licentius^ from augustin.

I. I have with difficulty found an opportunity
for writing to you : who would believe it? Yet
Licentius must take my word for it. I do not
wish you to search curiously for the causes and
reasons of this ; for though they could be given,


2 Licentius, son of Romanianus, had been a pupil of Augusim
when he was in retirement at Cassiacum. In this letter and in the
next we see proofs of Augustin's pious solicitude for his welfare.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


247


your confidence in me acquits me of obligation
to furnish them. Moreover, I received your
letters by messengers who were not available for
the carrying back of my reply. And as to the
thing which you asked me to ask, I attended
to it by letter as far as it seemed to me right to
bring it forward ; but with what result you may
have seen. If I have not yet succeeded, I will
press the matter more earnestly, either when the
result comes to my knowledge, or when you
yourself remind me of it. Thus far I have
spoken to you of the things in which we hear
the sound of the chains of this life. I pass from
them. Receive now in a few words the utter-
ance of my heart's anxieties concerning your
hope for eternity, and the question how a way
may be opened for you to God.

2. I fear, my dear Licentius, that you, while
repeatedly rejecting and dreading the restraints
of wisdom, as if these were bonds, are becom-
ing firmly and fatally in bondage to mortal
things. For wisdom, though at first it restrains
men, and subdues them by some labours in the
way of discipline, gives them presently true free-
dom, and enriches them, when free, with the
possession and enjoyment of itself ; and though
at first it educates them by the help of tempo-
rary restraints, it folds them afterwards in its
eternal embrace, the sweetest and strongest of
all conceivable bonds. I admit, indeed, that
these initial restraints are somewhat hard to
bear ; but the ultimate restraints of wisdom I
cannot call grievous, because they are most
sweet ; nor can I call them easy, because they
are most firm : in short, they possess a quality
which cannot be described, but which can be
the object of faith, and hope, and love. The
bonds of this world, on the other hand, have a
real harshness and a delusive charm, certain pain
and uncertain pleasure, hard toil and troubled
rest, an experience full of misery, and a hope
devoid of happiness. And are you submitting
neck and hands and feet to these chains, desir-
ing to be burdened with honours of this kind,
reckoning your labours to be in vain if they are
not thus rewarded, and spontaneously aspiring
to become fixed in that to which neither per-
suasion nor force ought to have induced you to
go? Perhaps you answer, in the words of the
slave in Terence,

" So ho, you are pouring out wise words here."

Receive my words, then, that I may pour them
out without wasting them. But if I sing, while
you prefer to dance to another tune, even thus
I do not regret my effort to give advice ; for the
exercise of singing yields pleasure even when
the song fails to stir to responsive motion the
person for whom it is sung with loving care.
There were in your letters some verbal mistakes


which attracted my attention, but I judge it
trifling to discuss these when solicitude about
your actions and your whole life disturbs me.

3. If your verses were marred by defective
arrangement, or violated the laws of prosody,
or grated on the ears of the hearer by imperfect
rhythm, you would doubtless be ashamed, and
you would lose no time, you would take no rest,
until you arranged, corrected, remodelled, and
balanced your composition, devoting any amount
of earnest study and toil to the acquisition and
practice of the art of versification : but when
you yourself are marred by disorderly living,
when you violate the laws of God, when your
life accords neither with the honourable desires
of friends on your behalf, nor with the light
given by your own learning, do you think this is
a trifle to be cast out of sight and out of mind?
As if, forsooth, you thought yourself of less
value than the sound of your own voice, and
esteemed it a smaller matter to displease God
by ill-ordered life, than to provoke the censure
of grammarians by ill-ordered syllables.

4. You write thus : "Oh that the morning light
of other days could with its gladdening chariot
bring back to me bright hours that are gone,
which we spent together in the heart of Italy
and among the high mountains, when proving
the generous leisure and pure privileges which
belong to the good ! Neither stern winter with
its frozen snow, nor the rude blasts of Zephyrs
and raging of Boreas, could deter me from fol-
lowing your footsteps with eager tread. You
have only to express your wish." '

Woe be to me if I do not express this wish,
nay, if I do not compel and command, or be-
seech and implore you to follow me. If, how-
ever, your ear is shut against my voice, let it be
open to your own voice, and give heed to your
own poem : listen to yourself, O friend, most
unyielding, unreasonable, and unimpressible.
What care I for your tongue of gold, while your
heart is of iron? How shall I, not in verses,
but in lamentations, sufficiently bewail these
verses of yours, in which I discover what a soul,
what a mind that is which I am not permitted
to seize and present as an offering to our God ?
You are waiting for me to express the wish that
you should become good, and enjoy rest and
happiness : as if any day could shine more
pleasantly on me than that in which I shall en-
joy in God your gifted mind, or as if you did
not know how I hunger and thirst for you, or as
if you did not in this poem itself confess this.
Return to the mind in which you wrote these
things ; say to me now again, " You have only
to express your wish." Here then is my wish,
if my expression of it be enough to move you

' Extract from a long poem, by Licentius, forming § 3 of the text.


248


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


to comply: Give yourself to me — give your-
self to my Lord, who is the Lord of us both,
and who has endowed you with your faculties :
for what am I but through Him your servant,
and under Him your fellow-servant?

5. Nay, has not He given expression to His
will? Hear the gospel: it declares, "Jesus
stood and cried." ' " Come unto me, all ye
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn
of me ; for I am meek and lowly in heart : so
shall ye find rest to your souls. For my yoke
i3 easy, and my burden is light." ^ If these
words are not heard, or are heard only with the
ear, do you, Licentius, expect Augustin to issue
his command to his fellow-servant, and not rather
complain that the will of his Lord is despised,
when He orders, nay invites, and as it were en-
treats all who labour to seek rest in Him ? But
to your strong and proud neck, forsooth, the
yoke of the world seems easier than the yoke
of Christ ; yet consider, in regard to the yoke
which He imposes, by whom and with what
recompense it is imposed. Go to Campania,
learn in the case of Paulinus, that eminent and
holy servant of God, how great worldly honours
he shook off, without hesitation, from neck truly
noble because humble, in order that he might
place it, as he has done, beneath the yoke of
Christ ; and now, with his mind at rest, he
meekly rejoices in Him as the guide of his way.
Go, learn with what wealth of mind he offers to
Llim the sacrifice of praise, rendering unto Him
all the good which he has received from Him,
lest, by failing to store all that he has in Him from
whom he received it, he should lose it all.

6. Why are you so excited? why so wavering?
why do you turn your ear away from us, and lend
it to the imaginations of fatal pleasures? They
are false, they perish, and they lead to perdition.
They are false, Licentius. " May the truth," as
you desire, " be made plain to us by demonstra-
tion, may it flow more clear than Eridanus."
The truth alone declares what is true : Christ is
the truth ; let us come to Him that we may be
released from labour. That He may heal us,
let us take His yoke upon us, and learn of Him
who is meek and lowly in heart, and we shall
find rest unto our souls : for His yoke is easy,
and His burden is hght. The devil desires to
wear you as an ornament. Now, if you found
in the earth a golden chaUce, you would give it
to the Church of God. But j'ou have received
from God talents that are spiritually valuable as
gold ; and do you devote these to the service
of your lusts, and surrender yourself to Satan?
Do it not, I entreat you. May you at some


time perceive with what a sad and sorrowful
heart I have written these things ; and I pray
you, have pity on me if you have ceased to be
precious in your own eyes.


' John vii. 37.
^ IMatt. xi. 28-30.


LETTER XXVII.

(a-D- 395-)

to my lord, holy and venerable, and worthy
of highest pr.\ise in christ, my brother
paulinus, augustin sends greeting in the

LORD.

I. O excellent man and excellent brother,
there was a time when you were unknown to
my mind ; and I charge my mind to bear pa-
tiently your being still unknown to my eyes, but
it almost — nay, altogether — refuses to obey.
Does it indeed bear this patiently? If so, why
then does a longing for your presence rack my
inmost soul? For if I were suffering bodily in-
firmities, and these did not interrupt the serenity
of my mind, I might be justly said to bear them
patiently ; but when I cannot bear with equa-
nimity the privation of not seeing you, it would
be intolerable were I to call my state of mind
patience. Nevertheless, it would perhaps be still
more intolerable if I were to be found patient
while absent from you, seeing that you are such
an one as you are. It is well, therefore, that I
am unsatisfied under a privation which is such
that, if I were satisfied under it, every one would
justly be dissatisfied with me. What has befallen
me is strange, yet true : I grieve because I do
not see you, and my grief itself comforts me ;
for I neither admire nor covet a fortitude easily
consoled under the absence of good men such
as you are. For do we not long for the heav-
enly Jerusalem? and the more impatiently we
long for it, do we not the more patiently sub-
mit to all things for its sake? Who can so
withhold himself from joy in seeing you, as to
feel no pain when you are no longer seen ? I at
least can do neither ; and seeing that if I could,
it could only be by trampling on right and natu-
ral feeling, I rejoice that I cannot, and in this
rejoicing I find some consolation. It is there-
fore not the removal, but the contemplation, of
this sorrow that consoles me. Blame me not,
I beseech you, with that devout seriousness of
spirit which so eminently distinguishes you ; say
not that I do wrong to grieve because of my not
yet knowing you, when you have disclosed to
my sight your mind, which is the inner man.
For if, when sojourning in any place, or in the
city to which you belong, I had come to know
you as my brother and friend, and as one so
eminent as a Christian, so noble as a man, how
could you think that it would be no disappoint-


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


249


ment to me if I were not permitted to know your
dwelling? How, then, can I but mourn because
I have not yet seen your face and form, the
dwelling-place of that mind which I have come
to know as if it were my own?

2. For I have read your letter, which flows
with milk and honey, which exhibits the sim-
plicity of heart wherewith, under the guidance of
piety, you seek the Lord, and which brings glory
and honour to Him. The brethren have read it
also, and find unwearied and ineffable satisfaction
in those abundant and excellent gifts with which
God has endowed you. As many as have read
it carry it away with them, because, while they
read, it carries them away. Words cannot ex-
press how sweet is the savour of Christ which
your letter breathes. How strong is the wish to
be more fully acquainted with you which that
letter awakens by presenting you to our sight !
for it at once permits us to discern and prompts
us to desire you. For the more effectually that
it makes us in a certain sense realize your pres-
ence, the more does it render us impatient under
your absence. All love you as seen therein, and
wish to be loved by you. Praise and thanksgiv-
ing are offered to God, by whose grace you are
what you are. In your letter, Christ is awakened
that He may be pleased to calm the winds and
the waves for you, directing your steps towards
His perfect stedfastness.' In it the reader be-
holds a wife^ who does not bring her husband to
effeminacy, but by union to him is brought her-
self to share the strength of his nature ; and unto
her in you, as completely one with you, and bound
to you by spiritual ties which owe their strength
to their purity, we desire to return our salutations
with the respect due to your Holiness. In it, the
cedars of Lebanon, levelled to the ground, and
fashioned by the skilful craft of love into the form
of the Ark, cleave the waves of this world, fear-
less of decay. In it, glory is scorned that it may
be secured, and the world given up that it may be
gained. In it, the little ones, yea, the might-
ier sons of Babylon, the sins of turbulence and
pride, are dashed against the rock.

3. These and other such most delightful and
hallowed spectacles are presented to the readers
of your letter, — that letter which exhibits a true
faith, a good hope, a pure love. How it breathes
to us your thirst, your longing and fainting for
the courts of the Lord ! With what holy love it
is inspired ! How it overflows with the abundant
treasure of a true heart ! What thanksgivings
it renders to God ! What blessings it procures
from Him ! Is it elegance or fervour, light or
life-giving power, which shines most in your
(letter? For how can it at once soothe us and


* Compare end of sec. 3 in Letter XXV, p. 246.

* Therasia,


animate us ? how can it combine fertilizing rains
with the brightness of a cloudless sky? How is
this ? I ask ; or how shall I repay you, except by
giving myself to be wholly yours in Him whose
you wholly are ? If this be httle, it is at least all
I have to give. But you have made me think it
not little, by your deigning to honour me in that
letter with such praises, that when I requite you
by giving myself to you, I would be chargeable
if I counted the gift a small one, with refusing to
believe your testimony. I am ashamed, indeed,
to believe so much good spoken of myself, but
I am yet more unwilling to refuse to believe you.
I have one way of escape from the dilemma : I
shall not credit your estimate of my character,
because I do not recognise myself in the por-
trait you have drawn ; but I shall believe myself
to be beloved by you, because I perceive and
feel this beyond all doubt. Thus I shall be found
neither rash in judging of myself, nor ungrateful
for your esteem. Moreover, when I offer myself
to you, it is not a small offering ; for I offer one
whom you very warmly love, and one who, though
be is not what you suppose him to be, is never-
theless one for whom you are praying that he
may become such. And your prayers I now beg
the more earnestly, lest, thinking me to be al-
ready what I am not, you should be less solici-
tous for the supply of that which I lack.

4. The bearer of this letter ^ to your Excel-
lency and most eminent Charity is one of my
dearest friends, and most intimately known to
me from early years. His name is mentioned
in the treatise De Religione, which your Holi-
ness, as you indicate in your letter, has read
with very great pleasure, doubtless because it
was made more acceptable to you by the recom-
mendation of so good a man as he who sent it
to you.'^ I would not wish you, however, to give
credence to the statements which, perchance,
one who is so intimately my friend may have
made in praise of me. For I have often ob-
served, that, without intending to say what was
untrue, he was, by the bias of friendship, mis-
taken in his opinion concerning me, and that he
thought me to be already possessed of many
things, for the gift of which my heart earnestly
waited on the Lord. And if he did such things
in my presence, who may not conjecture that
out of the fulness of his heart he may utter many
things more excellent than true concerning me
when absent? He will submit to your esteemed
attention, and review all my treatises ; for I am
not aware of having written anything, either ad-
dressed to those who are beyond the pale of the
Church, or to the brethren, which is not in his
possession. But when you are reading these,


3 Romanianus.
*• Alypius.


See De Religione, ch. vii. n. 12.


250


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


my holy Paulinus, let not those things which
Truth has spoken by my weak instrumentality,
so carry you away as to prevent your carefully
observing what I myself have spoken, lest, while
you drink in with eagerness the things good and
true which have been given to me as a sen^ant,
you should forget to pray for the pardon of my
errors and mistakes. For in all that shall, if
observed, justly displease you, I myself am seen ;
but in all which in my books is justly approved
by you, through the gift of the Holy Spirit be-
stowed on you, He is to be loved. He is to be
praised, with whom is the fountain of life* and in
whose light we shall see light,' not darkly as we
do here, but face to face.^ When, in reading
over my writings, I discover in them anything
which is due to the working of the old leaven in
me, I blame myself for it with true sorrow ; but
if anything which I have spoken is, by God's
gift, from the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth, I rejoice therein with trembling. For
what have we that we have not received ? Yet
it may be said, his portion is better whom God
has endowed with larger and more numerous
gifts, than his on whom smaller and fewer have
been conferred. True ; but, on the other hand,
it is better to have a small gift, and to render to
Him due thanks for it, than, having a large gift,
to wish to claim the merit of it as our own.
Pray for me, my brother, that I may make such
acknowledgments sincerely, and that my heart
may not be at variance with my tongue. Pray,
I beseech you, that, not coveting praise to my-
self, but rendering praise to the Lord, I may
worship Him ; and I shall be safe from mine
enemies.

5. There is yet another thing which may move
you to love more warmly the brother who bears
my letter ; for he is a kinsman of the venerable
and truly blessed bishop Alypius, whom you love
with your whole heart, and justly : for whoever
thinks highly of that man, thinks highly of the
great mercy and wonderful gifts which God has
bestowed on him. Accordingly, when he had
read your request, desiring him to write for you
a sketch of his history, and, while willing to do
it because of your kindness, was yet unwilling to
do it because of his humility, I, seeing him un-
able to decide between the respective claims of
love and humility, transferred the burden from his
shoulders to my own, for he enjoined me by let-
ter to do so. I shall therefore, with God's help,
soon place in your heart Alypius just as he is :
for this I chiefly feared, that he would be afraid
to declare all that God has conferred on him,
lest (since what he writes would be read by
others besides you) he should seem to any who


* Ps. xxxvi. 10.

* 1 Cor. xiii. 12,


are less competent to discriminate to be com-
mending not God's goodness bestowed on men,
but his own merits ; and that thus you, who
know what construction to put on such state-
ments, would, through his regard for the infirmity
of others, be deprived of that which to you as a
brother ought to be imparted. This I would
have done already, and you would already be
reading my description of him, had not my
brother suddenly resolved to set out earlier than
we expected. For him I bespeak a welcome
from your heart and from your lips as kindly as
if your acquaintance with him was not beginning
now, but of as long standing as my own. For
if he does not shrink from laying himself open
to your heart, he will be in great measure, if not
completely, healed by your lips ; for I desire
him to be often made to hear the words of those
who cherish for their friends a higher love than
that which is of this world.

6. Even if Romanianus had not been going to
visit your Charity, I had resolved to recommend
to you by letter his son [Licentius], dear to me
as my own (whose name you will find also in
some of my books), in order that he may be
encouraged, exhorted, and instructed, not so
much by the sound of your voice, as by the
example of your spiritual strength. I desire!
earnestly, that while his life is yet in the green
blade, the tares may be turned into wheat, and
he may believe those who know by experience
the dangers to which he is eager to expose him-l'
self. From the poem of my young friend, and
my letter to him, your most benevolent and con
siderate wisdom may perceive my grief, fear, an
care on his account. I am not without hopi
that, by the Lord's favour, I may through youi
means be set free from such disquietude regard
ing him.

As you are now about to read much that 1
have written, your love will be much more gratej
fully esteemed by me, if, moved by compassioni
and judging impartially, you correct and reprov«|
whatever displeases you. For you are not on^
whose oil anointing my head would make mi
afraid. 3

The brethren, not those only who dwell witji
us, and those who, dwelling elsewhere, serv|
God in the same way as we do, but almost al
who are in Christ our warm friends, send yoi
salutations, along with the expression of thei
veneration and affectionate longing for you as
brother, as a saint, and as a man.-* I dare nc
ask ; but if you have any leisure from ecclesias
tical duties, you may see for what favour a
Africa, with myself, is thirsting.


I


3 The reference is to Ps. cxii. 5, the words of which, translate

from the LXX. version, are given in full in the succeeding letter. '

_ ■* This may approximate to a translation of the three titles in t,

original, " Germanitas, Beatitudo, Humanitas tua." '


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


251


LETTER XXVIII.
(a.d. 394 OR 395.)

TO JEROME, HIS MOST BELOVED LORD, AND
BROTHER AND FELLOW-PRESBYTER, WORTHY OF
BEING HONOURED AND EMBRACED WITH THE
SINCEREST AFFECTIONATE DEVOTION, AUGUSTIN
SENDS GREETING.'

Chap. i. — i . Never was the face of any one
more familiar to another, than the peaceful,
happy, and truly noble diligence of your studies
in the Lord has become to me. For although I
long greatly to be acquainted with you, I feel
that already my knowledge of you is deficient in
respect of nothing but a very small part of you,
. — namely, your personal appearance ; and even
as to this, I cannot deny that since my most
blessed brother Alypius (now invested with the
office of bishop, of which he was then truly
worthy) has seen you, and has on his return been
seen by me, it has been almost completely im-
printed on my mind by his report of you ; nay,
I may say that before his return, when he saw
you there, I was seeing you myself with his eyes.
For any one who knows us may say of him and
me, that in body only, and not in mind, we are
two, so great is the union of heart, so firm the
intimate friendship subsisting between us ; though
in merit we are not alike, for his is far above
mine. Seeing, therefore, that you love me, both
of old through the communion of spirit by which
we are knit to each other, and more recently
through what you know of me from the mouth
of my friend, I feel that it is not presumptuous
in me (as it would be in one wholly unknown to
you) to recommend to your brotherly esteem the
brother Profuturus, in whom we trust that the
happy omen of his name (Good-speed) may be
fulfilled through our efforts furthered after this
by your aid ; although, perhaps, it may be pre-
sumptuous on this ground, that he is so great a
man, that it would be much more fitting that I
should be commended to you by him, than he
by me. I ought perhaps to write no more, if I
were willing to content myself with the style of
a formal letter of introduction ; but my mind
overflows into conference with you, concerning
the studies with which we are occupied in Christ
Jesus our Lord, who is pleased to furnish us
largely through your love with many benefits, and


* [The letters to Jerome, and Jerome's replies, are among the
most mteresting and important in this correspondence, especially
those parts which relate to Jerome's revision of the Latin version of
the Bible, and his interpretation of Gal. ii. 11-14. See Letters 40,
71, 72, 73, 75, 81, 82, 172, 195, 202. Augustin was inferior to Jerome
in learning, especially as a linguist, but superior in Christian temper
and humility. Jerome's false interpretation of the dispute between
Paul and Peter at Antioch, which involved both apostles in hypocrisy,
offended Augustin's keener sense of veracity. He here protests
against it in this letter (ch. iii), and again in Letter 40, and thereby
provokes Jerome's irritable temper. His last letters to Augustin,
however, show sincere esteem and affection. — P. S.]


some helps by the way, in the path which He
has pointed out to His followers.

Chap. ii. — 2. We therefore, and with us all
that are devoted to study in the African churches,
beseech you not to refuse to devote care and
labour to the translation of the books of those
who have written in the Greek language most
able commentaries on our Scriptures. You may
thus put us also in possession of these men, and
especially of that one whose name you seem to
have singular pleasure in sounding forth in your
writings [Origen]. But I beseech you not to
devote your labour to the work of translating
into Latin the sacred canonical books, unless you
follow the method in which you have translated
Job, viz. with the addition of notes, to let it be
seen plainly what differences there are between
this version of yours and that of the LXX., whose
authority is worthy of highest esteem. For my
own part, I cannot sufficiently express my wonder
that anything should at this date be found in the
Hebrew mss. which escaped so many translators
perfectly acquainted with the language. I say
nothing of the LXX., regarding whose harmony
in mind and spirit, surpassing that which is found
in even one man, I dare not in any way pro-
nounce a decided opinion, except that in my '
judgment, beyond question, very high authority
must in this work of translation be conceded to
them. I am more perplexed by those translators
who, though enjoying the advantage of labour-
ing after the LXX. had completed their work,
and although well acquainted, as it is reported,
with the force of Hebrew words and phrases, and ]
with Hebrew syntax, have not only failed to agree '
among themselves, but have left many things
which, even after so long a time, still remain tfe
be discovered and brought to light. Now these j
' things were either obscure or plain : if they were
obscure, it is believed that you are as likely to
have been mistaken as the others ; if they were
plain, it is not believed that they [the LXX.] '
I could possibly have been mistaken. Having i
I stated the grounds of my perplexity, I appeal to i
your kindness to give me an answer regarding ;
this matter. i

Chap. iii. — 3. I have been reading also some \
writings, ascribed to you, on the Epistles of the :
Apostle Paul. In reading your exposition of
the Epistle to the Galatians, that passage came to
my hand in which the Apostle Peter is called!
back from a course of dangerous dissimulation.
To find there the defence of falsehood under-
taken, whether by you, a man of such weight, or
by any author (if it is the writing of another),
causes me, I must confess, great sorrow, until at
least those things which decide my opinion in i
the matter are refuted, if indeed they admit of '
refutation. For it seems to me that most dis- j
astrous consequences must follow upon our be-


252


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


lieving that anything false is found in the sacred
books : that is to say, that the men by whom the
Scripture has been given to us, and committed
to writing, did put down in these books anything
false. It is one question whether it may be at
any time the duty of a good man to deceive ;
but it is another question whether it can have
been the duty of a writer of Holy Scripture to
deceive : nay, it is not another question — it is
no question at all. For if you once admit into
such a high sanctuary of authority one false
statement as made in the way of duty,' there
will not be left a single sentence of those books
which, if appearing to any one difficult in prac-
tice or hard to believe, may not by the same
fatal rule be explained away, as a statement in
which, intentionally, and under a sense of duty,
the author declared what was not true.

4. For if the Apostle Paul did not speak the
truth when, finding fault with the Apostle Peter,
he said : " If thou, being a Jew, livest after the
manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why
compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the
Jews?" — if, indeed, Peter seemed to him to be
doing what was right, and if, notwithstanding,
he, in order to soothe troublesome opponents,
both said and wrote that Peter did what was
wrong ; ^ — if we say thus, what then shall be
our answer when perverse men such as he him-
self prophetically described arise, forbidding
marriage,^ if they defend themselves by saying
that, in all which the same apostle wrote in con-
firmation of the lawfulness of marriage,-* he was,
on account of men who, through love for their
wives, might become troublesome opponents.


declaring what was false, •


■ saymg


these things.


forsooth, not because he believed them, but be-
cause their opposition might thus be averted?
It is unnecessary to quote many parallel exam-
ples. For even things which pertain to the
praises of God might be represented as piously
intended falsehoods, written in order that love
for Him might be enkindled in men who were
slow of heart ; and thus nowhere in the sacred
books shall the authority of pure truth stand sure.
Do we not observe the great care with which
the same apostle commends the truth to us, when
he says : "And if Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain, and your faith is also vain : yea,
and we are found false witnesses of God ; be-
cause we have testified of God that He raised up
Christ ; whom He raised not up, if so be that
the dead rise not." 5 If any one said to him,
"Why are you so shocked by this falsehood,
when the thing which you have said, even if it
were false, tends very greatly to the glory of

' Officiosu>n mendacium.

2 Gal. ii. 11-14.

3 I Tim. iv. 3.

* I Cor. vii. 10-16.
5 I Cor. XV. 14, 15.


God?" would he not, abhorring the madness of
such a man, with every word and sign which
could express his feelings, open clearly the secret
depths of his own heart, protesting that to speak
well of a falsehood uttered on behalf of God,
was a crime not less, perhaps even greater, than
to speak ill of the truth concerning Him? We
must therefore be careful to secure, in order to
our knowledge of the divine Scriptures, the
guidance only of such a man as is imbued with
a high reverence for the sacred books, and a
profound persuasion of their truth, preventing
him from flattering himself in any part of them
with the hypothesis of a statement being made
not because it was true, but because it was ex-
pedient, and making him rather pass by what he
does not understand, than set up his own feelings
above that truth. For, truly, when he pronounces
anything to be untrue, he demands that he be
believed in preference, and endeavours to shake
our confidence in the authority of the divine
Scriptures.

5 . For my part, I would devote all the strength
which the Lord grants me, to show that every
one of those texts which are wont to be quoted
in defence of the expediency of falsehood ought
to be otherwise understood, in order that every-
where the sure truth of these passages themselves
may be consistently maintained. For as state-
ments adduced in evidence must not be false,
neither ought they to favour falsehood. This,
however, I leave to your own judgment. For if
you apply more thorough attention to the pas-
sage, perhaps you will see it much more readily
than I have done. To this more careful study
that piety will move you, by which you discern
that the authority of the divine Scriptures be-
comes unsettled (so that every one may believe
what he wishes, and reject what he does not
wish) if this be once admitted, that the men by
whom these things have been delivered unto us,
could in their writings state some things which
were not true, from considerations of duty ; ^
unless, perchance, you propose to furnish us with
certain rules by which we may know when a false-
hood might or might not become a duty. If this
can be done, I beg you to set forth these rules
with reasonings which may be neither equivocal
nor precarious ; and I beseech you by our Lord,
in whom Truth was incarnate, not to consider
me burdensome or presumptuous in making this
request. For a mistake of mine which is in the
interest of truth cannot deserve great blame, if
indeed it deserves blame at all, when it is possi-
ble for you to use truth in the interest of false-
hood without doing wrong.

Chap. iv. — 6. Of many other things I would
wish to discourse with your most ingenuous heart,


6 Aliqua officiose mentiri.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


253-1


I


and to take counsel with you concerning Chris-
tian studies ; but this desire could not be satis-
fied within the limits of any letter. I may do
this more fully by means of the brother bearing
this letter, whom I rejoice in sending to share
and prolit by your sweet and useful conversation.
Nevertheless, although I do not reckon myself
superior in any respect to him, even he may take
less from you than I would desire ; and he will
excuse my saying so, for I confess myself to have
more room for receiving from you than he has.
I see his mind to be already more fully stored,
in which unquestionably he excels me. There-
fore, when he returns, as I trust he may happily
do by God's blessing, and when I become a
sharer in all with which his heart has been richly
furnished by you, there will still be a conscious-
ness of void unsatisfied in me, and a longing for
personal fellowship with you. Hence of the two j
I shall be the poorer, and he the richer, then as
now. This brother carries with him some of my !
writings, which if you condescend to read, I
implore you to review them with candid and
brotherly strictness. For the words of Scripture,
" The righteous shall correct me in compassion, |
and reprove me ; but the oil of the sinner shall <
not anoint my head," ' I understand to mean I
that he is the truer friend who by his censure ;
heals me, than the one who by flattery anoints |
my head. I find the greatest difficulty in exer- 1
cising a right judgment when I read over what I
have written, being either too cautious or too
rash. For I sometimes see my own faults, but I
prefer to hear them reproved by those who are i
better able to judge than I am ; lest after I have,
perhaps justly, charged myself with error, I begin
again to flatter myself, and think that my censure
has arisen from an undue mistrust of my own
judgment.

LETTER XXIX.
(a-d. 395.)

a letter from the presbyter of the district
of hippo to alypius the bishop of thagaste,
concerning the anniversary of the birth
of leontius,^ formerly bishop of hippo.

I. In the absence of brother Macharius, I have
not been able to write anything definite concern-
ing a matter about which I could not feel other-
wise than anxious : it is said, however, that he
will soon return, and whatever can be with God's
help done in the matter shall be done. Although
also our brethren, citizens of your town, who were
with us, might sufficiently assure you of our soli-
citude on their behalf when they returned, never-

' Ps. cxii. 5, translated from the Septuagint.

^ Leontius was Bishop of Hippo in the latter part of the second
century. He built a church which was called after him, and in which
some of the sermons of Augustin were delivered.


theless the thing which the Lord has granted to me\
is one worthy to be the subject of that epistolary:
intercourse which ministers so much to the com-i
fort of us both ; it is, moreover, a thing in thel
obtaining of which I believe that I have beem
greatly assisted by your own solicitude regarding^
it, seeing that it could not but constrain you tO'
intercession on our behalf.

2. Therefore let me not fail to relate to your,
Charity what has taken place ; so that, as youj
joined us in pouring out prayers for this mercyi
before it was obtained, you may now join us inj
rendering thanks for it after it has been received.;
When I was informed after your departure that'
some were becoming openly violent, and declar-,
ing that they could not submit to the prohibi-]
tion (intimated while you were here) of that'
feast which they call Lfetitia, vainly attempdng"
to disguise their revels under a fair name, it hap-'
pened most opportunely for me, by the hidder^i
fore-ordination of the Almighty God, that on the;
fourth holy day that chapter of the Gospel fell"
to be expounded in ordinary course, in which^
the words occur : " Give not that which is holy:
unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before^
swine." 3 I discoursed therefore concerning dogs*
and swine in such a way as to compel those who!
clamour with obstinate barking against the divine;
precepts, and who are given up to the abomina-J
tions of carnal pleasures, to blush for shame ; and'
followed it up by saying, that they might plainlyj
see how criminal it was to do, under the name^
of religion, within the walls of the church, that?
which, if it were practised by them in their own-.
houses, would make it necessary for them to be^
debarred from that which is holy, and from thes
privileges which are the pearls of the Church. ;

3. Although these words were well received,;
nevertheless, as few had attended the meeting,]
all had not been done which so great an emer-J
gency required. When, however, this discoursd
was, according to the ability and zeal of each^'
made known abroad by those who had heard it^i
it found many opponents. But when the morn-j
ing of Quadragesima came round, and a great
multitude had assembled at the hour of exposi-J
tion of Scripture, that passage in the Gospel was,
read in which our Lord said, concerning thos^
sellers who were driven out of the temple, and;
the tables of the money-changers which He had,
overthrown, that the house of His Father hadj
been made a den of thieves instead of a housei
of prayer.-* After awakening their attention by;
bringing forward the subject of immoderate in^i
dulgence in wine, I myself also read this chapter,!
and added to it an argument to prove with how|
much greater anger and vehemence our Lordj

would cast forth drunken revels, which are every-!

[ ■' I

3 Matt. vii. 6.

4 Matt. xxi. 12, I


254


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


where disgraceful, from that temple from which
He thus drove out merchandise lawful elsewhere,
especially when the things sold were those re-
quired for the sacrifices appointed in that dis-
pensation ; and I asked them whether they
regarded a place occupied by men selling what
was necessary, or one used by men drinking to
excess, as bearing the greater resemblance to a
den of thieves.

4. Moreover, as passages of Scripture which
I had prepared were held ready to be put into
my hands, I went on to say that the Jewish
nation, with all its lack of spirituality in religion,
never held feasts, even temperate feasts, much
less feasts disgraced by intemperance, in their
temple, in which at that time the body and
blood of the Lord were not yet offered, and that
in history they are not found to have been ex-
cited by wine on any public occasion bearing
the name of worship, except when they held
a feast before the idol which they had made.'
While I said these things I took the manuscript
from the attendant, and read that whole passage.
Reminding them of the words of the apostle,
who says, in order to distinguish Christians from
the obdurate Jews, that they are his epistle writ-
ten, not on tables of stone, but on the fleshly
tables of the heart,^ I asked further, with the
deepest sorrow, how it was that, although Moses
the servant of God broke both the tables of
stone because of these rulers of Israel, I could
not break the hearts of those who, though men
of the New Testament dispensation, were desir-
ing in their celebration of saints' days to repeat
often the public perpetration of excesses of which
the people of the Old Testament economy were
guilty only once, and that in an act of idolatry.

5. Having then given back the manuscript of
Exodus, I proceeded to enlarge, so far as my
time permitted, on the crime of drunkenness,
and took up the writings of the Apostle Paul,
and showed among what sins it is classed by
him, reading the text, " If any man that is called
a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an
idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extor-
tioner ; with such an one (ye ought) not even to
eat ; " ^ pathetically reminding them how great
is our danger in eating with those who are guilty
of intemperance even in their own houses. I
read also what is added, a little further on, in
the same epistle : " Be not deceived : neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with man-
kind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards,
nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
kingdom of God. And such were some of you :
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye

' Ex. xxxii. 6.
^ 2 Cor. iii. 3.
3 I Cor. V. II.


are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the Sjjirit of our God." + After reading these,
I charged them to consider how believers could
hear these words, " but ye are washed," if they
still tolerated in their own hearts — that is, in
God's inner temple — the abominations of such
lusts as these against which the kingdom of
heaven is shut. Then I went on to that pas-
sage : " When ye come together into one place,
this is not to eat the Lord's supper : for in eating,
every one taketh before other his own supper ;
and one is hungry, and another is drunken.
What ! have ye not houses to eat and to drink
in, or despise ye the church of God? "5 After
reading which, I more especially begged them
to remark that not even innocent and temperate
feasts were permitted in the church : for the
apostle said not, " Have ye not houses of your
own in which to be drunken?" — as if it was
drunkenness alone which was unlawful in the
church ; but, " Have ye not houses to eat and
to drink in?" — things lawful in themselves, but
not lawful in the church, inasmuch as men have
their own houses in which they may be recruited
by necessary food : whereas now, by the corrup-
tion of the times and the relaxation of morals,
we have been brought so low, that, no longer
insisting upon sobriety in the houses of men, all
that we venture to demand is, that the realm
of tolerated excess be restricted to their own
homes.

6. I reminded them also of a passage in the
Gospel which I had expounded the day before,
in which it is said of the false prophets : " Ye
shall know them by their fruits." ^ I also bade
them remember that in that place our works are
signified by the word fruits. Then I asked
among what kind of fruits drunkenness was
named, and read that passage in the Epistle to
the Galatians : " Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these : adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, sedi-
tions, heresies, envyings, murder, drunkenness,
revellings, and such like ; of the which I tell
you before, as I have told you in time past, that
they which do such things shall not inherit the
kingdom of God." ^ After these words, I asked
how, when God has commanded that Christians
be known by their fruits, we could be known as
Christians by this fruit of drunkenness ? I added
also, that we must read what follows there : " But
the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance."^ And I pled with them to con-
sider how shameful and lamentable it would be,

* I Cor. vi. 9-1 1.

5 I Cor. xi. 20-22.

6 Matt. vii. 16.

7 Gal. V. ig-2i.

8 Gal. V. 22, 23,


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


255


if, not content with living at home in the prac-
tice of these works of the flesh, they even wished
by them, forsooth, to honour the church, and to
fill the whole area of so large a place of wor-
ship, if they were permitted, with crowds of
revellers and drunkards : and yet would not
present to God those fruits of the Spirit which,
by the authority of Scripture, and by my groans,
they were called to yield, and by the offering of
which they would most suitably celebrate the
saints' days.

7. This being finished, 1 returned the manu-
script; and being asked to speak,' I set before
their eyes with all my might, as the danger itself
constrained me, and as the Lord was pleased to
give strength, the danger shared by them who
were committed to my care, and by me, who
must give account to the Chief Shepherd, and
implored them by His humiliation, by the un-
paralleled insults, the buffetings and spitting on
the face which He endured, by His pierced
hands and crown of thorns, and by His cross
and blood, to have pity on me at least, if they
were displeased with themselves, and to consider
the inexpressible love cherished towards me by
the aged and venerable Valerius, who had not
scrupled to assign to me for their sakes the
perilous burden of expounding to them the word
of truth, and had often told thern that in my
here his prayers were answered ; not
surely, that I had come to share or to
behold the death of our hearers, but rejoicing
that I had come to share his labours for their
eternal Hfe. In conclusion, I told them that I
was resolved to trust in Him who cannot lie,
and who has given us a promise by the mouth
of the prophet, saying of our Lord Jesus Christ,
" If His children forsake my law, and walk not
in my judgments ; if they break my statutes, and
keep not my commandments ; then will I visit
their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity
with stripes : nevertheless my loving-kindness
will I not utterly take from Him." ^ I declared,
therefore, that I put my trust in Him, that if
they despised the weighty words which had now
been read and spoken to them. He would visit
them with the rod and with stripes, and not
leave them to be condemned with the world.
In this appeal I put forth all the power in
thought and utterance which, in an emergency
so great and hazardous, our Saviour and Ruler
was pleased to supply. I did not move them
to weep by first weeping myself ; but while these
things were being spoken, I own that, moved by
the tears which they began to shed, I myself
could not refrain from following their example.
And when we had thus wept together, I con-
cluded my sermon with full persuasion that they

' Imperatd oratione.
^ Ps. Ixxxix. 30-33.


commg
rejoicing,


would be restrained by it from the abuses de-
nounced.

8. Next morning, however, when the day
dawned, which so many were accustomed to
devote to excess in eating and drinking, I re-
ceived notice that some, even of those who were
present when I preached, had not yet desisted
from complaint, and that so great was the power
of detestable custom with them, that, using no
other argument, they asked, " Wherefore is this
now prohibited ? Were they not Christians who
in former times did not interfere with this prac-
tice? " On hearing this, I knew not what more
powerful means for influencing them I could de-
vise ; but resolved, in the event of their judging
it preper to persevere, that after reading in
Ezekiel's prophecy that the watchman has de-
livered his own soul if he has given warning,
even though the persons warned refuse to give
heed to him, I would shake my garments and
depart. But then the Lord showed me that He
leaves us not alone, and taught me how He en-
courages us to trust Him ; for before the time
at which I had to ascend the pulpit,^ the very
persons of whose complaint against interference
with long-established custom I had heard came
to me. Receiving them kindly, I by a few
words brought them round to a right opinion ;
and when it came to the time for my discourse,
having laid aside the lecture which I had pre-
pared as now unnecessary, I said a few things
concerning the question mentioned above,
"Wherefore noiv prohibit this custom?" saying
that to those who might propose it the briefest
and best answer would be this : " Let us now at
last put down what ought to have been earlier
prohibited."

9. Lest, however, any slight should seem to be
put by us on those who, before our time, either
tolerated or did not dare to put down such mani-
fest excesses of an undisciphned multitude, I
explained to them the circumstances out of
which this custom seems to have necessarily
risen in the Church, — namely, that when, in ',
the peace which came after such numerous and
violent persecutions, crowds of heathen who
wished to assume the Christian religion were
kept back, because, having been accustomed to
celebrate the feasts connected with their wor-
ship of idols in revelling and drunkenness, they
could not easily refrain from pleasures so hurt-
ful and so habitual, it had seemed good to our
ancestors, making for the time a concession to
this infirmity, to permit them to celebrate, in- 1
stead of the festivals which they renounced,
other feasts in honour of the holy martyrs, which
were observed, not as before with a profane
design, but with similar self-indulgence. I

3 Exhedra.


s


256


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


added that now upon them, as persons bound
together in the name of Christ, and submissive
to the yoke of His august authority, the whole-
some restraints of sobriety were laid — restraints
with which the honour and fear due to Him who
appointed them should move them to comply —
and that therefore the time had now come in
which all who did not dare to cast off the
Christian profession should begin to walk ac-
cording to Christ's will ; and being now con-
firmed Christians, should reject those concessions
to infirmity which were made only for a time in
order to their becoming such.

lo. I then exhorted them to imitate the ex-
ample of the churches beyond the sea, in some
of which these practices had never been toler-
ated, wliile in others they had been already put
down by the people complying with the counsel
of good ecclesiastical rulers ; and as the ex-
amples of daily excess in the use of wine in the
church of the blessed Apostle Peter were brought
forward in defence of the practice, I said in the
first place, that I had heard that these excesses
had been often forbidden, but because the place
was at a distance from the bishop's control, and
because in such a city the multitude of carnally-
minded persons was great, the foreigners espe-
cially, of whom there is a constant influx, clinging
to that practice with an obstinacy proportioned
to their ignorance, the suppression of so great
an evil had not yet been possible. If, however,
I continued, we would honour the Apostle Peter,
we ought to hear his words, and look much more
to the epistles by which his mind is made knowai
to us, than to the place of worship, by which it
is not made known ; and immediately taking the
manuscript, I read his own words : " Forasmuch
then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh,
arm yourselves likewise with the same mind :
for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased
from sin ; that he no longer should live the rest
of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but
to the will of God. For the time past of our
life may suffice us to have wrought the will of
the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness,
lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings,
and abominable idolatries." ' After this, when
I saw that all were with one consent turning to
a right mind, and renouncing the custom against
which I had protested, I exhorted them to as-
semble at noon for the reading of God's word
and singing of psalms ; stating that we had re-
solved thus to celebrate the festival in a way
imuch more accordant with purity and piety ;
and that, by the number of worshippers who
should assemble for this purpose, it would plain-
ly appear who were guided by reason, and who
were the slaves of appetite. With these words
the discourse concluded.


^ 1 Pet. iv. 1-3.


11. In the afternoon a greater number assem-
bled than in the forenoon, and there was read-
ing and praise alternately up to the hour at
which I went out in company with the bishop ;
and after our coming two psalms were read.
Then the old man [Valerius] constrained me by
his express command to say something to the
people ; from which I would rather have been
excused, as I was longing for the close of the
anxieties of the day. I delivered a short dis-
course in order to express our gratitude to God.
And as we heard the noise of the feasting, which
was going on as usual in the church of the here-
tics, who still prolonged their revelry while we
were so differently engaged, I remarked that the
beauty of day is enhanced by contrast with the
night, and that when anything black is near,
the purity of white is the more pleasing ; and
that, in like manner, our meeting for a spiritual
feast might perhaps have been somewhat less
sweet to us, but for the contrast of the carnal
excesses in which the others indulged ; and I
exhorted them to desire eagerly such feasts as
we then enjoyed, if they had tasted the good-
ness of the Lord. At the same time, I said
that those may well be afraid who seek anything
which shall one day be destroyed as the chief
object of their desire, seeing that every one
shares the portion of that which he worships ; a
warning expressly given by the apostle to such,
when he says of them their " god is their belly," ^
inasmuch as he has elsewhere said, " Meats for
the belly, and the belly for meats ; but God shall
destroy both it and them." ^ I added that it is
our duty to seek that which is imperishable,
which, far removed from carnal aftections, is
obtained through sanctification of the spirit ;
and when those things which the Lord was
pleased to suggest to me had been spoken on
this subject as the occasion required, the daily
evening exercises of worship were performed ;
and when with the bishop I retired from the
church, the brethren said a hymn there, a con-
siderable multitude remaining in the church,
and engaging in praise '' even till daylight failed.

12. I have thus related as concisely as I could
that which I am sure you longed to hear. Pray
that God may be pleased to protect our efforts
from giving offence or provoking odium in any
way. In the tranquil prosperity which you en-
joy we do with lively warmth of affection par-
ticipate in no small measure, when tidings so
frequently reach us of the gifts possessed by the
highly spiritual church of Thagaste. The ship
bringing our brethren has not yet arrived. At
Hasna, where our brother Argentius is presby-
ter, the Circumcelliones, entering our church,


2 Phil. iii. 19.

3 I Cor. vi. 13.
* Psallente.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


257


demolished the altar. The case is now in
process of trial ; and we earnestly ask your
prayers that it may be decided in a peaceful
way, and as becomes the Catholic Church, so as
to silence the tongues of turbulent heretics. I
have sen. a letter to the Asiarch.'

Brethren most blessed, may ye persevere in
the Lord, and remember us. Amen.

LETTER XXX.

(A.D. 396.)

This letter of Paulinus was written before receiving a
reply to his former letter, No. 27, p. 248.

TO AUGUSTIN, OUR LORD AND HOLY AND BELOVED
BROTHER, PAULINUS AND THERASIA, SINNERS,
SEND GREETING.

1. My beloved brother in Christ the Lord,
having through your holy and pious works come
to know you without your knowledge, and to see
you though absent long ago, my mind embraced
vou with unreserved affection, and I hastened to
secure the gratification of hearing you through
familiar brotherly exchange of letters. I believe
also that by the Lord's hand and favour my
letter has reached you ; but as the youth whom,
before winter, we had sent to salute you and
others equally loved in God's name, has not
returned, we could no longer either put off what
we feel to be our duty, or restrain the vehemence
of our desire to hear from you. If, then, my
former letter has been found worthy to reach
you, this is the second ; if, however, it was not
so fortunate as to come to your hand, accept
this as the first.

2. But, my brother, judging all things as a
spiritual man, do not estimate our love to you
by the duty which we render, or the frequency
of our letters. For the Lord, who everywhere,
as one and the same, worketh His love in His
own, is witness that, from the time when, by the
kindness of the venerable bishops Aurelius and
Alypius, we came to know you through your
writings against the Manich?eans, love for you
has taken such a place in us, that we seemed
not so much to be acquiring a new friendship as
reviving an old affection. Now at length we
address you in writing; and though we are
novices in expressing, we are not novices in
feehng love to you ; and by communion of the

' A magistrate who was also charged with the affairs pertaining
to the protection of religion The title belonged primarily to those
who in the province of Asia had charge of the games. — Codex
Tkeodosianus, xv. 9.


spirit, which is the inner man, we are as it were
acquainted with you. Nor is it strange that
though distant we are near, though unknown we
are well known to each other ; for we are mem-
bers of one body, having one Head, enjoying the
effusion of the same grace, hving by the same
bread, walking in the same way, and dwelling in
the same home. In short, in all that makes up
our being, — in the whole faith and hope by
which we stand in the present life, or labour for
that which is to come, — we are both in the
spirit and in the body of Christ so united, that
if we fell from this union we would cease to be.
3. How small a thing, therefore, is that which
our bodily separation denies to us ! — for it is
nothing more than one of those fruits that gratify
the eyes, which are occupied only with the things
of time. And yet, perhaps, we should not num-
ber this pleasure which in the body we enjoy
among the blessings which are only in time
the portion of spiritual men, to whose bodies the
resurrection will impart immortality ; as we,
though in ourselves unworthy, are bold to expect,
through the merit of Christ and the mercy of
God the Father. Wherefore I pray that the
grace of God by our Lord Jesus Christ may
grant unto us this favour too, that we may yet
see your face. Not only would this bring great
gratification to our desires ; but by it illumination
would be brought to our minds, and our poverty
would be enriched by your abundance. This
indeed you may grant to us even while we are
absent from you, especially on the present occa-
sion, through our sons Romanus and Agilis,
beloved and most dear to us in the Lord (whom
as our second selves we commend to you), when
they return to us in the Lord's name, after ful-
filling the labour of love in which they are en-
gaged ; in which work we beg that they may
especially enjoy the goodwill of your Charity.
For you know what high rewards the Most High
promises to the brother who gives his brother
help. If you are pleased to impart to me any
gift of the grace that has been bestowed on you,
you may safely do it through them ; for, believe
me, they are of one heart and of one mind with
us in the Lord. May the grace of God always
abide as it is with you, O brother beloved, ven-
erable, most dear, and longed for in Christ the
Lord ! Salute on our behalf all the saints in
Christ who are with you, for doubtless such
attach themselves to your fellowship ; commend
us to them all, that they may, along with your-
self, remember us in prayer.


258


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


SECOND DIVISION.


LETTERS WHICH WERE WRITTEN BV AUGUSTIN AFTER HIS BECOMIXG BISHOP OF HIPPO, AND
BEFORE THE CONFERENCE HELD WITH THE DONATISTS AT CARTHAGE, AND THE DISCOVERY
OF THE HERESY OF PELAGIUS IN AFRICA (A.D. 396-4 1 O).


LETTER XXXI.

(A.D. 396.)

TO BROTHER PAULINUS AND TO SISTER THERASIA,
MOST BELOVED AND SINCERE, TRULY MOST
BLESSED AND MOST EMINENT FOR THE VERY
ABUNDANT GRACE OF GOD BESTOWED ON THEM,
AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING IN THE LORD.

1. Although in my longing to be without
delay near you in one sense, while still remote
in another, I wished much that what I wrote in
answer to your former letter (if, indeed, any
letter of mine deserves to be called an answer
to yours) should go with all possible expedition
to your Grace,' my delay has brought me the
advantage of a second letter from you. The
Lord is good, who often withholds what we de-
sire, that He may add to it what we would pre-
fer. For it is one pleasure to me that you will
write me on receiving my letter, and it is an-
other that, through not receiving it at once, you
have written now. The joy which I have felt in
reading this letter would have been lost to me
if my letter to your Holiness had been quickly
conveyed to you, as I intended and earnesdy
desired. But now, to have this letter, and to
expect a reply to my own, multiplies my satis-
faction. The blame of the delay cannot be laid
to my charge ; and the Lord, in His more abun-
dant kindness, has done that which He judged
to be more conducive to my happiness.

2. We welcomed with great gladness in the
Lord the holy brothers Romanus and Agilis,
who were, so to speak, an additional letter from
you, capable of hearing and answering our voices,
whereby most agreeably your presence was in
part enjoyed by us, although only to make us
long the more eagerly to see you. It would be
at all times and in every way impossible for you
to give, and unreasonable for us to ask, as much
information from you concerning yourself by
letter as we received from them by word of
mouth. There was manifest also in them (what
no paper could convey) such delight in telling
us of you, that by their very countenance and
eyes while they spoke, we could with unspeak-
able joy read you written on their hearts. More-
over, a sheet of paper, of whatever kind it be,
and however excellent the things written upon


* Charitas.


it may be, enjoys no benefit itself from what it
contains, though it may be unfolded with great
benefit to others ; but, in reading this letter of
yours — namely, the minds of these brethren —
when conversing with them, we found that the
blessedness of those upon whom you had written
was manifestly proportioned to the fulness with
which they had been written upon by you. In
order, therefore, to attain to the same blessed-
ness, we transcribed in our own hearts what was
written in theirs, by most eager questioning as to
everything concerning you.

3. Notwithstanding all this, it is with deep
regret that we consent to their so soon leaving
us, even to return to you. For observe, I be-
seech you, the conflicting emotions by which we
are agitated. Our obligation to let them go
without delay was increased according to the
vehemence of their desire to obey you ; but the
greater the vehemence of this desire in them,
the more completely did they set you forth
as almost present with us, because they let us
see how tender your affections are. Therefore
our reluctance to let them go increased with our
sense of the reasonableness of their urgency to
be permitted to go. Oh insupportable trial,
were it not that by such partings we are not,
after all, separated from each other, — were it
not that we are " members of one body, having
one Head, enjoying the effusion of the same
grace, living by the same bread, walking in the
same way, and dwelling in the same home !"^
You recognise these words, I suppose, as quoted
from your own letter ; and why should not I also
use them } Why should they be yours any more
than mine, seeing that, inasmuch as they are
true, they proceed from communion with the
same head ? And in so far as they contain some-
thing that has been specially given to you, I hav(
so loved them the more on that account, tha
they have taken possession of the way leadinj^
through my breast, and would suffer no words to
pass from my heart to my tongue until they wen
first, with the priority which is due to them a'
yours. My brother and sister, holy and belovei
in God, members of the same body with u;
who could doubt that we are animated by on
spirit, except those who are strangers to ihv
affection by which we are bound to each other
4. Yet I am curious to know whether yo


2 Letter XXX. p. 257.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


259


bear with more patience and ease than I do
this bodily separation. If it be so, I do not,
I confess, take any pleasure in your fortitude
in this respect, unless perhaps because of its
reasonableness, seeing that I confess myself
much less worthy of your affectionate longing
than you are of mine. At all events, if I found
in myself a power of bearing your absence pa-
tiently, this would displease me, because it would
make me relax my efforts to see you ; and what
could be more absurd than to be made indolent
by power of endurance ? But I beg to acquaint
your Charity with the ecclesiastical duties by
which I am kept at home, inasmuch as the
blessed father Valerius (who with me salutes
you, and thirsts for you with a vehemence oft
which you will hear from our brethren), not
content with having me as his presbyter, has '
insisted upon adding the greater burden of shar- '
ing the episcopate with him. This office I was 1
afraid to decline, being persuaded, through the ]
love of Valerius and the importunity of the peo- !
pie, that it was the Lord's will, and being pre-
cluded from excusing myself on other grounds
by some precedents of similar appointments.
The yoke of Christ, it is true, is in itself easy,
and His burden light; ' yet, through my per\-er-
sity and infirmity, I may find the yoke vexatious
and the burden heavy in some degree ; and I
cannot tell how much more easy and light my
yoke and burden would become if I were com-
forted by a visit from you, who live, as I am
informed, more disengaged and free from such
cares.^ I therefore feel warranted in asking, '
nay, demanding and imploring you to conde- 1
scend to come over into Africa, which is more
oppressed with thirst for men such as you are '
I than even by the well-known aridity of her soil.^
5 . God knoweth that I long for your visiting
this country, not merely to gratify my own desire,
nor merely on account of those who through
me, or by public report, have heard of your
pious resolution ; •♦ I long for it for the sake of
others also who either have not heard, or, hear-
ing, have not beUeved the fame of your piety,
but who might be constrained to love excellence
of which they could then be no longer in igno-
rance or doubt. For although the perseverance
and purity of your compassionate benevolence
is good, more is required of you ; namely, " Let
your light so shine before men, that they may
behold your good works, and may glorify your
Father which is in heaven." s The fishermen
of Galilee found pleasure not only in leaving

' Matt. xi. 30.
_ ^ Paulinus was then at Nola, having gone thither from Barcelona
in A.D. 393 or 394. He became Bishop of Nola in 409.

' Npbilitate siccitatis.

* This refers to the voluntary poverty which Paulinus and The-
rasia, though of high rank and great wealth, embraced, selling iill
that they had in order to give to the poor.

5 Matt. V. 16.


their ships and their nets at the Lord's com-
mand, but also in declaring that they had left
all and followed Him.^ And truly he despises
all who despises not only all that he was able,
but also all that he was desirous to possess.
\V'hat may have been desired is seen only by
the eyes of God ; what was actually possessed
is seen also by the eyes of men. Moreover,
when things trivial and earthly are loved by us,
we are somehow more firmly wedded to what
we have than to what we desire to have. For
whence was it that he who sought from the
Lord counsel as to the way of eternal life, went
away sorrowful upon hearing that, if he would
be perfect, he must sell all, and distribute to
the poor, and have treasure in heaven, unless
because, as the Gospel tells us, he had great
possessions ? 7 For it is one thing to forbear
from appropriating what is wanting to us ; it is
another thing to rend away that which has be-
come a part of ourselves : the former action is
like declining food, the latter is like cutting off
a limb. How great and how full of wonder is
the joy with which Christian charity beholds in
our day a sacrifice cheerfully made in obedi-
ence to the Gospel of Christ, which that rich
man grieved and refused to make at the bidding
of Christ Himself!

6. Although language fails to express that
which my heart has conceived and labours to
utter, nevertheless, since you perceive with your
discernment and piety that the glory of this is
not yours, that is to say, not of man, but the glory
of the Lord in you (for you yourselves are most
carefully on your guard against your Adversary,
and most devoutly strive to be found as learners
of Christ, meek and lowly in heart ; and, indeed,
it were better with humility to retain than with
pride to renounce this world's wealth) ; — since,
I say, you are aware that the glory here is not
yours, but the Lord's, you see how weak and in-
adequate are the things which I have spoken.
For I have been speaking of the praises of Christ,
a theme transcending the tongue of angels. We
long to see this glory of Christ brought near to
the eyes of our people ; that in you, united in
the bonds of wedlock, there may be given to
both sexes an example of the way in which pride
must be trodden under foot, and perfection hope-
fully pursued. I know not any way in which you
could give greater proof of your benevolence,
than in resolving to be not less willing to permit
your worth to be seen, than you are zealous to
acquire and retain it.

7. I recommend to your kindness and charity
this boy Vetustinus, whose case might draw forth
the sympathy even of those who are not reli-
gious : the causes of his affliction and of his leav-

* Matt. xi.\. 27.

' Luke xviii. 22, 23.


26o


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


ing his country you will hear from his own lips.
As to his pious resolution — his promise, namely,
to devote himself to the ser\'ice of God — it will
be more decisively known after some time has
elapsed, when his strength has been confirmed,
and his present fear is removed. Perceiving the
warmth of your love for me, and encouraged
thereby to believe that you will not grudge the
labour of reading what I have written, I send to
your Holiness and Charity three books : would
that the size of the volumes were an index of the
completeness of the discussion of so great a sub-
ject ; for the question of free-will is handled in
them ! I know that these books, or at least some
of them, are not in the possession of our brother
Romanianus ; but almost everything which I have
been able for the benefit of any readers to write
is, as I have intimated, accessible to your perusal
through him, because of your love to me, although
I did not charge him to carry them to you. For
he already had them all, and was carrying them
with him : moreover, it was by him that my an-
swer to your first letter was sent. I suppose that
your Holiness has already discovered, by that
spiritual sagacity which the Lord has given you,
how much that man bears in his soul of what is
good, and how far he still comes short through
infirmity. In the letter sent through him you
have, as I trust, read with what anxiety I com-
mended himself and his son to your sympathy
and love, as well as how close is the bond by
which they are united to me. May the Lord
build them up by your means ! This must be
asked from Him rather than from you, for I know
how much it is already your desire.

8. I have heard from the brethren that you
are writing a treatise against the Pagans : if we
have any claim on your heart, send it at once to
us to read. For your heart is such an oracle of
divine truth, that we expect from it answers which
shall satisfactorily and clearly decide the most
prolix debates. I understand that your Holiness
has the books of the most blessed father ' Am-
brose, of which I long greatly to see those which,
with much care and at great length, he has writ-
ten against some most ignorant and pretentious
men, who affirm that our Lord was instructed by
the writings of Plato.^

9. Our most blessed brother Severus, formerly
of our community, now president ^ of the church
in Milevis, and well known by the brethren in
that city, joins me in respectful salutation to your
Holiness. The brethren also who are with me
serving the Lord salute you as warmly as they
long to see you : they long for you as much as
they love you ; and they love you as your emi-
nent goodness merits. The loaf which we send


' Beatissimi papa.

2 These books of Ambrose are lost.

3 Antistcs.


you will become more rich as a blessing through
the love with which your kindness receives it.
May the Lord keep you for ever from this gener-
ation,* my brother and sister most beloved and
sincere, truly benevolent, and most eminently
endowed with abundant grace from the Lord.

LETTER XXXn.

This letter from Paulinus to Romanianus and Licen-
tius expresses the satisfaction with which he heard of the
promotion of Augustin to the episcopate, and conveys
both in prose and in verse excellent counsels to Licen-
tius: it is one which in this selection may without loss
be omitted.

LETTER XXXHL

(a.d. 396.)

to proculeianus, my lord, honourable and
most beloved, augustin sends greeting.

1. The titles prefixed to this letter I need not
defend or explain at any length to you, though
they may give offence to the vain prejudices of
ignorant men. For I rightly address you as lord,
seeing that we are both seeking to deliver each
other froin error, although to some it may seem
uncertain which of us is in error before the mat-
ter has been fully debated ; and therefore we are
mutually serviiig one another, if we sincerely
labour that we may both be delivered from the
perversity of discord. That I labour to do this
with a sincere heart, and with the fear and trem-
bling of Christian humility, is not perhaps to
most men manifest, but is seen by Him to whom
all hearts are open. What I without hesitation
esteem honourable in you, you readily perceive.
For I do not esteem worthy of any honour the
error of schism, from which I desire to have all
men delivered, so far as is within my power ; but
yourself I do not for a moment hesitate to regard
as worthy of honour, chiefly because you are knit
to me in the bonds of a common humanity, and
because there are conspicuous in you some indi-
cations of a more gentle disposition, by which I
am encouraged to hope that you may readily
embrace the truth when it has been demonstrated
to you. As for my love to you, I owe not less
than He commanded who so loved us as to bear
the shame of the cross for our sakes.

2. Be not, however, surprised that I have so
long forborne from addressing your Benevolence ;
for I did not think that your views were such as
were with great joy declared to me by brother
Evodius, whose testimony I cannot but believe.
For he tells me that, when you met accidentally I
at the same house, and conversation began be- ,
tween you concerning our hope, that is to say,
the inheritance of Christ, you were kindly pleased j

■♦ See Ps. xii. 7.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


261


to say that you were willing to have a conference
with me in the presence of good men. I am
truly glad that you have condescended to make
this proposal : and I can in no wise forego so
important an opportunity, given by your kind-
ness, of using whatever strength the Lord may
be pleased to give me in considering and debat-
ing with you what has been the cause, or source,
or reason of a division so lamentable and deplor-
able in that Church of Christ to which He said :
"Peace I give you, my peace I leave unto you." '
3. I heard from the brother aforesaid that you
had complained of his having said something in
answer to you in an insulting manner ; but, I
pray you, do not regard it as an insult, for I am
sure it did not proceed from an overbearing spirit,
as I know my brother well. But if, in disputing
in defence of his own faith and the Church's
love, he spoke perchance with a degree of warmth
something which you regarded as wounding your
dignity, that deserves to be called, not contuma-
cy, but boldness. For he desired to debate and
discuss the question, not to be merely submitting
to you and flattering you. For such flattery is
the oil of the sinner, with which the prophet
does not desire to have his head anointed ; for
he saith : " The righteous shall correct me in
compassion, and rebuke me ; but the oil of the
"sinner shall not anoint my head."^ For he pre-
fers to be corrected by the stern compassion of
the righteous, rather than to be commended with
the soothing oil of flattery. Hence also the say-
ing of the prophet : " They who pronounce you
happy cause you to err." ^ Therefore also it is
commonly and justly said of a man whom false
compliments have made proud, " his head has
grown ;" ■♦ for it has been increased by the oil
of the sinner, that is, not of one correcting with
stern truth, but of one commending with smooth
flattery. Do not, however, suppose me to mean
by this, that I wish it to be understood that you
have been corrected by brother Evodius, as by
a righteous man ; for I fear lest you should
think that anything is spoken by me also in an
insulting manner, against which I desire to the
utmost of my power to be on guard. But He
is righteous who hath said, " I am the truth." s
When, therefore, any true word has been uttered,
though it may be somewhat rudely, by the mouth
of any man, we are corrected not by the speaker,
who may perhaps be not less a sinner than our-
selves, but by the truth itself, that is to say, by
Christ who is righteous, lest the unction of
smooth but pernicious flattery, which is the oil
of the sinner, should anoint our head. Although,
therefore, brother Evodius, through undue ex-

' John xiv. 27.

2 Ps. cxli. 5.

3 Isa. iii. 12, according to the LXX. version.
* Crevit caput.

5 John xiv. 6.


citement in defending the communion to which
he belongs, may have said something too ve-
hemently through strong feeling, you ought to
excuse him on the ground of his age, and of
the importance of the matter in his estimation.

4. I beseech you, however, to remember what
you have been pleased to promise ; namely, to
investigate amicably with me a matter of so
great importance, and so closely pertaining to
the common salvation, in the presence of such
spectators as you may choose (provided only
that our words are not uttered so as to be lost,
but are taken down with the pen ; so that we
may conduct the discussion in a more calm and
orderly manner, and anything spoken by us
which escapes the memory may be recalled by
reading the notes taken). Or, if you prefer it,
we may discuss the matter without the interfer-
ence of any third party, by means of letters or
conference and reading, wherever you please,
lest perchance some hearers, unwisely zealous,
should be more concerned with the expectation
of a conflict between us, than the thought of our
mutual profit by the discussion. Let the people,
however, be afterwards informed through us of
the debate, when it is concluded ; or, if you
prefer to have the matter discussed by letters
exchanged, let these letters be read to the two
congregations, in order that they may yet come
to be no longer divided, but one. In fact, I
willingly accede to whatever terms you wish, or
prescribe, or prefer. And as to the sentiments
of my most blessed and venerable father Vale-
rius, who is at present from home, I undertake
with fullest confidence that he will hear of this
with great joy ; for I know how much he loves
peace, and how free he is from being influenced
by any paltry regard for vain parade of dignity.

5. I ask you, what have we to do with the
dissensions of a past generation ? Let it suffice
that the wounds which the bitterness of proud
men inflicted on our members have remained
until now ; for we have, through the lapse of
time, ceased to feel the pain to remove which
the physician's help is usually sought. You see
how great and miserable is the calamity by which
the peace of Christian homes and families is
broken. Husbands and wives, agreeing together
at the family hearth, are divided at the altar of
Christ. By Him they pledge themselves to be
at peace between themselves, yet in Him they
cannot be at peace. Children have the same
home, but not the same house of God, with
their own parents. They desire to be secure of
the earthly inheritance of those with whom they
wrangle concerning the inheritance of Christ.
Servants and masters divide their common Lord,
who took on Him the form of a servant that He
might deliver all from bondage. Your party
honours us, and our party honours you. Your


262


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


members appeal to us by our episcopal insignia,'
and our members show the same respect to you.
We receive the words of all, we desire to give
oftence to none. AV'hy then, finding cause of
offence in none besides, do we find it in Christ,
whose members we rend asunder? When we
mav be serviceable to men that are desirous of
terminating through our help disputes concerning
secular affairs, they address us as saints and ser-
vants of God, in order that they may have their
questions as to property disposed of by us : let
us at length, unsolicited, take up a matter which
concerns both our own salvation and theirs. It
is not about gold or silver, or land, or cattle, —
matters concerning which we are daily saluted
with lowly respect, in order that we may bring
disputes to a peaceful termination, — but it is
concerning our Head Himself that this dissen-
sion, so unworthy and pernicious, exists between
us. However low they bow their heads who
salute us in the hope that we may make them
agree together in regard to the things of this
world, our Head stooped from heaven even to
the cross, and yet we do not agree together in
Him.

6. I beg and beseech you, if there be in you
that brotherly feeling for which some give you
credit, let your goodness be approved sincere,
and not feigned with a view to passing honours,
by this, that your bowels of compassion be
moved, so that you consent to have this matter
discussed ; joining with me in persevering prayer,
and in peaceful discussion of every point. Let
not the respect paid by the unhappy people to
our dignities be found, in the judgment of God,
aggravating our condemnation ; rather let them
be recalled along with us, through our unfeigned
li-H-e, from errors and dissensions, and guided
into the ways of truth and peace.

My lord, honourable and most beloved, I pray
that you may be blessed in the sight of God.


LETTER XXXIV.

(a.d. 396.)

to eusebius, imy excellent lord and brother,
worthy of affection and esteem, augustin
sends greeting.

I. God, to whom the secrets of the heart of
man are open, knoweth that it is because of my
love for Christian peace that I am so deeply
moved by the profane deeds of those who basely
and impiously persevere in dissenting from it.
He knoweth also that this feehng of mme is one
tending towards peace, and that my desire is,
not that any one should against his will be co-


7 1


^ Corona.


erced into the Catholic communion, but that to
all who are in error the truth may be openly
declared, and being by God's help clearly ex-
hibited through my ministry, may so commend
itself as to make them embrace and follow it.

2. Passing many other things unnoticed, what
could be more worthy of detestation than what
has just happened ? A young man is reproved
by his bishop for frequently beating his mother
like a madman, and not restraining his impious
hands from wounding her who bore him, even
on those days on which the sternness of law
shows mercy to the most guilty criminals.^ He
then threatens his mother that he would pass to
the party of the Donatists, and that he would
kill her whom he is accustomed to beat with
incredible ferocity. He utters these threats,)
then passes over to the Donatists, and is rebap- >
tized while filled with wicked rage, and is arrayed '
in white vestments while he is burning to shed
his mother's blood. He is placed in a prominent
and conspicuous position within the railing in
the church ; and to the eyes of sorrowful and
indignant beholders, he who is purposing matri-
cide is exhibited as a regenerate man.

3. I appeal to you, as a man of most mature
judgment, can these things find favour in your
eyes ? I do not believe this of you : I know
your wisdom. A mother is wounded by her son
in the members of that body which bore and
nursed the ungrateful wretch ; and when the
Church, his spiritual mother, interferes, she too
is wounded in those sacraments by which, to
the same ungrateful son, she ministered life and
nourishment. Do you not seem to hear the
young man gnashing his teeth in rage for a par-
ent's blood, and saying, " What shall I do to the
Church which forbids my wounding my mother?
I have found out what to do : let the Church
herself be wounded by such blows as she can
suffer ; let that be done in me which may cause
her members pain. Let me go to those who
know how to despise the grace with which she
gave me spiritual birth, and to Aar the form
which in her womb I received. Let me vex
both my natural and my spiritual mother with
cruel tortures : let the one who was the second
to give me birth be the first to give me burial ;
for her sorrow let me seek spiritual death, and
for the other's death let me prolong my natural
life." Oh, Eusebius ! I appeal to you as an!
honourable man, what else may we expect than
that now he shall feel himself, as a Donatist, so|
armed as to have no fear in assailing that un-
happy woman, decrepit with age and helpless in-
her widowhood, from wounding whom he wasi
restrained while he remained a Catholic ? For
what else had he purposed in his passionate-


2 During Lent and the Easter holidays.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


263


heart when he said to his mother, " I will pass
over to the party of Donatus, and I will drink
your blood?" Behold, arrayed in white vest-
ments, but with conscience crimson with blood,
he has fulfilled his threat in part ; the other part
remains, viz. that he drink his mother's blood.
If, therefore, these things find favour in your
eyes, let him be urged by those who are now
his clergy and his sanctifiers to fulfil within eight
days the remaining portion of his vow.

4. The Lord's right hand indeed is strong, so
that He may keep back this man's rage from
that unhappy and desolate widow, and, by means
known unto His own wisdom, may deter him
from his impious design ; but could I do other-
wise than utter my feelings when my heart was
pierced with such grief? Shall they do such
things, and am I to be commanded to hold my
peace ? When He commands me by the mouth
of the apostle, saying that those who teach what
they ought not must be rebuked by the bishop,"
shall I be silent through dread of their displeas-
ure ? The Lord deliver me from such folly ! As
to my desire for having such an impious crime
recorded in our public registers, it was desired
by me chiefly for this end, that no one who may
hear me bewailing these proceedings, especially
in other towns where it may be expedient for me
to do so, may think that I am inventing a false-
hood, and the rather, because in Hippo itself it
is already affirmed that Proculeianus did not
issue the order which was in the official report
ascribed to him.

5. In what more temperate way could we
dispose of this important matter than through
the mediation of such a man as you, invested
with most illustrious rank, and possessing calm-
ness as well as great prudence and goodwill ? I
beg, therefore, as I have already done by our
brethren, good and honourable men, whom I sent
to your Excellency, that you will condescend to
inquire whether it is the case that the presbyter
Victor did not receive from his bishop the order
which the public official records reported ; or
whether, since Victor himself has said otherwise,
they have in their records laid a thing falsely to
his charge, though they belong to the same com-
munion with him. Or, if he consents to our
calmly discussing the whole question of our dif-
ferences, in order that the error which is already
manifest may become yet more so, I willingly
embrace the opportunity. For I have heard
that he proposed that without popular tumult,
in the presence only of ten esteemed and hon-
ourable men from each party, we should investi-
gate what is the truth in this matter according to
the Scriptures. As to another proposal which
some have reported to me as made by him, that


' Tit. i. 9-13.


I should rather go to Constantina,^ because in
that town his party was more numerous ; or that
I should go to Milevis, because there, as they
say, they are soon to hold a council ; — these
things are absurd, for my special charge does
not extend beyond the Church of Hippo. The
whole importance of this question to me, in the
first place, is as it affects Proculeianus and my-
self; and if, perchance, he thinks himself not a
match for me, let him implore the aid of any
one whom he pleases as his colleague in the de-
bate. For in other towns we interfere with the
affairs of the Church only so far as is permitted
or enjoined by our brethren bearing the same
priestly office with us, the bishops of these
towns.

6. And yet I cannot comprehend what there
is in me, a novice, that should make him, who
calls himself a bishop of so many years' standing,
unwilling and afraid to enter into discussion with
me. If it be my acquaintance with liberal
studies, which perhaps he did not pursue at all,
or at least not so much as I have done, what has
this to do with the question in debate, which is
to be decided by the Holy Scriptures or by
ecclesiastical or public documents, with which
he has for so many years been conversant, that
he ought to be more skilled in them than I am ?
Once more, I have here my brother and col-
league Samsucius, bishop of the Church of Tur-
ris,3 who has not learned any of those branches
of culture of which he is said to be afraid : let
him attend in my place, and let the debate be
between them. I will ask him, and, as I trust
in the name of Christ, he will readily consent to
take my place in this matter ; and the Lord will,
I trust, give aid to him when contending for the
truth : for although unpolished in language, he
is well instructed in the true faith. There is
therefore no reason for his referring me to others
whom I do not know, instead of letting us settle
between ourselves that which concerns ourselves.
However, as I have said, I will not decline
meeting them if he himself asks their assistance.


LETTER XXXV.

(a.d. 396.)

(Another letter to Eusebius on the same subject.)

TO EUSEBIUS, MY EXCELLENT LORD AND BROTHER,
WORTHY OF AFFECTION AND ESTEEM, AUGUS-
TIN SENDS GREETING.

I. I did not impose upon you, by importunate
exhortation or entreaty in spite of your reluc-
tance, the duty, as you call it, of arbitrating be-
tween bishops. Even if I had desired to move

2 Constantina, a chief city of Numidia,

3 Turris, a town in Numidia.


264


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


you to this, I might perhaps have easily shown
how competent you are to judge between us in
a cause so clear and simple ; nay, I might show
how you are already doing this, inasmuch as
you, who are afraid of the office of judge, do
not hesitate to pronounce sentence in favour of
one of the parties before you have heard both.
But of this, as I have said, I do not meanwhile
say anything. For I had asked nothing else
from your honourable good-nature, — and I be-
seech you to be pleased to remark it in this
letter, if you did not in the former, — than that
you should ask Proculeianus whether he himself
said to his presbyter Victor that which the pub-
lic registers have by official report ascribed to
him, or whether those who were sent have writ-
ten in the public registers not what they heard
from Victor, but a falsehood ; and further, what
his opinion is as to our discussing the whole
question between us. I think that he is not
constituted judge between parties, who is only
requested by the one to put a question to the
other, and condescend to write what reply he
has received. This also I now again ask you
not to refuse to do, because, as I know by ex-
periment, he does not wish to receive a letter
from me, otherwise I would not employ your
Excellency's mediation. Since, therefore, he
does not wish this, what could I do less likely
to give offence, than to apply through you, so
good a man and such a friend of his, for an
answer concerning a matter about which the
burden of my responsibility forbids me to hold
my peace? Moreover, you say (because the
son's beating of his mother is disapproved by
your sound judgment), "If Proculeianus had
known this, he would have debarred that man
from communion with his party." I answer in
a sentence, " He knows it now, let him now
debar him."

2. Let me mention another thing. A man
who was formerly a subdeacon of the church at
Spana, Primus by name, when, having been for-
bidden such intercourse with nuns as contravened
the laws of the Church,' he treated with con-
tempt the established and wise regulations, was
deprived of his clerical office, — this man also,
being provoked by the divinely warranted dis-
cipline, went over to the other party, and was by
them rebaptized. Two nuns also, who were
settled in the same lands of the Catholic Church
with him, either taken by him to the other party,
or following him, were likewise rebaptized : and
now, among bands of Circumcelliones and troops
of homeless women, who have declined matri-
mony that they may avoid restraint, he proudly
boasts himself in excesses of detestable revelry,
rejoicing that he now has without hindrance the

' Accessus indisciplinatus sanctitnonialiuni.


Utmost freedom in that misconduct from which
in the Catholic Church he was restrained. Per-
haps Proculeianus knows nothing about this
case either. Let it therefore through you, as a
man of grave and dispassionate spirit, be made
known to him ; and let him order that man to be
dismissed from his communion, who has chosen
it for no other reason than that he had, on account
of insubordination and dissolute habits, forfeited
his clerical office in the Catholic Church.

3. For my own part, if it please the Lord, I
purpose to adhere to this rule, that whoever,
after being deposed among them by a sentence
of discipline, shall express a desire to pass over
into the Catholic Church, must be received on
condition of submitting to give the same proofs
of penitence as those which, perhaps, they
would have constrained him to give if he had
remained among them. But consider, I be-
seech you, how worthy of abhorrence is their
procedure in regard to those whom we check by
ecclesiastical censures for unholy living, persuad-
ing them first to come to a second baptism, in
order to their being qualified for which they de-
clare themselves to be pagans (and how much
blood of martyrs has been poured out rather
than that such a declaration should proceed
from the mouth of a Christian !) ; and there-
after, as if renewed and sanctified, but in truth
more hardened in sin, to defy with the impiety
of new madness, xmder the guise of new grace,
that discipline to which they could not submit.
If, however, I am wrong in attempting to obtain
the correction of these abuses through your
benevolent interposition, let no one find fault
with my causing them to be made known to
Proculeianus by the public registers, — a means
of notification which in this Roman city cannot,
I believe, be refused to me. For, since the
Lord commands us to speak and proclaim the
truth, and in teaching to rebuke what is wrong,
and to labour in season and out of season, as I
can prove by the words of the Lord and of the
apostles,^ let no man think that I am to be per-
suaded to be silent concerning these things. If
they meditate any bold measures of violence or
outrage, the Lord, who has subdued under His
yoke all earthly kingdoms in the bosom of His
Church spread abroad through the whole world,
will not fail to defend her from wrong.

4. The daughter of one of the cultivators of
the property of the Church here, who had been
one of our catechumens, had been, against the
will of her parents, drawn away by the other
party, and after being baptized among them, had
assumed the profession of a nun. Now her father
wished to compel her by severe treatment to re-
turn to the Catholic Church ; but I was unwilling


i


2 2 Tim. iv. 2 and Tit. i. g-ii.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


265


that this woman, whose mind was so perverted,
should be received by us unless with her own
will, and choosing, in the free exercise of judg-
ment, that which is better : and when the coun-
tryman began to attempt to compel his daughter
by blows to submit to his authority, I immedi-
ately forbade his using any such means. Not-
withstanding, after all, when I was passing
through the Spanian district, a presbyter of
Proculeianus, standing in a field belonging to
an excellent Catholic woman, shouted after me
with a most insolent voice that I was a Traditor
and a persecutor ; and he hurled the same re-
proach against that woman, belonging to our
communion, on whose property he was stand-
ing. But when I heard his words, I not only
refrained from pursuing the quarrel, but also
held back the numerous company which sur-
rounded me. Yet if I say. Let us inquire and
ascertain who are or have been indeed Traditors
and persecutors, they reply, " We will not de-
bate, but we will rebaptize. Leave us to prey
upon your flocks with crafty cruelty, like wolves ;
and if you are good shepherds, bear it in si-
lence." For what else has Proculeianus com-
manded but this, if indeed the order is justly
ascribed to him : " If thou art a Christian," said
he, " leave this to the judgment of God ; what-
ever we do, hold thou thy peace." The same
presbyter, moreover, dared to utter a threat
against a countryman who is overseer of one of
the farms belonging to the Church.

5. I pray you to inform Proculeianus of all
these things. Let him repress the madness of
his clergy, which, honoured Eusebius, I have
felt constrained to report to you. Be pleased
to write to me, not your own opinion concern-
ing them all, lest you should think that the re-
sponsibility of a judge is laid upon you by me,
but the answer which they give to my questions.
May the mercy of God preserve you from harm,
my excellent lord and brother, most worthy of
affection and esteem.


LETTER XXXVL

(a.d. 396.)

to my brother and fellow-presbyter casu-
lanus, most beloved and longed for, au-
gustin sends greeting in the lord.

Chap. i. — i . I know not how it was that I did
not reply to your first letter ; but I know that
my neglect was not owing to want of esteem for
you. For I take pleasure in your studies, and
even in the words in which you express your
thoughts ; and it is my desire as well as advice
that you make great attainments in your early
years in the word of God, for the edification of
the Church. Having now received a second


letter from you, in which you plead for an an-
swer on the most just and amiable ground of
that brotherly love in which we are one, I have
resolved no longer to postpone the gratification
of the desire expressed by your love ; and
although in the midst of most engrossing busi-
ness, I address myself to discharge the debt
due to you.

2. As to the question on which you wish my
opinion, " whether it is lawful to fast on the
seventh day of the week," ' I answer, that if it
were wholly unlawful, neither Moses nor Elijah,
nor our Lord Himself, would have fasted for
forty successive days. But by the same argu-
ment it is proved that even on the Lord's day
fasting is not unlawful. And yet, if any one
were to think that the Lord's day should be
appointed a day of fasting, in the same way as
the seventh day is observed by some, such a
man would be regarded, and not unjustly, as
bringing a great cause of offence into the Church.
For in those things concerning which the divine
Scriptures have laid down no definite rule, the
custom of the people of God, or the practices
instituted by their fathers, are to be held as the
law of the Church.^ If we choose to fall into
a debate about these things, and to denounce
one party merely because their custom differs
from that of others, the consequence must be
an endless contention, in which the utmost care
is necessary lest the storm of conflict overcast
with clouds the calmness of brotherly love, while
strength is spent in mere controversy which can-
not adduce on either side any decisive testi-
monies of truth. This danger the author has
not been careful to avoid, whose prolix disserta-
tion you deemed worth sending to me with your
former letter, that I might answer his arguments.

Chap. ii. — 3. I have not at my disposal suffi-
cient leisure to enter on the refutation of his
opinions one by one : my time is demanded by
other and more important work. But if you
devote a little more carefully to this treatise of
an anonymous Roman author,^ the talents which
by your letters you prove yourself to possess,
and which I greatly love in you as God's gift,
you will see that he has not hesitated to wound
by his most injurious language almost the whole
Church of Christ, from the rising of the sun to
its going down. Nay, I may say not almost, but
absolutely, the whole Church. For he is found
to have not even spared the Roman Christians,
whose custom he seems to himself to defend ;
but he is not aware how the force of his invec-
tives recoils upon them, for it has escaped his
observation. For when arguments to prove the

' Sabbato.

2 We give the ipsissima verba of this canon: " In his enim re-
bus de quibiis nihil certi statuit Scriptura divina mos populi Dei vel
instituta majorum pro lege tcnenda sunt."

•5 In the text the name is Urbicus, from Urbs Roma.


266


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


obligation to fast on the seventh day of the week
fail him, he enters on a vehement blustering pro-
test against the excesses of banquets and drunken
revelries, and the worst licence of intoxication,
as if there were no medium between fasting and
rioting. Now if this be admitted, what good
can fasting on Saturday do to the Romans ? since
on the other days on which they do not fast they
must be presumed, according to his reasoning,
to be gluttonous, and given to excess in wine.
If, therefore, there is any difference between
loading the heart with surfeiting and drunken-
ness, which is always sinful, and relaxing the
strictness of fasting, with due regard to self-
restraint and temperance on the other, which
is done on the Lord's day without censure from
any Christian, — if, I say, there is a difference
between these two things, let him first mark the
distinction between the repasts of saints and the
excessive eating and drinking of those whose god
is their belly, lest he charge the Romans them-
selves with belonging to the latter class on the
days on which they do not fast ; and then let
him inquire, not whether it is lawful to indulge
in drunkenness on the seventh day of the week,
which is not lawful on the Lord's day, but
whether it is incumbent on us to fast on the
seventh day of the week, which we are not wont
to do on the Lord's day.

4. This question I would wish to see him
investigate, and resolve in such a manner as
would not involve him in the guilt of openly
speaking against the whole Church diffused
throughout the world, with the exception of
the Roman Christians, and hitherto a few of the
Western communities. Is it, I ask, to be en-
dured among the entire Eastern Christian com-
munities, and many of those in the West, that
this man should say of so many and so eminent
servants of Christ, who on the seventh day of
the week refresh themselves soberly and mod-
erately with food, that they " are in the flesh,
and cannot please God ; " and that of them it
is written, " Let the wicked depart from me, I
will not know their way ; " and that they make
their belly their god, that they prefer Jewish
rites to those of the Church, and are sons of the
bondwoman ; that they are governed not by
the righteous law of God, but by their own good
pleasure, consulting their own appetites instead
of submitting to salutary restraint ; also that
they are carnal, and savour of death, and other
such charges, which if he had uttered against
even one servant of God, who would listen to
him, who would not be bound to turn away from
him? But now, when he assails with such re-
proachful and abusive language the Church bear-
ing fruit and increasing throughout the whole
world, and in almost all places observing no fast
on the seventh day of the week, I warn him.


whoever he is, to beware. For in wishing to
conceal from me his name, you plainly showed
your unwillingness that I should judge him.

Chap, hi. — 5. " The Son of man," he says, "is
Lord of the Sabbath, and in that day it is by all
means lawful to do good rather than do evil." '
If, therefore, we do evil when we break our fast,
there is no Lord's day upon which we live as
we should. As to his admission that the apos-
tles did eat upon the seventh day of the week,
and his remark upon this, that the time for their
fasting had not then come, because of the Lord's
own words, "The days will come when the
Bridegroom shall be taken away from them,
and then shall the children of the Bridegroom
fast ; " ^ since there is " a time to rejoice, and
a time to mourn," ^ he ought first to have ob-
served, that our Lord was speaking there of
fasting in general, but not of fasting upon the
seventh day. Again, when he says that by fast-
ing grief is signified, and that by food joy is
represented, why does he not reflect what it was
which God designed to signify by that which is
written, " that He rested on the seventh day
from all His works," — namely, that joy, and)
not sorrow, was set forth in that rest ? Unless, j
perchance, he intends to affirm that in God's
resting and hallowing of the Sabbath, joy was
signified to the Jews, but grief to the Christians. j
But God did not lay down a rule concerning
fasting or eating on the seventh day of the week,
either at the time of His hallowing that day be-
cause in it He rested from His works, or after-
wards, when He gave precepts to the Hebrew
nation concerning the observance of that day.
The only thing enjoined on man there is, that
he abstain from doing work himself, or requir-
ing it from his servants. And the people of
the former dispensation, accepting this rest as a.
shadow of things to come, obeyed the commandj
by such abstinence from work as we now seei
practised by the Jews ; not, as some suppose,;
through their being carnal, and misunderstand-l
ing what the Christians rightly understand. Nor
do we understand this law better than the proph-
ets, who, at the time when this was still binding,
observed such rest on the Sabbath as the Jews
believe ought to be observed to this day. Hence
also it was that God commanded them to stone
to death a man who had gathered sticks on the
Sabbath ; '' but we nowhere read of any one being
stoned, or deemed worthy of any punishment
whatever, for either fasting or eating on the Sab-
bath. Which of the two is more in keeping with
rest, and which with toil, let our author himself
decide, who has regarded joy as the portion of


I

Matt.

xii.

8-12.

2

Matt.

1,X.

15^

3

Eccles

. 11

■ ■♦• 1

4

Num.

XV.

35.

LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


267


those who eat, and sorrow as the portion of those
who fast, or at least has understood that these
things were so regarded by the Lord, when, giv-
ing answer concerning fasting, He said : " Can
the children of the bride-chamber mourn as long
as the Bridegroom is with them?" '

6. Moreover, as to his assertion, that the reason
of the apostles eating on the seventh day (a thing
forbidden by the tradition of the elders) was,
that the time for their fasting on that day had
not come ; I ask, if the time had not then come
for the abolition of the Jewish rest from work
on that day? Did not the tradition of the elders
prohibit fasting on the one hand, and enjoin rest
on the other? and yet the disciples of Christ,
of whom we read that they did eat on the Sab-
bath, did on the same day pluck the ears of
corn, which was not then lawful, because forbid-
den by the tradition of the elders. Let him
therefore consider whether it might not with
more reason be said in reply to him, that the
Lord desired to have these two things, the pluck-
ing of the ears of corn and the taking of food,
done in the same day by His disciples, for this
reason, that the former action might confute
those who would prohibit all work on the seventh
day, and the latter action confute those who
would enjoin fasting on the seventh day ; since
by the former action He taught that the rest
from labour was now, through the change in the
dispensation, an act of superstition ; and by the
latter He intimated His will, that under both
dispensations the matter of fasting or not was
left to every man's choice. I do not say this
by way of argument in support of my view, but
only to show how, in answer to him, things much
more forcible than what he has spoken might be
advanced.

Chap. jv. — 7. "How shall we," says our au-
thor, " escape sharing the condemnation of the
Pharisee, if we fast twice in the week? " ^ As if
the Pharisee had been condemned for fasting
twice in the week, and not for proudly vaunting
himself above the publican. He might as well
say that those also are condemned with that Phari-
see, who give a tenth of all their possessions to
the poor, for he boasted of this among his other
works ; whereas I would that it were done by
many Christians, instead of a very small number,
as we find. Or let him say, that whosoever is
not an unjust man, or adulterer, or extortioner,
must be condemned with that Pharisee, because
he boasted that he was none of these ; but the
man who could think thus is, beyond quesdon,
beside himself. Moreover, if these things which
the Pharisee mentioned as found in him, being
admitted by all to be good in themselves, are
not to be retained with the haughty boastfulness

* Matt. ix. 15.

* Luke xviii. ii, 12.


which was manifest in him, but are to be retained
with the lowly piety which was not in him ; by
the same rule, to fast twice in the week is in a
man such as the Pharisee unprofitable, but is in
one who has humility and faith a religious service.
Moreover, after all, the Scripture does not say
that the Pharisee was condemned, but only that
the publican was "justified rather than the
other."

8. Again, when our author insists upon inter-
preting, in connection with this matter, the
words of the Lord, " Except your righteousness
shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven," 3 and thinks that we cannot fulfil this
precept unless we fast oftener than twice in the
week, let him mark well that there are seven
days in the week. If, then, from these any one
subtract two, not fasting on the seventh day nor
on the Lord's day, there remain five days in
which he may surpass the Pharisee, who fasts
but twice in the week. For 1 think that if any
man fast three times in the week, he already
surpasses the Pharisee who fasted but twice.
And if a fast is observed four times, or even so
often as five times, passing over only the seventh
day and the Lord's day without fasting, — a
practice observed by many through their whole
lifetime, especially by those who are settled in
monasteries, — by this not the Pharisee alone is
surpassed in the labour of fasting, but that Chris-
tian also whose custom is to fast on the fourth,
and sixth, and seventh days, as the Roman com-
munity does to a large extent. And yet your
nameless metropolitan disputant calls such an
one carnal, even though for five successive days of
the week, excepting the seventh and the Lord's
day, he so fast as to withhold all refection from
the body; as if, forsooth, food and drink on
other days had nothing to do with the flesh, and
condemns him as making a god of his belly, as
if it was only the seventh day's repast which en-
tered into the belly.

• •••••••

We have no compunction in passing over about eight
columns here of this letter, in which Augustin ex-
poses, with a tedious minuteness and with a waste of
rhetoric, other feeble and irrelevant puerilities of the
Roman author whose work Casulanus had submitted
to his review. Instead of accompanying him into the
shallow places into which he "was drawn while pur-
suing such an insignificant foe, let us resume the
translation at the point at which Augustin gives his
own opinion regarding the question whether it is
binding on Christians to fast on Saturday.


Chap. xi. — 25. As to the succeeding para-
graphs with which he concludes his treatise, they
are, like some other things in it which I have not
thought worthy of notice, even more irrelevant

3 Matt. V. 21.


268


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


to a discussion of the question whether we
should fast or eat on the seventh day of the
week. But I leave it to yourself, especially if
you have found any help from what I have
already said, to observe and dispose of these.
Having now to the best of my ability, and as I
think, sutiiciently, replied to the reasonings of
this author, if I be asked what is my own opin-
ion in this matter, I answer, after carefully pon-
dering the question, that in the Gospels and
Epistles, and the entire collection of books for
our instruction called the New Testament, I see
that fasting is enjoined. But I do not discover
any rule definitely laid down by the Lord or by
the apostles as to days on which we ought or
ought not to fast. And by this I am persuaded
that exemption from fasting on the seventh day
is more suitable, not indeed to obtain, but to
foreshadow, that eternal rest in which the true
Sabbath is realized, and which is obtained only
by faith, and by that righteousness whereby the
daughter of the King is all glorious within.

26. In this question, however, of fasting or
not fasting on the seventh day, nothing appears
to me more safe and conducive to peace than
the apostle's rule : " Let not him that eateth
despise him that eateth not, and let not him
which eateth not judge him that eateth : " ' " for
neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we
eat not are we the worse ; "^ our fellowship with
those among whom we live, and along with whom
we live in God, being preserved undisturbed by
these things. For as it is true that, in the words
of the apostles, " it is evil for that man who eat-
eth with offence," ^ it is equally true that it is evil
for that man who fasteth with offence. Let us
not therefore be like those who, seeing John the
Baptist neither eating nor drinking, said, " He
hath a devil ; " but let us equally avoid imitat-
ing those who said, when they saw Christ eating
and drinking, " Behold a man gluttonous, and a
winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners." '♦
After mentioning these sayings, the Lord sub-
joined a most important truth in the words,
" But Wisdom is justified of her children ; " and
if you ask who these are, read what is written,
" The sons of Wisdom are the congregation of
the righteous : " s they are they who, when they
eat, do not despise others who do not eat ; and
when they eat not, do not judge those who eat,
but who do despise and judge those who, with
offence, either eat or abstain from eating.

Chap. xii. — 27. As to the seventh day of the
week there is less difficulty in acting on the rule
above quoted, because both the Roman Church
and some other churches, though few, near to it

' Rom. xiv. 3.

2 I Cor. viii. 8.

3 Rom. xiv. 20.
* Matt. xi. 19.
i Ecclus. iii. I.


or remote from it, observe a fast on that day ;
but to fast on the Lord's day is a great offence,
especially since the rise of that detestable heresy
of the Manicha^ans, so manifestly and grievously
contradicting the Catholic faith and the divine
Scriptures : for the Manich^eans have prescribed
to their followers the obligation of fasting upon
that day ; whence it has resulted that the fast
upon the Lord's day is regarded with the greater
abhorrence. Unless, perchance, some one be
able to continue an unbroken fast for more than
a week, so as to approach as nearly as may be to
the fast of forty days, as we have known some
do ; and we have even been assured by brethren
most worthy of credit, that one person did attain
to the full period of forty days. For as, in the
time of the Old Testament fathers, Moses and
Elijah did not do anything against liberty of eat-
ing on the seventh day of the week, when they
fasted forty days ; so the man who has been
able to go beyond seven days in fasting has not
chosen the Lord's day as a day of fasting, but
has only come upon it in course among the days
for which, so far as he might be able, he had
vowed to prolong his fast. If, however, a con-
tinuous fast is to be concluded within a week,
there is no day upon which it may more suit-
ably be concluded than the Lord's day ; but if
the body is not refreshed until more than a week
has elapsed, the Lord's day is not in that case
selected as a day of fasting, but is found occur-
ring within the number of days for which it had
seemed good to the person to make a vow.

28. Be not moved by that which the Priscil-
lianists^ (a sect very like the Manichseans) are
wont to quote as an argument from the Acts of
the Apostles, concerning what was done by the
Apostle Paul in Troas. The passage is as fol-
lows : " Upon the first day of the week, when
the disciples came together to break bread, Paul
preached unto them, ready to depart on the
morrow ; and continued his speech until mid-
night." 7 Afterwards, when he had come down
from the supper chamber where they had been
gathered together, that he might restore the
young man who, overpowered with sleep, had
fallen from the window and was taken up dead,
the Scripture states further concerning the apos-
tle : " VVhen he therefore was come up again,
and had broken bread, and eaten and talked a
long while, even till break of day, so he de-
parted." ^ Far be it from us to accept this as
affirming that the apostles were accustomed to
fast habitually on the Lord's day. For the day
now known as the Lord's day was then called

b Priscillian, Bishop of Avila in Spain, adopted Gnostic and Man-
ichaean errors and practices. He was condemned by the Synod of
Saragossa in 381 a.d., and beheaded, along with his principal follow-
ers, by order of Maximus in 385 A.D.

' Acts XX. 7.

^ Acts XX. II.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


269


the first day of the week, as is more plainly seen
in the Gospels ; for the day of the Lord's resur-
rection is called by Matthew fxia aa/B/SaTwv, and
by the other three evangelists 17 /mm {twv) a-afS-
fidrwi',' and it is well ascertained that the same
is the day which is now called the Lord's day.
Either, therefore, it was after the close of the
seventh day that they had assembled, — namely,
in the beginning of the night which followed, and
which belonged to the Lord's day, or the first
day of the week, — and in this case the apostle,
before proceeding to break bread with them, as
is done in the sacrament of the body of Christ,
continued his discourse until midnight, and also,
after celebrating the sacrament, contmued still
speaking again to those who were assembled, be-
ing much pressed for time in order that he might
set out at dawn upon the Lord's day ; or if it was
on the first day of the week, at an hour before
sunset on the Lord's day, that they had assem-
bled, the words of the text, " Paul preached unto
them, ready to depart on the morrow," them-
selves expressly state the reason for his prolonging
his discourse, — namely, that he was about to
leave them, and wished to give them ample in-
struction. The passage does not therefore prove
that they habitually fasted on the Lord's day, but
only that it did not seem meet to the apostle to
interrupt, for the sake of taking refreshment, an
important discourse, which was listened to with
the ardour of most lively interest by persons
whom he was about to leave, and whom, on ac-
count of his many other journeyings, he visited
but seldom, and perhaps on no other occasion
than this, especially because, as subsequent events
prove, he was then leaving them without expec-
tation of seeing them again in this life. Nay,
by this instance, it is rather proved that such
festing on the Lord's day was not customary,
because the writer of the history, in order to pre-
vent this being thought, has taken care to state
the reason why the discourse was so prolonged,
that we might know that in an emergency dinner
is not to stand in the way of more important
work. But indeed the example of these most
eager listeners goes further ; for by them all
bodily refreshment, not dinner only, but supper
also, was disregarded when thirsting vehemently,
not for water, but for the word of truth ; and
considering that the fountain was about to be re-
moved from them, they drank in with unabated
desire whatever flowed from the apostle's lips.

29. In that age, however, although fasting
upon the Lord's day was not usually practised,
it was not so great an offence to the Church
when, in any similar emergency to that in which
'aul was at Troas, men did not attend to the re-
eshment of the body throughout the whole of

' " Prima Sabbati a Matthseo, a cseteris autem tribus una Sabbati
dtur." Matt, xxviii. i; Mark xvi. 2; Luke xxiv. x; Johnxx. i.


the Lord's day until midnight, or even until the
dawn of the following morning. But now, since
heretics, and especially, these most impious
Manichosans, have begun not to observe an occa-
sional fast upon the Lord's day, when constrained
by circumstances, but to prescribe such fasting
as a duty bidding by sacred and solemn institu-
tion, and this practice of theirs has become well
known to Christian communities ; even were
such an emergency arising as that which the
apostle experienced, I verily think that what he
then did should not now be done, lest the harm
done by the offence given should be greater than
the good received from the words spoken.
Whatever necessity may arise, or good reason,
compelling a Christian to fast on the Lord's day,
— as we find, e.g., in the Acts of the Apostles,
that in peril of shipwreck they fasted on board
of the ship in which the apostle was for fourteen
days successively, within which the Lord's day
came round twice,^ — we ought to have no hesi-
tation in believing that the Lord's day is not to
be placed among the days of voluntary fasting,
except in the case of one vowing to fast contin-
uously for a period longer than a week.

Chap. xiii. — 30. The reason why the Church
prefers to appoint the fourth and sixth days of
the week for fasting, is found by considering the
gospel narrative. There we find that on the
fourth day of the week ^ the Jews took counsel
to put the Lord to death. One day having in-
tervened, — on the evening of which, at the
close, namely,, of the day which we call the
fifth day of the week, the Lord ate the passover
with His disciples, — He was thereafter betrayed
on the night which belonged to the sixth day of
the week, the day (as is everywhere known)
of His passion. This day, beginning with the
evening, was the first day of unleavened bread.
The evangelist Matthew, however, says that the
fifth day of the week was the first of unleavened
bread, because in the evening following it the
paschal supper was to be observed, at which they
began to eat the unleavened bread, and the lamb
offered in sacrifice. From which it is inferred
that it was upon the fourth day of the week that
the Lord said, " You know that after two days is
the feast of the passover, and the Son of man is
betrayed to be crucified ; " ■* and for this reason
that day has been regarded as one suitable for
fasting, because, as the evangelist immediately
adds : " Then assembled together the chief
priests and the scribes and the elders of the
people unto the palace of the high priest, who
is called Caiaphas, and consulted that they might
take Jesus by subtilty and kill Him." 5 After


2 Acts xxvii. 33.

3 Commonly called guarta feria.
* Matt. xxvi. 2.

s Matt. xxvi. 3, 4.


270


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


the intermission of one day, — the day, namely,
of which the evangehst writes : ' " Now, on the
first day of the feast of unleavened bread, the
disciples came to Jesus, saying unto Him, Where
wilt Thou that we prepare for Thee to eat the
passover?" — the Lord suffered on the sixth
day of the week, as is admitted by all : where-
fore the sixth day also is rightly reckoned a day
for fasting, as fasting is symbolical of humilia-
tion ; whence it is said, " I humbled my soul
with fasting." 2

31. The next day is the Jewish Sabbath, on
which day Christ's body rested in the grave, as
in the original fashioning of the world God
rested on that day from all His works. Hence
originated that variety in the robe of His bride ^
which we are now considering : some, espe-
cially the Eastern communities, preferring to
take food on that day, that their action might
be emblematic of the divine rest ; others, namely
the Church of Rome, and some churches in the
West, preferring to fast on that day because of
the humiliation of the Lord in death. Once
in the year, namely at Easter, all Christians ob-
serve the seventh day of the week by fasting, in
memory of the mourning with which the dis-
ciples, as men bereaved, lamented the death of
the Lord (and this is done with the utmost de-
voutness by those who take food on the seventh
day throughout the rest of the year) ; thus pro-
viding a symbolical representation of both events,
— of the disciples' sorrow on one seventh day
in the year, and of the blessing of repose on all
the others. There are two things which make
the happiness of the just and the end of all
their misery to be confidently expected, viz.
death and the resurrection of the dead. In
death is that rest of which the prophet speaks :
" Come, my people, enter thou into thy cham-
bers, and shut thy doors about thee : hide thy-
self as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation be overpast." ■* In resurrection
blessedness is consummated in the whole man,
both body and soul. Hence it came to be
thought that both of these things [death and
resurrection] should be symbolized, not by the
hardship of fasting, but rather by the cheerful-
ness of refreshment with food, excepting only
the Easter Saturday, on which, as I have said,
it had been resolved to commemorate by a more
protracted fast the mourning of the disciples, as
one of the events to be had in remembrance.

Chap. xiv. — 32. Since, therefore (as I have
said above), we do not find in the Gospels or
in the apostolical writings, belonging properly to
the revelation of the New Testament, that any


' Matt. xxvi. 17.

^ Ps. XXXV. 13.

3 Ps. xlv. 13, 14.
* Isa. xxvi. 20.


law was laid down as to fasts to be observed on
i particular days ; and since this is consequently
one of many things, difficult to enumerate, which
make up a variety in the robe of the King's
daughter,5 that is to say, of the Church, — I will
tell you the answer given to my questions on this
subject by the venerable Ambrose Bishop of
MiLm, by whom I was baptized. When my
mother was with me in that city, I, as being
only a catechumen, felt no concern about these
questions ; but it was to her a question causing
anxiety, whether she ought, after the custom of
our own townj-^o fast on the Saturday, or, after
the custom of the Church of Milan, not to fast.
To deliver her from perplexity, I put the question
to the man of God whom I have just named.
He answered, " What else can I recommend to
others than what I do myself? " When I thought
that by this he intended simply to prescribe
to us that we should take food on Saturdays
— for I knew this to be his own practice — he,
following me, added these words : " \V^hen I
am here I do not fast on Saturday ; but when
I am at Rome I do : whatever church you may
come to, conform to its custom, if you would
avoid either receiving or giving offence." This
reply I reported to my mother, and it satisfied
j her, so that she scrupled not to comply with it ;
and I have myself followed the same rule. Since,
I however, it hapi^ens, especially in Africa, that
; one church, or the churches within the same
\ district, may have some members who fast and
I others who do not fast on the seventh day, it
seems to me best to adopt in each congregadon
I the custom of those to whom authority in its
\ government has been committed. Wherefore,
if you are quite willing to follow my advice,
especially because in regard to this matter I
have spoken at greater length than was neces-
sary, do not in this resist your own bishop, but
follow his practice without scruple or debate.

■J

LETTER XXXVII. ■■


ijfl


ibc


'Mm


(a.d. 397.)

to simplictanus,^ my lord most blessed, and
my father most worthy of being cherished i
with respect and sincere affection, au-
gustin sends greeting in the lord.

I . I received the letter which your Holiness ,
kindly sent, — a letter full of occasions of much':
joy to me, because assuring me that you reme"m- '
ber me, that you love me as you used to do, and '
that you take great pleasure in every one of the
gifts which the Lord has in His compassion !j


tt


DO


5 Ps. xlv. 13.

6 Simplicianus succeeded Ambrose in the see of Milan in 397 a.u.
This letter is the preface to the two books addressed to Simplicianus, JBiE^
and contained in vol. vi. of the Benedictme edition of Augustm. . H'^-,


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


271


been pleased to bestow on me. In reading that
letter, I have eagerly welcomed the fatherly
affection which flows from your benignant heart
towards me : and this I have not found for the
first time, as something short-lived and new, but
long ago proved and well known, my lord, most
blessed, and most worthy of being cherished with
respect and sincere love.

2. Whence comes so great a recompense for
the literary labour given by me to the writing of
a few books as this, that your Excellency should
condescend to read them? Is it not that the
Lord, to whom my soul is devoted, has purposed
thus to comfort me under my anxieties, and to
lighten the fear with which in such labour I can-
not but be exercised, lest, notwithstanding the
evenness of the plain of truth, I stumble through
want either of knowledge or of caution? For
when what I write meets your approval, I know
by whom it is approved, for I know who dwells
in you ; and the Giver and Dispenser of all spirit-
ual gifts designs by your approbation to confirm
my obedience to Him. For whatever in these
writings of mine merits your approbation is from
God, who has by me as His instrument said,
" Let it be done," and it was done ; and in your
approval God has pronounced that what was
done is " good." '

3. As for the questions which you have con-
descended to command me to resolve, even if
through the dulness of my mind I did not
understand them, I might through the assistance
of your merits find an answer to them. This
only I ask, that on account of my weakness you
intercede with God for me, and that whatever
writings of mine come into your sacred hands,
whether on the topics to which you have in a
manner so kind and fatherly directed my atten-
tion, or on any others, you will not only take
pains to read them, but also accept the charge
of reviewing and correcting them ; for I acknowl-
edge the mistakes which I myself have made, as
readily as the gifts which God has bestowed on
me.

LETTER XXXVIII.

(a.d. 397.)

. to his brother profuturus augustin sends
greeting.

I. As for my spirit, I am well, through the
Lord's good pleasure, and the strength which He
condescends to impart ; but as for my body, I
im confined to bed. I can neither walk, nor
stand, nor sit, because of the pain and swelling
)f a boil or tumour.^ But even in such a case,
ince this is the will of the Lord, what else can

say than that I am well? For if we do not

' Gen. i. 3, 4.
Rhagas vel exochas.


wish that which He is pleased to do, we ought

rather to take blame to ourselves than to think

j that He could err in anything which He either

I does or suffers to be done. All this you know

I well ; but what shall I more willingly say to you

than the things which I say to myself, seeing

that you are to me a second self? I commend

i therefore both my days and my nights to your

pious intercessions. Pray for me, that I may

I not waste my days through want of self-control,

and that I may bear my nights with patience :

pray that, though I walk in the midst of the

shadow of death, the Lord may so be with me

that I shall fear no evil.

2. You have heard, doubtless, of the death of
the aged Megalius,' for it is now twenty-four
days since he put off this mortal body. I wish
to know, if possible, whether you have seen, as
you proposed, his successor in the primacy. We
are not delivered from offences, but it is equally
true that we are not deprived of our refuge ;
our griefs do not cease, but our consolations are
equally abiding. And well do you know, my
excellent brother, how, in the midst of such
offences, we must watch lest hatred of any one
gain a hold upon the heart, and so not only
hinder us from praying to God with the door of
our chamber closed,'* but also shut the door
against God Himself; for hatred of another in-
sidiously creeps upon us, while no one who is
angry considers his anger to be unjust. For
anger habitually cherished against any one be-
comes hatred, since the sweetness which is
mingled with what appears to be righteous anger
makes us detain it longer than we ought in the
vessel, until the whole is soured, and the vessel
itself is spoiled. Wherefore it is much better
for us to forbear from anger, even when one has
given us just occasion for it, than, beginning
with what seems just anger against any one, to
fall, through this occult tendency of passion, into
hating him. We are wont to say that, in enter-
taining strangers, it is much better to bear the
inconvenience of receiving a bad man than to
run the risk of having a good man shut out,
our caution lest any bad man be ad-
, but in the passions of the soul the oppo-
site rule holds true. For it is incomparably more
for our soul's welfare to shut the recesses of the
heart against anger, even when it knocks with a
just claim for admission, than to admit that
which it will be most difficult to expel, and
which will rapidly grow from a mere sapling to
a strong tree. Anger dares to increase with

3 Megalius, Bishop of Calama and Primate of Numidia, by whom
two years before Augustin had been ordained Bishop of Hippo.
The reflections upon anger which follow the allusion here to the death
of Megalius were probably suggested by the remembrance of an in-
cident in the life of that bishop. While .Augustin was a presbyter,
Megalius had written in anger a letter to him for which he afterwards
apologized, formally retracting calumny which it contained.

•♦ Matt. vi. 6.


through
mitted


272


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


boldness more suddenly than men suppose, for
it does not blush in the dark, when the sun has
gone down upon it.' You will understand with
how great care and anxiety I write these things,
if you consider the things which lately on a cer-
tain journey you said to me.

3. I salute my brother Severus, and those who
are with him. I would perhaps write to them
also, if the limited time before the departure
of the bearer permitted me. I beseech you
also to assist me in persuading our brother Vic-
tor (to whom I desire through your Holiness
to express my thanks for his informing me of
his setting out to Constantina) not to refuse to
return by way of Calama, on account of a busi-
ness known to him, in which I have to bear a
very heavy burden in the importunate urgency
of the elder Nectarius concerning it ; he gave
me his promise to this effect. Farewell !

LETTER XXXIX.

(a.d. 397.)

to my lord augustin, a father ^ truly holy
and most blessed, jerome sends greeting in

CHRIST.

Chap. i. — i . Last year I sent by the hand of
our brother, the sub-deacon Asterius, a letter
conveying to your Excellency a salutation due to
you, and readily rendered by me ; and I think
that my letter was delivered to you. I now
write again, by my holy brother the deacon Prae-
sidius, begging you in the first place not to for-
get me, and in the second place to receive the
bearer of this letter, whom I commend to you
with the request that you recognise him as one
very near and dear to me, and that you encour-
age and help him in whatever way his circum-
stances may demand ; not that he is in need of
anything (for Christ has amply endowed him),
but that he is most eagerly desiring the friend-
ship of good men, and thinks that in securing
this he obtains the most valuable blessing. His
design in travelling to the West you may learn
from his own lips.

Chap. n. — 2. As for us, established here in our
monastery, we feel the shock of waves on every
side, and are burdened with the cares of our lot
as pilgrims. But we beheve in Him who hath
said, " Be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world," 3 and are confident that by His grace
and guidance we shall prevail against our adver-
sary the devil.

I beseech you to give my respectful salutation
to the holy and venerable brother, our father
Alypius. The brethren who, with me, devote

' Eph. iv. 26.
3 John XVI. 33.


themselves to serve the Lord in this monastery,
salute you warmly. May Christ our Almighty
God guard you from harm, and keep you mind-
ful of me, my lord and father truly holy and
venerable.

LETTER XL.

(a.d. 397.)

to my lord much beloved, and brother wor-
thy of being honoured and embr.'^ced with
the most sincere devotion of charity, my
fellow- presbyter jerome, augustin sends
greeting.

Chap. i. — i. I thank you that, instead of a
mere formal salutation, you wrote me a letter,
though it was much shorter than I would desire
to have from you ; since nothing that comes
from you is tedious, however much time it may
demand. Wherefore, although 1 am beset with
great anxieties about the affairs of others, and
that, too, in regard to secular matters, I would
find it difificult to pardon the brevity of your
letter, were it not that I consider that it was
written in reply to a yet shorter letter of my own.
Address yourself, therefore, I entreat you, to
that exchange of letters by which we may have
fellowship, and may not permit the distance
which separates us to keep us wliolly apart from
each other ; though we are in the Lord bound
togetherby the unity of the Spirit, even when
our pens rest and we are silent. The books in
which you have laboured to bring treasures from
the Lord's storehouse give me almost a complete
knowledge of you. Eor if I may not say, " I
know you," because I have not seen your face,
it may with equal truth be said that you do not
know yourself, for you cannot see your own face.
If, however, it is this alone which constitutes
your acquaintance with yourself, that you know
your own mind, we also have no small knowl-
edge of it through your writings, in studying ,
which we bless God that to yourself, to us, to all I
who read your works, He has given you as you are.

Chap. ii. — 2. It is not long since, among other
things, a certain book of yours came into my 1
hands, the name of which I do not yet know, ■
for the manuscript itself had not the title written,
as is customary, on the first page. The brother
with whom it was found said that its title is jEp- ;
taphium, — a name which we might believe you:
to have approved, if we found in the work a.'
notice of the lives or writings of those only who
are deceased. Inasmuch, however, as mention
is there made of the works of some who were, at
the time when it was written, or are even now,
alive, we wonder why you either gave this tide
to it, or permitted others to believe that you had
done so. The book itself has our complete
approval as a useful work.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


273


Chap. hi. — 3. In your exposition of the Epis-
tle of Paul to the Galatians I have found one thing
which causes me much concern. For if it be
the case that statements untrue in themselves,
but made, as it were, out of a sense of duty in
the interest of religion,' have been admitted into
the Holy Scriptures, what authority will be left
to them? If this be conceded, what sentence
can be produced from these Scriptures, by the
weight of which the wicked obstinacy of error
can be broken down ? For as soon as you have
[produced it, if it be disliked by him who con-
tends with you, he will reply that, in the passage
alleged, the writer was uttering a falsehood under
the pressure of some honourable sense of duty.
And where will any one find this way of escape
impossible, if it be possible for men to say and
believe that, after introducing his narrative with
these words, " The things which I write unto you,
behold, before God, I lie not," ^ the apostle lied
when he said of Peter and Barnabas, " I saw that
they walked not uprightly, according to the truth
of the gospel " ? ^ For if they did walk uprightly,
Paul wrote what was false ; and if he wrote what
was false here, when did he say what was true ?
Shall he be supposed to say what is true when
his teaching corresponds with the predilection
of his reader, and shall everything which runs
counter to the impressions of the reader be
reckoned a falsehood uttered by him under a
sense of duty ? It will be impossible to prevent
men from finding reasons for thinking that he
not only might have uttered a falsehood, but was
bound to do so, if we admit this canon of inter-
pretation. There is no need for many words in
pursuing this argument, especially in writing to
you, for whose wisdom and prudence enough
has already been said. I would by no means
be so arrogant as to attempt to enrich by my
small coppers'* your mind, which by the divine
gift is golden ; and none is more able than your-
self to revise and correct that work to which I
have referred.

Chap. iv. — 4. You do not require me to teach
you in what sense the apostle says, "To the Jews
I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews,"5
and other sucli things in the same passage, which
are to be ascribed to the compassion of pitying
love, not the artifices of intentional deceit. For
he that ministers to the sick becomes as if he
were sick himself; not, indeed, falsely pretending
to be under the fever, but considering, with the
Itnind of one truly sympathizing, what he would
Iwish done for himself if he were in the sick
man's place. Paul was indeed a Jew ; and when
he had become a Christian, he had not aban-


* \y clut Ojfficiosa viendacia.^
' Gal. i. 20.

3 Gal. ii. 14.

* \_Obolzs meisJ]
S I Cor. ix. 20.


doned those Jewish sacraments which that peo-
ple had received in the right way, and for a
certain appointed time. Therefore, even al-
though he was an apostle of Christ, he took
part in observing these ; but with this view, that
he might show that they were in no wise hurtful
to those who, even after they had believed in
Christ, desired to retain the ceremonies which
by the law they had learned from their fathers ;
provided only that they did not build on these
their hope of salvation, since the salvation which
was foreshadowed in these has now been brought
in by the Lord Jesus. For the same reason,
he judged that these ceremonies should by no
means be made binding on the Gentile converts,
because, by imposing a heavy and superfluous
burden, they might turn aside from the faith
those who were unaccustomed to them.

5. The thing, therefore, which he rebuked in
Peter was not his observing the customs handed
down from his fathers — which Peter, if he
wished, might do without being chargeable with
deceit or inconsistency, for, though now super-
fluous, these customs were not hurtful to one

1 who had been accustomed to them — but his
' compelling the Gelitiles to observe Jewish cere-
. monies,^ which he could not do otherwise than
by so acting in regard to them as if their observ-
ance was, even after the Lord's coming, still ne-
! cessary to salvation, against which truth protested
I through the apostolic office of Paul. Nor was
I the Apostle Peter ignorant of this, but he did it
; through fear of those who were of the circum-
cision. Manifestly, therefore, Peter was truly
corrected, and Paul has given a true narrative
of the event, unless, by the admission of a false-
hood here, the authority of the Holy Scriptures
given for the faith of all coming generations is
to be made wholly uncertain and wavering. For
it is neither possible nor suitable to state within
the compass of a letter how great and how un-
utterably evil must be the consequences of such
a concession. It might, however, be shown
seasonably, and with less hazard, if we were
conversing together.

6. Paul had forsaken everything peculiar to
the Jews that was evil, especially this : " That,
being ignorant of God's righteousness, and go-
ing about to establish their own righteousness,
they had not submitted themselves unto the
righteousness of God." ^ In this, moreover, he
differed from them : that after the passion and
resurrection of Christ, in whom had been given
and made manifest the mystery of grace, accord-
ing to the order of Melchizedek, they still con-
sidered it binding on them to celebrate, not out
of mere reverence for old customs, but as neces-
sary to salvation, the sacraments of the old econ-

6 Rom. X. 3.


274


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


omy, which were indeed at one time necessary,
else had it been unprofitable and vain for the
Maccabees to suffer martyrdom, as they did, for
their adherence to them." Lastly, in this also
Paul differed from the Jews : that they persecuted
the Christian preachers of grace as enemies of
the law. These and all similar errors and sins
he declares that he " counted but loss and dung
that he might win Christ ; " ^ but he does not,
in so saying, disparage the ceremonies of the
Jewish law, if only they were observed after the
custom of their fathers, in the way in which he
himself observed them, without regarding them
as necessary to salvation, and not in the way in
which the Jews affirmed that they must be ob-
served, nor in the exercise of deceptive dissimu-
lation such as he had rebuked in Peter. For if
Paul observed these sacraments in order, by pre-
tending to be a Jew, to gain the Jews, why did
he not also take part with the Gentiles in hea-
then sacrifices, when to them that were without
law he became as without law, that he might gain
them also? The explanation is found in this,
that he took part in the Jewish sacrifices, as be-
ing himself by birth a Jew ; and that when he
said all this which I have quoted, he meant, not
that he pretended to be what he was not, but
that he felt with true compassion that he must
bring such help to them as would be needful for
himself if he were involved in their error.
Herein he exercised not the subtlety of a de-
ceiver, but the, sympathy of a compassionate
deliverer. In the same passage the apostle has
stated the principle more generally : " To the
weak became I as weak, that I might gain the
weak ; I am made all things to all men, that I
might by all means save some," ^ — the latter
clause of which guides us to understand the
former as meaning that he showed himself one
who pitied the weakness of another as much as
if it had been his own. For when he said,
"Who is weak, and I am not weak?"-* he did
not wish it to be supposed that he pretended to
suffer the infirmity of another, but rather that he
showed it by sympathy.

7. Wherefore I beseech you, apply to the cor-
rection and emendation of that book a frank and
truly Christian severity, and chant what the
Greeks call TraAirajSia. For incomparably more
lovely than the Grecian Helen is Christian truth.
Li her defence, our martyrs have fought against
Sodom with more courage than the heroes of
Greece displayed against Troy for Helen's sake.
I do not say this in order that you may recover
the faculty of spiritual sight, 5 — far be it from

' 2 Mace. vii. i.

2 Phil. iii. 8.

3 I Cor. ix. 22.
* 2 Cor. .\i. 29.

f The reference here is to the story of the poet Stesichorus, who,
having lost his sight as a judgment for writing an attack on Helen,
was miraculously healed when he wrote a poem in retractation.


me to say that you have lost it ! — but that, hav-
ing eyes both clear and quick in discernment,
you may turn them towards that from which, in
unaccountable dissimulation, you have turned
them away, refusing to see the calamitous conse-
quences which would follow on our once admit-
ting that a writer of the divine books could in
any part of his work honourably and piously utter
a falsehood.

Chap. v. — 8. I had written some time ago a
letter to you on this subject,^ which was not de-
livered to you, because the bearer to whom it
was entrusted did not finish his journey to you.
From it I may quote a thought which occurred
to me while I was dictating it, and which I
ought not to omit in this letter, in order that, if
your opinion is still different from mine, and is
better, you may readily forgive the anxiety which
has moved me to write. It is this : If vour
opinion is different, and is according to truth
(for only in that case can it be better than
mine), you will grant that "a mistake of mine,
which is in the interest of truth, cannot deserve
great blame, if indeed it deserves blame at all,
\v*ien it is possible for you to use truth in the
interest of falsehood without doing wrong." 7

9. As to the reply which you were pleased to
give me concerning Origen, I did not need to be
told that we should, not only in ecclesiastical
writers, but in all others, approve and commend
what we find right and true, but reject and con-
demn what we find false and mischievous. What
I craved from your wisdom and learning (and I
still crave it), was that you should acquaint us
definitely with the points in which that remarka-
ble man is proved to have departed from the
belief of the truth. Moreover, in that book in
which you have mentioned all the ecclesiastical
writers whom you could remember, and their
works, it would, I think, be a more convenient
arrangement if, after naming those ^ whom you
know to be heretics (since you have chosen not
to pass them without notice), you would add in
what respect their doctrine is to be avoided.
Some of these heretics also you have omitted, and
I would fain know on what grounds. If, however,
perchance it has been from a desire not to en-
large that volume unduly that you refrained from
adding to a notice of heretics, the statement of
the things in which the Catholic Church has
authoritatively condemned them, I beg you not
to grudge bestowing on this subject, to which
with humility and brotherly love I direct youif
attention, a portion of that literary labour by
which already, by the grace of the Lord our
God, you have in no small measure stimulated
and assisted the saints in the study of the Latin
tongue, and publish in one small book (if your

6 [Epist. xxvni.]

7 See Letter XXVHI. sec. 5.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


275


other occupations permit you) a digest of the
perverse dogmas of all the heretics who up to
this time have, through arrogance, or ignorance,
or self-will, attempted to subvert the simplicity
of the Christian faith ; a work most necessary
for the information of those who are prevented,
either by lack of leisure or by their not knowing
the Greek language, from reading and under-
standing so many things. I would urge my re-
quest at greater length, were it not that this is
commonly a sign of misgivings as to the benevo-
lence of the party from whom a favour is sought.
Meanwhile I cordially recommend to your good-
will in Christ our brother Paulus, to whose high
standing in these regions I bear before God
willing testimony.


LETTER XLL

(a.d. 397.)

to father aurelius, our lord most blessed
and worthy of veneration, our brother
most sincerely beloved, and our partner in
the sacerdotal office, alypius and augustin
send greeting in the lord.

I. "Our mouth is filled with laughter, and
our tongue with singing," ' by your letter inform-
ing us that, by the help of that God whose
inspiration guided you, you have carried into
effect your pious purpose concerning all our
brethren in orders, and especially concerning
the regular delivering of a sermon to the people
in your presence by the presbyters, through
whose tongues thus engaged your love sounds
louder in the hearts than their voice does in the
ears of men. Thanks be unto God ! Is there
anything better for us to have in our heart,
or utter with our lips, or record with our pen,
than this ? Thanks be unto God ! No other
phrase is more easily spoken, and nothing more
pleasant in sound, profound in significance, and
profitable in practice, than this. Thanks be
unto God, who has endowed you with a heart
so true to the interests of your sons, and who
has brought to light what you had latent in the
inner soul, beyond the reach of human eye, giv-
ing you not only the will to do good, but the
means of realizing your desjres. So be it, cer-
tainly so be it ! let these works shine before men,
that they may see them, and rejoice and glorify
your Father in heaven.^ In such things delight
yourself in the Lord ; and may your prayers for
these presbyters be graciously heard on their
behalf by Him whose voice you do not consider
it beneath you to hear when He speaks by them !
May they go on, and walk, yea, run in the way
of the Lord ! May the small and the great be


* Ps. cxxvi. I.
' Matt. V. 16.


blessed together, being made glad by those who
say unto them, " Let us go into the house of the
Lord ! " 3 Let the stronger lead ; let the weaker
imitate their example, being followers of them,
as they are of Christ. May we all be as ants
pursuing eagerly the path of holy industry, as
bees labouring amidst the fragrance of holy duty ;
and may fruit be brought forth in patience by
the saving grace of stedfastness unto the end !
May the Lord " not suffer us to be tempted
above that we are able, but with the temptation
may He make a way to escape, that we may be
able to bear it " ! "^

2. Pray for us : we value your prayers as wor-
thy to be heard, since you go to God with so
great an offering of unfeigned love, and of praise
brought to Him by your works. Pray that in us
also these works may shine, for He to whom
you pray knows with what fulness of joy we be-
hold them shining in you. Such are our de-
sires ; such are the abounding comforts which
in the multitude of our thoughts within us de-
light our souls. 5 It is so now because such is
the promise of God ; and as He hath promised,
so shall it be in the time to come. We be-
seech you, by Him who hath blessed you, and
has by you bestowed this blessing on the people
whom you serve, to order any of the presbyters'
sermons which you please to be transcribed, and
after revisal sent to us. For I on my part am
not neglecting what you required of me ; and
as I have written often before, I am still longing
to know what you think of Tychonius' seven
Rules or Keys.^

We warmly commend to you our brother
Hilarinus, leading physician and magistrate of
Hippo. As to our brother Romanus, we know
how actively you are exerting yourself on his
behalf, and that we need ask nothing but that
God may prosper your endeavours.


LETTER XLIL

(a.d. 397.)

to paulinus and therasia, my brother and
sister in christ, worthy of respect and
praise, most eminent for piety, augustin
sends greeting in the lord.

Could this have been hoped or expected by
us, that now by our brother Severus we should
have to claim the answer which your love has
not yet written to us, so long and so impatient-
ly desiring your reply? Why have we been
doomed through two summers (and these in the

3 Ps. cxxii. I.

* 1 Cor. ix. 13.

5 P,s. xciv. ig.

*> On this work of Tyclionius, see Augustin, De Doctrina Chris-
tiana, b. iii., in which these seven keys for the opening of Scripture
are stated and examined.


276


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


parched land of Africa) to bear this thirst?
\\'hat more can I say? O generous man, who
art daily giving away what is your own, be just,
and pay what is a debt to us. Perhaps the rea-
son of your long delay is your desire to finish
and transmit to me that book against heathen
worship, in writing which I had heard that you
were engaged, and for which I had expressed a
very earnest desire. O that you might by so rich
a feast satisfy the hunger which has been sharp-
ened by fasting (so far as your pen was con-
cerned ) for more than a year ! but if this be
not yet prepared, our complaints will not cease
unless meanwhile you prevent us from being
famished before that is finished. Salute our
brethren, especially Romanus and Agilis.' From
this place all who are with me salute you, and
they would be less provoked by your delay in
writing if they loved you less than they do.


LETTER XLIII.

(a.d. 397.)

ro glorius, eleusius, the two felixes, graini-
maticus, and all others to whom this may
be acceptable, my lords most beloved and
worthy of pr.aise, augustin sends greeting.

Chap. i. — i. The Apostle Paul hath said : " A
man that is an heretic after the first and second '
admonition reject, knowing that he that is such
is subverted and sinneth, being condemned of
himself." - But though the doctrine which men
hold be false and perverse, if they do not main-
tain it with passionate obstinacy, especially when
they have not devised it by the rashness of their
own presumption, but have accepted it from
parents who had been misguided and had fallen
into error, and if they are with anxiety seeking
the truth, and are prepared to be set right when
they have found it, such men are not to be
counted heretics. Were it not that I believe
you to be such, perhaps I would not write to
you. And yet even in the case of a heretic,
however puffed up with odious conceit, and in-
sane through the obstinacy of his wicked resist-
ance to truth, although we warn others to avoid
him, so that he may not deceive the weak and
inexperienced, we do not refuse to strive by
every means in our power for his correction.
On this ground I wrote even to some of the
chief of the Donatists, not indeed letters of com-
munion, which on account of their per\'ersity
they have long ceased to receive from the un-
divided Catholic Church which is spread through-
out the world, but letters of a private kind, such
as we may send even to pagans. These letters,


I See Epistle XXXI. p. 258.
^ Tit. iii. 10, II,


however, though they have sometimes read them,
they have not been willing, or perhaps it is more
probable, have not been able, to answer. In
these cases, it seems to me that I have dis-
charged the obligation laid on me by that love
which the Holy Spirit teaches us to render, not
only to our own, but to all, saying by the apos-
tle : " The Lord make you to increase and
abound in love one toward another, and toward
all men." 3 in another place we are warned
that those who are of a different opinion from
us must be corrected with meekness, " if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth, and that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the devil,
who are taken captive by him at his will."-*

2. I have said these things by way of preface,
lest any one should think, because you are not
of our communion, that I have been influenced
by forwardness rather than consideration in
sending this letter, and in desiring thus to confer
with you regarding the welfare of the soul ;
though I believe that, if I were writing to you
about an affair of property, or the settlement of
some dispute about money, no one would find
fault with me. So precious is this world in the
esteem of men, and so small is the value which
they set upon themselves ! This letter, there-
fore, shall be a witness in my vindication at the
bar of God, who knows the spirit in which I
Avrite, and who has said : '•' Blessed are the
peacemakers : for they shall be called the sons
of God." 5

Chap. ii. — 3. I beg you, therefore, to call
to mind that, when I was in your town,*^ and
was discussing with you a little concerning the
communion of Christian unity, certain Acts
were brought forward by you, fro4ii which a
statement was read aloud that about seventy
bishops condemned Cascilianus, formerly our
Bishop of Carthage, along with his colleagues,
and those by whom he was ordained. In the
same Acts was given a full account of the case
of Felix of Aptunga, as one singularly odious
and criminal. When all these had been read, I
answered that it was not to be wondered at if
the men who then caused that schism, and who
did not scruple to tamper with Acts, thought
that it was right to condemn those against whom
they had been instigated by envious and wicked
men, although the sentence was passed without
deliberation, in the absence of the parties con-
demned, and without acquainting them with the
matter laid to their charge. I added that we
have other ecclesiastical Acts, according to
which Secundus of Tigisis, who was for the time

3 I Thess. iii. 12.
* 2 Tim. ii. 25, 26.
5 ISLitt. V. 9.

*> Tubursi, a town recently identified, half-way between Calama
and Madaura.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


277


Primate of Numidia, left those who, being there
present, confessed themselves traditors to the
judgment of God, and permitted them to remain
in the episcopal sees which they then occupied ;
and I stated that the names of these men are in
the list of those who condemned Csecilianus,
and that this Secundus himself was president of
the Council in which he secured the condem-
nation of those who, being absent, were accused
as traditors, by the votes of those whom he par-
doned when, being present, they confessed the
same crime.

4. I then said that some time after the ordi-
nation of Majorinus, whom they with impious
wickedness set up against Caecilianus, raising
one altar against another, and rending with in-
fatuated contentiousness the unity of Christ,
they applied to Constantine, who was then em-
peror, to appoint bishops to act as judges and
arbiters concerning the questions which, having
arisen in Africa, disturbed the peace of the
Church.' This having been done, Csecilianus and
those who had sailed from Africa to accuse him
being present, and the case tried by Melchiades,
who was then Bishop of Rome, along with the
assessors whom at the request of the Donatists
the Emperor had sent, nothing could be proved
against Csecilianus ; and thus, while he was con-
firmed in his episcopal see, Donatus, who was
present as his opponent, was condemned. After
all this, when they all still persevered in the ob-
stinacy of their most sinful schism, the Emperor
being appealed to, took pains to have the mat-
ter again more carefully examined and settled
at Aries. They, however, declining an ecclesias-
tical decision, appealed to Constantine himself
to hear their cause. When this trial came on,
both parties being present, Csecilianus was pro-
nounced innocent, and they retired vanquished ;
but they still persisted in the same perversity.
At the same time the case of Felix of Aptunga
was not forgotten, and he too was acquitted of
the crimes laid to his charge, after an investiga-
tion by the proconsul at the order of the same
prince.

5. Since, however, I was only saying these
things, not reading from the record, I seemed
to you to be doing less than my earnestness had
led you to expect. Perceiving this, I sent at once
for that which I had promised to read. While
I went on to visit the Church at Gelizi, intend-
ing to return thence to you, all these Acts were
brought to you before two days had passed, and
were read to you, as you know, so far as time
permitted, in one day. We read first how Se-


' They asked judges from Gaul, as a country in which none had
been guihy of surrendering the sacred books under pressure of per-
secution. The bishops appointed were Maternus of Agrippina, Rhe-
ticius of Augustodunum, and Marinus of Aries. They were sent to
Rome with fifteen Italian bishops; Melchiades, Bishop of Rome, pre-
sided in their meeting in a.d. 313, and acquitted Cscilianus.


cundus of Tigisis did not dare to depose his
colleagues in office who confessed themselves
to be traditors ; but afterwards, by the help of
these very men, dared to condemn, without
their confessing the crime, and in their absence,
Caecilianus and others who were his colleagues.
And we next read the proconsular Acts in which
Felix was, after a most thorough investigation,
proved innocent. These, as you will remember,
were read in the forenoon. In the afternoon I
read to you their petition to Constantine, and
the ecclesiastical record of the proceedings in
Rome of the judges whom he appointed, by
which the Donatists were condemned, and Cse-
cilianus confirmed in his episcopal dignity. In
conclusion, I read the letters of the Emperor
Constantine, in which the evidence of all these
things was established beyond all possibility of
dispute.

Chap. hi. — 6. What more do you ask, sirs?
what more do you ask? The matter in question
here is not your gold and silver ; it is not your
land, nor property, nor bodily health that is at
stake. I appeal to your souls concerning their
obtaining eternal life, and escaping eternal death.
At length awake ! I am not handling an ob-
scure question, nor searching into some hidden
mystery, for the investigation of which capacity
is found in no human intellect, or at least in
only a few : the thing is clear as day. Is any-
thing more obvious? could anything be more
quickly seen? I affirm that parties innocent
and absent were condemned by a Council, very
numerous indeed, but hasty in their decisions.
I prove this by the proconsular Acts, in which
that man was wholly cleared from the charge of
being a traditor, whom the Acts of the Council
which your party brought forward proclaimed as
most specially guilty. I affirm further, that the
sentence against those who were said to be
traditors was passed by men who had confessed
themselves guilty of that very crime. I prove
this by the ecclesiastical Acts in which the names
of those men are set forth, to whom Secundus
of Tigisis, professing a desire to preserve peace,
granted pardon of a crime which he knew them
to have committed, and by whose help he after-
wards, notwithstanding the destruction of peace,
passed sentence upon others of whose crime he
had no evidence ; whereby he made it manifest
that in the former decision he had been moved,
not by a regard for peace, but by fear for him-
self. For Purpurius, Bishop of Limata, had
alleged against him that he himself, when he had
been put in custody by a curator and his soldiers,
in order to compel him to give up the Scriptures,
was let go, doubtless not without paying a price,
in either giving up something, or ordering others
to do so for him. He, fearing that this suspi-
cion might be easily enough confirmed, having


278


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


obtained the advice of Secundus the younger,
his own kinsman, and having consulted all his
colleagues in the episcopal office, remitted crimes
which required no proof to be judged by God,
and in so doing appeared to be protecting the
peace of the Church : which was false, for he
was only protecting himself.

7. For if, in truth, regard for peace had any
place in his heart, he would not afterwards at
Carthage have joined those traditors whom he
had left to the judgment of God when they were
present, and confessed their fault, in passing
sentence for the same crime upon others who
were absent, and against whom no one had
proved the charge. He was bound, moreover,
to be the more afraid on that occasion of dis-
turbing the peace, inasmuch as Carthage was a
great and famous city, from which any evil origi-
nating there might extend, as from the head of
the body, throughout all Africa. Carthage was
also near to the countries beyond the sea, and
distinguished by illustrious renown, so that it had
a bishop of more than ordinary influence, who
could afford to disregard even a number of
enemies conspiring against him, because he saw
himself united by letters of communion both to
the Roman Church, in which the supremacy of
an apostolic chair has always flourished,' and to
all other lands from which Africa itself received
the gospel, and was prepared to defend himself
before these Churches if his adversaries attempted
to cause an alienation of them from him. See-
ing, therefore, that Caecilianus declined to come
before his colleagues, whom he perceived or sus-
pected (or, as they affirm, pretended to suspect)
to be biassed by his enemies against the real
merits of his case, it was all the more the duty
of Secundus, if he wished to be the guardian of
true peace, to prevent the condemnation in
their absence of those who had wholly declined
to compear at their bar. For it was not a mat-
ter concerning presbyters or deacons or clergy
of inferior order, but concerning colleagues who
might refer their case wholly to the judgment of
other bishops, especially of apostolical churches,
in which the sentence passed against them in
their absence would have no weight, since they
had not deserted their tribunal after having com-
peared before it, but had always declined com-
pearance because of the suspicions which they
entertained.

8. This consideration ought to have weighed
much with Secundus, who was at that time Pri-
mate, if his desire, as president of the Council,
was to promote peace ; for he might perhaps have


' " In qua semper apostolicse calhedrse viguit principattis." The
use in the translation of the indefinite article, "an apostolic chair,"
is vindicated by the language of Augustin in sec 26 of this letter re-
garding Carthage, and by the words in Letter CCXXXII. sec. 3:
" Christlanae societatis qua; per sedes apostolorum et successiones
episcoporum certa per orbem propagatione diffunditur."


quieted or restrained the mouths of those who
were raging against men who were absent, if he
had spoken thus : " Ye see, brethren, how after
so great havoc of persecution peace has been
given to us, through God's mercy, by the princes
of this world ; surely we, being Christians and
bishops, ought not to break up the Christian
unity which even pagan enemies have ceased to
assail. Either, therefore, let us leave to God, as
Judge, all those cases which the calamity of a
most troublous time has brought upon the
Church ; or if there be some among you who
have such certain knowledge of the 2;uilt of other
parties, that they are able to bring against them
a definite indictment, and prove it if they plead
not guilty, and who also shrink from having
communion with such persons, let them hasten
to our brethren and peers, the bishops of the
churches beyond the sea, and present to them
in the first place a complaint concerning the
conduct and contumacy of the accused, as hav-
ing through consciousness of guilt declined the
jurisdiction of their peers in Africa, so that by
these foreign bishops they may be summoned to
compear and answer before them regarding the
things laid to their charge. If they disobey this
summons, their criminality and obduracy will
become known to those other bishops ; and by
a synodical letter sent in their name to all parts
of the world throughout which the Church of
Christ is now extended, the parties accused will
be excluded from communion with all churches,
in order to prevent the springing up of error in
the see of the Church at Carthage. When that
has been done, and these men have been sepa-
rated from the whole Church, we shall without
fear ordain another bishop over the community
in Carthage ; whereas, if now another bishop be
ordained by us, communion will most probably
be withheld from him by the Church beyond the
sea, because they will not recognise the validity
of the deposition of the bishop, whose ordination
was everywhere acknowledged, and with whom
letters of communion had been exchanged ; and
thus, through our undue eagerness to pronounce
without deliberation a final sentence, the great
scandal of scliism within the Church, when it has
rest from without, may arise, and we may be
found presuming to set up another altar, not
against Caecilianus, but against the universal
Church, which, uninformed of our procedure,
would still hold communion with him."

9. If any one had been disposed to reject
sound and equitable counsels such as these,
what could he have done? or how could he
have procured the condemnation of any one of
his absent peers, when he could not have any
decisions with the authority of the Council, see- .
ing that the Primate was opposed to him ? And
if such a serious revolt against the authority of


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


279


the Primate himself arose, that some were re-
solved to condemn at once those whose case he
desired to postpone, how much better would it
have been for him to separate himself by dissent
from such quarrelsome and factious men, than
from the communion of the whole world ! But
because there were no charges which could be
proved at the bar of foreign bishops against
Cseciliajius and those vho took part in his ordi-
nation, those who condemned them were not
willing to delay passing sentence ; and when
they had pronounced it, were not at any pains
to intimate to the Church beyond the sea the
1 names of those in Africa with whom, as con-
demned traditors, she should avoid communion.
For if they had attempted this, Ctecilianus and the
others would have defended themselves, and would
have vindicated their innocence against their false
accusers by a most thorough trial before the
ecclesiastical tribunal of bishops beyond the sea.
10. Our belief concerning that perverse and
unjust Council is, that it was composed chiefly
of traditors whom Secundus of Tigisis had par-
doned on their confession of guilt ; and who,
when a rumour had gone abroad that some had
been guilty of delivering up the sacred books,
sought to turn aside suspicion from themselves
by bringing a calumny upon others, and to
escape the detection of their crime, through
surrounding themselves with a cloud of lying
rumours, when men throughout all Africa, be-
lieving their bishops, said what was false con-
cerning innocent men, that they had been
condemned at Carthage as traditors. Whence
you perceive, my beloved friends, how that
which some of your party affirmed to be im-
probable could indeed happen, viz. that the very
men who had confessed their own guilt as tradi-
tors, and had obtained the remission of their
case to the divine tribunal, afterwards took part
in judging and condemning others who, not be-
ing present to defend themselves, were accused
of the same crime. For their own guilt made
them more eagerly embrace an opportunity by
which they might overwhelm others with a
groundless accusation, and by thus finding oc-
cupation for the tongues of men, which screen

More-
should
condemn in another the wrong which he had
himself done, the Apostle Paul would not have
had occasion to say : " Therefore thou art inex-
cusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest :
for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemn-
est thyself j for thou that judgest doest the same
things." ' This is exactly what these men did,
so that the words of the apostle may be fully
and appropriately applied to them.

' Rom. ii. I.


their own misdeeds from

over, if it were inconceivable that a man


mvestigation.


11. Secundus, therefore, was not acting in the
interests of peace and unity when he remitted
to the divine tribunal the crimes which these
men confessed : for, if so, he would have been
much more careful to prevent a schism at Car-
thage, when there were none present to wliom he
might be constrained to grant pardon of a crime
which they confessed ; when, on the contrary, all
that the preservation of peace demanded was
a refusal to condemn those who were absent.
They would have acted unjustly to these inno-
cent men, had they even resolved to pardon
them, when they were not proved guilty, and had
not confessed the guilt, but were actually not
present at all. For the guilt of a man is estab-
lished beyond question when he accepts a pardon.
How much more outrageous and blind were they
wlio thought that they had power to condemn for
crimes which, as unknown, they could not even
have forgiven ! In the former case, crimes that
were known were remitted to the divine arbitra-
tion, lest others should be inquired into ; in the
latter case, crimes that were not known were made
ground of condemnation, that those which were
known might be concealed. But it will be said,
the crime of Caecilianus and the others was known.
Even if I were to admit this, the fact of their
absence ought to have protected them from such
a sentence. For they were not chargeable with
deserting a tribunal before which they had never
stood ; nor was the Church so exclusively repre-
sented in these African bishops, that in refusing
to appear before them they could be supposed
to decline all ecclesiastical jurisdiction. For
there remained thousands of bishops in coun-
tries beyond the sea, before whom it was mani-
fest that those who seemed to distrust their peers
in Africa and Numidia could be tried. Have
you forgotten what Scripture commands : "Blame
no one before you have examined him ; and
when you have examined him, let your correc-
tion be just"?^ If, then, the Holy Spirit has
forbidden us to blame or correct any one before
we have questioned him, how much greater is
the crime of not merely blaming or correcting,
but actually condemning men who, being absent,
could not be examined as to the charges brought
against them !

12. Moreover, as to the assertion of these
judges, that though the parties accused were
absent, having not fled from trial, but always
avowed their distrust of that faction, and de-
clined to appear before them, the crimes for
which they condemned them were well known ;
I ask, my brethren, how did they know them?
You reply. We cannot tell, since the evidence is
not stated in the public Acts. But I will tell you
how they knew them. Observe carefully the

2 Ecclus. xi. 7.


2S0


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


:ase of Felix of Aptunga, and first read how
much more vehement they were against him ;
"or they had just the same grounds for their
knowledge in the case of the others as in his,
>vho was afterwards proved most completely inno-
:ent by a thorough and severe investigation.
How much greater the justice and safety and
readiness with which we are warranted in believ-
ng the innocence of the others whose indictment
,vas less serious, and their condemnation less se-
vere, seeing that the man against whom they
raged much more furiously has been proved in-
nocent !

Chap. rv. — 13. Some one may perhaps make
in objection which, though it was disapproved
jy you when it was brought forward, I must not
Dass over, for it has been made by others, viz. :
[t was not meet that a bishop should be acquitted
3y trial before a proconsul : as if the bishop had
limself procured this trial, and it had not been
ione by order of the Emperor, to whose care
;his matter, as one concerning which he was re-
sponsible to God, especially belonged. For they
;hemselves had constituted the Emperor the ar-
biter and judge in this question regarding the
surrender of the sacred books, and regarding
;he schism, by their sending petitions to him,
md afterwards appealing to him ; and neverthe-
ess they refuse to accjuiesce in his decision. If,
;herefore, he is to be blamed whom the magistrate
ibsolved, though he had not himself applied to
:hat tribunal, how much more worthy of blame
ire those who desired an earthly king to be the
judge of their cause ! For if it be not wrong to
ippeal to the Emperor, it is not wrong to be
:ried by the Emperor, and consequently not
vrong to be tried by him to whom the Emperor
"efers the case. One of your friends was anx-
ous to make out a ground of complaint on the
iact that, in the case of the bishop Felix, one
vitness was suspended on the rack, and another
;ortured with pincers.' But was it in the power
Df Felix to prevent the prosecution of the inquiry
,vith diligence, and even severity, when the case
regarding which the advocate was labouring to
iiscover the truth was his own ? For what else
ivould such a resistance to investigation have
Deen construed to signify, than a confession of
lis crime ? And yet this proconsul, surrounded
ivith the awe-inspiring voices of heralds, and the
blood-stained hands of executioners at his ser-
t^ice, would not have condemned one of his
peers in absence, who declined to come before
his tribunal, if there was any other place where
his cause could be disposed of. Or if he had
in such circumstances pronounced sentence, he
would himself assuredly have suffered the due
and just award prescribed by civil law.

' UnguliE, mentioned in Codex Justinianus, ix. i8. 7.


Chap. v. — 14. If, however, you repudiate the
Acts of a proconsul, submit yourselves to the
Acts of the Church. These have all been read
over to you in their order. Perhaps you will say
that Melchiades, bishop of the Roman Church,
along with the other bishops beyond the sea
who acted as his colleagues, had no right to
usurp the place of judge in a matter which had
been already settled by seventy African bishops,
over whom the bishop of Tigisis as Primate pre-
sided. But what will you say if he in fact did
not usurp this place ? For the Emperor, being
appealed to, sent bishops to sit with him as
judges, with authority to decide the whole matter
in the way which seemed to them just. This we
prove, both by the petitions of the Donatists and
the words of the Emperor himself, both of
which were, as you remember, read to you, and
are now accessible to be studied or transcribed
by you. Read and ponder all these. See with
what scrupulous care for the preservation or
restoration of peace and unity everything was
discussed ; how the legal standing of the ac-
cusers was inquired into, and what defects were
proved in this matter against some of them ; and
how it was clearly proved by the testimony of
those present that they had nothing to say
against Caecilianus, but wished to transfer the
whole matter to the people belonging to the
party of Majorinus,^ that is, to the seditious mul-
titude who were opposed to the peace of the
Church, in order, forsooth, that Csecilianus might
be accused by that crowd which they believed to
be powerful enough to bend aside to their views
the minds of the judges by mere turbulent clam-
our, without any documentary evidence or ex-
amination as to the truth ; unless it was likely
that true accusations should be brought against
Csecilianus by a multitude infuriated and infatu-
ated by the cup of error and wickedness, in a
place where seventy bishops had with insane
precipitancy condemned, in their absence, men
who were their peers, and who were innocent, as
was proved in the case of Felix of Aptunga.
They wished to have Csecilianus accused by a
mob such as that to which they had given way
themselves, when they pronounced sentence
upon parties who were absent, and who had
not been examined. But assuredly they had not
come to judges who could be persuaded to such
madness.

15. Your own prudence may enable you to
remark here both the obstinacy of these men,
and the wisdom of the judges, who to the last
persisted in refusing to admit accusations against
Csecilianus from the populace who were of the
faction of Majorinus, who had no legal standing
in the case. You will also remark how they

2 Ordained by the Donatists bishop of Carthage in room of
Cscilianus.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


281


were required to bring forward the men who had
come with them from Africa as accusers or wit-
nesses, or in some other connection with the
case, and how it was said that they had been
present, but had been withdrawn by Donatus.
The said Donatus promised that he would pro-
duce them, and this promise he made repeatedly ;
yet, after all, declined to appear again in pres-
ence of that tribunal before which he had already
confessed so much, that it seemed as if by his
refusal to return he desired only to avoid being
present to hear himself condemned ; but the


things for which he was to be condemned had


been proved against him in his own presence,
and after examination. Besides this, a libel
bringing charges against Ccecilianus was handed
in by some parties. How the inquiry was there-
upon opened anew, what persons brought up the
libel, and how nothing after all could be proved
against Csecilianus, I need not state, seeing that
you have heard it all, and can read it as often as
you please.

16. As to the fact that there were seventy
bishops in the Council [which condemned
Csecilianus], you remember what was said in
the way of pleading against him the venerable
authority of so great a number. Nevertheless
these most venerable men resolved to keep their
judgment unembarrassed by endless questions of
hopeless intricacy, and did not care to inquire
either what was the number of those bishops, or
whence they had been collected, when they saw
them to be blinded with such reckless presump-
tion as to pronounce rash sentence upon their
peers in their absence, and without having exam-
ined them. And yet what a decision was finally
pronounced by the blessed Melchiades himself;
how equitable, how complete, how prudent, and
how fitted to make peace ! For he did not
presume to depose from his own rank those
peers against whom nothing had been proved ;
and, laying blame chiefly upon Donatus, whom
he had found the cause of the whole disturb-
ance, he gave to all the others restoration if they
chose to accept it, and was prepared to send
letters of communion even to those who were
known to have been ordained by Majorinus ; so
that wherever there were two bishops, through
this dissension doubling their number, he decided
that the one who was prior in the date of ordi-
nation should be confirmed in his see, and a new
congregation found for the other. O excellenfl
man ! O son of Christian peace, father of the \
[Christian people ! Compare now this handful
ith that multitude of bishops, not counting,
ut weighing them : on the one side you have
oderation and circumspection ; on the other,
recipitancy and blindness. On the one side,
lemency has not wronged justice, nor has justice
been at variance with clemency; on the other


side, fear was hiding itself under passion, and
passion was goaded to excess by fear. In the
one case, they assembled to clear the innocent
from false accusations by discovering where the
guilt really lay ; in the other, they had met to
screen the guilty from true accusations by bring-
ing false charges against the innocent.

Chap, vi. — 17. Could Csecilianus leave him-
self to be tried and judged by these men, when
he had such others before whom, if his case were
argued, he could most easily prove his inno-
cence? He could not have left himself in their
hands even had he been a stranger recently or-
dained over the Church at. Carthage, and conse-
quently not aware of the power in perverting the
minds of men, either worthless or unwise, which
was then possessed by a certain Lucilla, a very
wealthy woman, whom he had offended when he
was a deacon, by rebuking her in the exercise of
church discipline ; for this evil influence was also
at work to bring about that iniquitous transac-
tion. For in that Council, in which men absent
and innocent were condemned by persons who
had confessed themselves to be traditors, there
were a few who wished, by defaming others, to
hide their own crimes, that men, led astray by
unfounded rumours, might be turned aside from
inquiring into the truth. The number of those
who were especially interested in this was not
great, although the preponderating authority was
on their side ; because they had with them Se-
cundus himself, who, yielding to fear, had par-
doned them. But the rest are said to have been
bribed and instigated specially against Csecilia-
nus by the money of Lucilla. There are Acts
in the possession of Zenophilus, a man of con-
sular rank, according to which one Nundinarius,
a deacon who had been (as we learn from the
same Acts) deposed by Sylvanus, bishop of Cirta,
having failed in an attempt to recommend him-
self to that party by the letters of other bishops,
in the heat of passion revealed many secrets, and
brought them forward in open court ; amongst
which we read this on the record, that the rear-
ing of rival altars in the Church of Carthage, the
chief city of Africa, was due to the bishops being
bribed by the money of Lucilla. I am aware
that I did not read these Acts to you, but you
remember that there was not time. Besides
these influences, there was also some bitterness
arising from mortified pride, because they had
not themselves ordained Csecilianus bishop of
Carthage.

18. When Csecihanus knew that these men had
assembled, not as impartial judges, but hostile
and perverted through all these things, was it
possible that either he should consent, or the
people over whom he presided should allow him,
to leave the church and go into a private dwell-
ing, where he was not to be tried fairly by his


i


282


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


peers, but to be slain by a small faction, urged
on by a woman's spite, especially when he saw
that his case might have an unbiassed and equi-
table hearing before the Church beyond the sea,
which was uninfluenced by private enmities on
either side in the dispute ? If his adversaries de-
clined pleading before that tribunal, they would
thereby cut themselves off from that communion
with the whole world which innocence enjoys.
And if they attempted there to bring a charge
against him, then he would compear for himself,
and defend his innocence against all their plots,
as you have learned that he afterwards did, when
they, already guilty of schism, and stained with
the atrocious crime of having actually reared
their rival altar, applied — but too late — for the
decision of the Church beyond the sea. For this
they would have done at first, if their cause had
been supported by truth ; but their policy was to
come to the trial after false rumours had gained
strength by lapse of time, and public report of!
old standing, so to speak, had prejudged the '
case ; or, which seems more likely, having first
condemned Csecilianus as they pleased, they re-
lied for safety upon their number, and did not
dare to open the discussion of so bad a case
before other judges, by whom, as they were not
influenced by bribery, the truth might be discov-
ered.

Chap. vii. — 19. But when they actually found
that the communion of the whole world with
Caecilianus continued as before, and that letters
of communion from churches beyond the sea
were sent to him, and not to the man whom they
had flagitiously ordained, they became ashamed
of being always silent ; for it might be objected
to them : Why did they suffer the Church in so
many countries to go on in ignorance, communi-
cating with men that were condemned ; and es-
pecially why did they cut themselves off from
communion with the whole world, against which
they had no charge to make, by their bearing in
silence the exclusion from that communion of
the bishop whom they had ordained in Carthage ?
They chose, therefore, as it is reported, to bring
their dispute with Caecihanus before the foreign
churches, in order to secure one of two things,
either of which they were prepared to accept :
if, on the one hand, by any amount of craft,
they succeeded in making good the false accu-
sation, they would abundantly satisfy their lust of
revenge ; if, however, they failed, they might
remain as stubborn as before, but would now
have, as it were, some excuse for it, in alleging
that they had suffered at the hands of an unjust
tribunal, — the common outcry of all worthless
litigants, though they have been defeated by the
clearest light of truth, — as if it might not have
been said, and most justly said, to them : " Well,
let us suppose that those bishops who decided


the case at Rome were not good judges ; there
still remained a plenary Council of the universal
Church, in which these judges themselves might
be put on their defence ; so that, if they were
convicted of mistake, their decisions might be
reversed." Whether they have done this or not,
let them prove : for we easily prove that it was
not done, by the fact that the whole world does
not communicate with them ; or if it was done,
they were defeated there also, of which their
state of separation from the Church is a proof.

20. What they actually did afterwards, how-
ever, is sufficiently shown in the letter of the
Emperor. For it was not before other bishops,
but at the bar of the Emperor, that they dared
to bring the charge of wrong judgment against
ecclesiastical judges of so high authority as the
bishops by whose sentence the innocence of
Caecilianus and their own guilt had been de-
clared. He granted them the second trial at
Aries, before other bishops ; not because this was
due to them, but only as a concession to their
stubbornness, and from a desire by all means to
restrain so great effrontery. For this Christian
Elmperor did not presume so to grant their un-
ruly and groundless complaints as to make him-
self the judge of the decision pronounced by
the bishops who had sat at Rome ; but he ap-
pointed, as I have said, other bishops, from
wliom, however, they preferred again to appeal
to the Emperor himself; and you have heard the
terms in which he disapproved of this. Would
that even then they had desisted from their most
insane contentions, and had yielded at last to the
truth, as he yielded to them when (intending
afterwards to apologize for this course to the!
reverend prelates) he consented to try their case
after the bishops, on condition that, if they did!
not submit to his decision, for which they hadi
themselves appealed, they should thenceforward]
be silent ! For he ordered that both parties]
should meet him at Rome to argue the case.!
When Caecilianus, for some reason, failed to com-
pear there, he, at their request, ordered all to fol-
low him to Milan. Then some of their part
began to withdraw, perhaps offended that Con-1
stantine did not follow their example, and con-i
demn Caecilianus in his absence at once and(i
summarily. When the prudent Emperor was;|
aware of this, he compelled the rest to come to
Milan in charge of his guards. Caecilianus hav-
ing come thither, he brought him forward in per-1
son, as he has written ; and having examined thej]
matter with the diligence, caution, and prudence '
which his letters on the subject indicate, he pro-,
nounced Caecilianus perfectly innocent, and them I
most criminal.

Chap. vni. — 21. And to this day they ad-^
minister baptism outside of the communion ofij|
the Church, and, if they can, they rebaptize tk


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


283


members of the Church : they offer sacrifice in
discord and schism, and salute in the name of
peace communities which they pronounce be-
yond the bounds of the peace of salvation. The |
unity of Christ is rent asunder, the heritage of j
Christ is reproached, the baptism of Christ is '
treated with contempt ; and they refuse to have
these errors corrected by constituted human
authorities, applying penalties of a temporal
kind in order to prevent them from being
doomed to eternal punishment for such sacri-
lege. We blame them for the rage which has
driven them to schism, the madness which makes
them rebaptize, and for the sin of separation
from the heritage of Christ, which has been
spread abroad through all lands. In using
manuscripts which are in their hands as well as
in ours, we mention churches, the names of
which are now read by them also, but with which
they have now no communion ; and when these
are pronounced in their conventicles, they say to
the reader, " Peace be with thee ; " and yet
they have no peace with those to whom these
letters were written. They, on the other hand,
blame us for crimes of men now dead, making
charges which either are false, or, if true, do not
concern us ; not perceiving that in the things
which we lay to their charge they are all in-
volved, but in the things which they lay to our
charge the blame is due to the chaff or the tares
in the Lord's harvest, and the crime does not
belong to the good grain ; not considering,
moreover, that within our unity those only have
fellowship with the wicked who take pleasure in
their being such, whereas those who are displeased
with their wickedness yet cannot correct them, —
as they do not presume to root out the tares
before the harvest, lest they root out the wheat
also,' — have fellowship with them, not in their
deeds, but in the altar of Christ ; so that not
only do they avoid being defiled by them, but
they deserve commendation and praise accord-
ing to the word of God, because, in order to
prevent the name of Christ from being reproached
by odious schisms, they tolerate in the interest
of unity that which in the interest of righteous-
ness they hate.

22. If they have ears, let them hear what the
i Spirit saith to the churches. For in the Apoca-
lypse of John we read : " Unto the angel of the
1 Church of Ephesus write : These things saith
I He that hokleth the seven stars in His right
hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven
golden candlesticks ; I know thy works, and thy
llabour, and thy patience, and how thou canst
mot bear them which are evil : and thou hast
[tried them which say they are apostles, and are
["not, and hast found them liars : and hast borne.


Matt.


xiu. 29.


and hast patience, and for My name's sake hast
tolerated them,^ and hast not fainted." ^ Now,
if He wished this to be understood as addressed
to a celestial angel, and not to those invested
with authority in the Church, He would not go
on to say : " Nevertheless I have somewhat
against thee, because thou hast left thy first
love. Remember therefore from whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and do the first works ;
or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy candlestick out of his place, except
thou repent." ■♦ This could not be said to the
heavenly angels, who retain their love unchanged,
as the only beings of their order that have de-
parted and fallen from their love are the devil
and his angels. The first love here alluded to is
that which was proved in their tolerating for
Christ's name's sake the false apostles. To this
He commands them to return, and to do " their
first works." Now we are reproached with the
crimes of bad men, not done by us, but by
others ; and some of them, moreover, not known
to us. Nevertheless, even if they were actually
committed, and that under our own eyes, and
we bore with them for the sake of unity, letting
the tares alone on account of the wheat, who-
soever with open heart receives the Holy Scrip-
tures would pronounce us not only free from
blame, but worthy of no small praise.

23. Aaron bears with the multitude demand-
ing, fashioning, and worshipping an idol. Moses
bears with thousands murmuring against God,
and so often offending His holy name. David
bears with Saul his persecutor, even when for-
saking the things that are above by his wicked
life, and following after the things that are be-
neath by magical arts, avenges his death, and
calls him the Lord's anointed, 5 because of the
venerable right by which he had been conse-
crated. Samuel bears with the reprobate sons of
Eli, and his own perverse sons, whom the people
refused to tolerate, and were therefore rebuked
by the warning and punished by the severity of
God. Lastly, he bears with the nation itself,
though proud and despising God. Isaiah bears
with those against whom he hurls so many mer-
ited denunciations. Jeremiah bears with those
at whose hands he suffers so many things. Zech-
ariah bears with the scribes and Pharisees, as
to whose character in those days Scripture in-
forms us. I know that I have omitted many
examples : let those who are willing and able
read the divine records for themselves : ■ they will
find that all the holy servants and friends of God
have always had to bear with some among their


2 Augustin translates ipda-Taa-ai; (E. V. "hast laboured") by
" sustinuisti eos " — " hast tolerated thevi; " and upon this his argu-
ment turns.

3 Rev. ii. 1-3.
•« Rev. ii. 4, 5.

S Christum Domini.


284


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


own people, with whom, nevertheless, they par-
took in the sacraments of that dispensation, and
in so doing not only were not defiled by them,
but were to be commended for their tolerant
spirit, "endeavouring to keep," as the aposde
says, " the unity of the Si)irit in the bond of
peace." ' Let them also observe what has oc-
curred since the Lord's coming, in which time
we would find many more examples of this tol-
eration in all parts of the world, if they could all
be written down and authenticated : but attend
to those which are on record. The Lord Him-
self bears with Judas, a devil, a thief. His own
betrayer ; He permits him, along with the inno-
cent disciples, to receive that which behevers
know as our ransom.^ The apostles bear with
false apostles ; and in the midst of men who
sought their own things, and not the things of
Jesus Christ, Paul, not seeking his own, but the
things of Christ, lives in the practice of a most
noble toleration. Li fine, as I mentioned a
little while ago, the person presiding under the
title of Angel over a Church, is commended,
because, though he hated those that were evil,
he yet bore with them for the Lord's name's
sake, even when they were tried and discovered.
24. In conclusion, let them ask themselves :
Do they not bear with the murders and devasta-
tions by fire which are perpetrated by the Cir-
cumcelliones, who treat with honour the dead
bodies of those who cast themselves down from
dangerous heights ? Do they not bear with the
misery which has made all Africa groan for years
beneath the incredible outrages of one man,
Optatus [bishop of Thamugada] ? I forbear
from specifying the tyrannical acts of violence
and public depredations in districts, towns, and
properties throughout Africa ; for it is better to
leave you to speak of these to each other,
whether in whispers or openly, as you please.
For wherever you turn your eyes, you will find
the things of which I speak, or, more correctly,
refrain from speaking. Nor do we on this
ground accuse those whom, when they do such
things, you love. What we dislike in that party
is not their bearing w»th those who are wicked,
but their intolerable wickedness in the matter of
schism, of raising altar against altar, and of sep-
aration from the heritage of Christ now spread,
as was so long ago promised, throughout the
world. We behold with grief and lamentation
peace broken, unity rent asunder, baptism admin-
istered a second time, and contempt poured on
the sacraments, which are holy even when min-
istered and received by the wicked. If they
regard these things as trifles, let them observe
those examples by which it has been proved how

' Eph. iv 3.

'^ Augustin holds that Judas was present at the institution of the
Lord's Supper. See Letter XLIV. sec. 10, p. 288.


they are esteemed by God. The men who made
an idol perished by a common death, being slain
with the sword : 3 but when the men endeav-
oured to make a schism in Israel, the leaders
were swallowed up by the opening earth, and the
crowd of their accomplices was consumed by fire.'*
In the difference between the punishments, the
different degrees of demerit may be discerned.

Chap. ix. — 25. These, then, are the facts : In
time of persecution, the sacred books are sur-
rendered to the persecutors. Those who were
guilty of this surrender confess it, and are re-
mitted to the divine tribunal ; those who were
innocent are not examined, but condemned at
once by rash men. The integrity of that one
who, of all the men thus condemned in their ab-
sence, was the most vehemently accused, is after-
wards vindicated before unimpeachable judges.
From the decision of bishops an appeal is made
to the Emperor ; the Emperor is chosen judge ;
and the sentence of the Emperor, when pro-
nounced, is set at naught. What was then done
you have read ; what is now being done you have
before your eyes. If, after all that you have read,
you are still in doubt, be convinced by what you
see. By all means let us give up arguing from
ancient manuscripts, public archives, or the acts
of courts, civil or ecclesiastical. We have a
greater book — the world itself. In it I read
the accomplishment of that of which I read the
promise in the Book of God : " The Lord hath
said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten Thee : ask of Me, and I shall give Thee
the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the utter-
most parts of the earth for Thy possession." 5
He that has not communion with this inherit-
ance may know himself to be disinherited, w^hat-
ever books he may plead to the contrary. He
that assails this inheritance is plainly enough de-
clared to be an outcast from the family of God.
The question is raised as to the parties guilty of
surrendering the divine books in which that in-
heritance is promised. Let him be believed to
have delivered the testament to the flames, who
is resisting the intentions of the testator. O fac-
tion of Donatus, what has the Corinthian Church
done


agamst


you ? In speaking of this one i
Church, I wish to be understood as asking the 1
same question in regard to all similar churches ■
remote from you. What have these churches
done against you, which could not know even
what you had done, or the names of the men
whom you branded with condemnation ? Or is
it so, that because Caecilianus gave offence to
Lucilla in Africa, the light of Christ is lost to
the whole world?''


3 Ex. xxxii. 27, 28.

*• Num. xvi. 31, 35.

5 Ps. ii. 7, 8.

^ The original has a play on the words Lucillam and LucenJt


tifai
iiit
M\
H


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


285


26. Let them at last become sensible of what
they have done ; for in the lapse of years, by a
just retribution, their work has recoiled upon
themselves. Ask by what woman's instigation
Maximianus ' (said to be a kinsman of Donatus)
withdrew himself from the communion of Primi-
anus, and how, having gathered a foction of
bishops, he pronounced sentence against Primi-
anus in his absence, and had himself ordained as
a rival bishop in his place, — precisely as Majo-
rinus, under the influence of Lucilla, assembled
a faction of bishops, and, having condemned
Csecilianus in his absence, was ordained bishop
in opposition to him. Do you admit, as I sup-
pose you do, that when Primianus was delivered
by the other bishops of his communion in Africa
from the sentence pronounced by the faction of
Maximianus, this decision was valid and suffi-
cient? And will you refuse to admit the same
in the case of Caecilianus, when he was released
by the bishops of the same one Church beyond
the sea from the sentence pronounced by the
faction of Majorinus ? Pray, my brethren, what
great thing do I ask of you ? What difficulty is
there in comprehending what I bring before you ?
The African Church, if it be compared with the
churches in other parts of the world, is very dif-
ferent from them, and is left far behind both in
numbers and in influence ; and even if it had
retained its unity, is far smaller when compared
with the universal Church in other nations, than
was the faction of Maximianus when compared
with that of Primianus. I ask, however, only
this — and I believe it to be just — that you give
no more weight to the Council of Secundus of
Tigisis, which Lucilla stirred up against Caecili-
anus when absent, and against an apostolic see
and the whole world in communion with Ccecili-
anus, than you give to the Council of Maximianus,
which in like manner some other woman stirred
up against Primianus when absent, and against
the rest of the multitude throughout Africa which
was in communion with him. What case could
be more transparent ? what demand more just ?

27. You see and know all these things, and
you groan over them ; and yet God at the same

1 time sees that nothing compels you to remain in

I such fatal and impious schism, if you would but

subdue the lust of the flesh in order to win the

spiritual kingdom ; and in order to escape from

eternal punishment, have courage to forfeit the

friendship of men, whose favour will not avail

at the bar of God. Go now, and take counsel

Itogether : find what you can say in reply to that

Iwhich I have written. If you bring forward

jmanuscrtpts on your side, we do the same ; if

(four party say that our documents are not to be

trusted, let them not take it amiss if we retort

' A deacon in the Donatisi communion at Carthage. This matter
imore fully gone into by Augustin in his second sermon on Ps. xxxvi.


the charge. No one can erase from heaven the
divine decree, no one can efface from earth the
Church of God. His decree has promised
the whole world, and the Church has filled it ;
and it includes both bad and good. On earth
it loses none but the bad, and into heaven it
admits none but the good.

In writing this discourse, God is my witness
with what sincere love to peace and to you I
have taken and used that which He has given.
It shall be to you a means of correction if you
be willing, and a testimony against you whether
you will or not.

LETTER XLIV.

(a.d. 398.)

to my lords most beloved, and brethren
worthy of all praise, eleusius, glorius, and
the two felixes, augustin sends greeting.

Chap. i. — i. In passing through Tubursi on
my way to the church at Cirta, though pressed
for time, I visited Fortunius, your bishop there,
and found him to be, in truth, just such a man
as you were wont most kindly to lead me to
expect. When I sent him notice of your con-
versation with me concerning him, and expressed
a desire to see him, he did not decline the visit.
I therefore went to him, because I thought it
due to his age that I should go to him, instead
of insisting upon his first coming to me. I went,
therefore, accompanied by a considerable num-
ber of persons, who, as it happened, were at that
time beside me. When, however, we had taken
our seats in his house, the thing becoming known,
a considerable addition was made to the crowd
assembled ; but in that whole multitude there
appeared to me to be very few who desired the
matter to be discussed in a sound and profitable
manner, or with the deliberation and solemnity
which so great a question demands. All the
others had come rather in the mood of playgoers,
expecting a scene in our debates, than in Chris-
tian seriousness of spirit, seeking instruction in
regard to salvation. Accordingly they could
neither favour us with silence when we spoke,
nor speak with care, or even with due regard to
decorum and order, — excepting, as I have said,
those few persons about whose pious and sincere
interest in the matter there was no doubt. Every-
thing was therefore thrown into confusion by the
noise of men speaking loudly, and each accord-
ing to the unchecked impulse of his own feel-
ings ; and though both Fortunius and I used
entreaty and remonstrance, we utterly failed in
persuading them to listen silently to what was
spoken.

2. The discussion of the question Avas
opened notwithstanding, and for some hours we
persevered, speeches being delivered by each


if


286


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


side in turn, so far as was permitted by an occa-
sional respite from the voices of the noisy
onlookers. In the beginning of the debate,
perceiving that things which had been spoken
were liable to be forgotten by myself, or by those
about whose salvation I was deeply concerned ;
being desirous also that our debate should be
managed with caution and self-restraint, and that
both you and other brethren who were absent
might be able to learn from a record what passed
in the discussion, I demanded that our words
should be taken down by reporters. This was
for a long time resisted, either by Fortunius or
by those on his side. At length, however, he
agreed to it ; but the reporters who were present,
and were able to do the work thoroughly, de-
clined, for some reason unknown to me, to take
notes. 1 urged them, that at least the brethren
who accompanied me, though not so expert in
the work, should take notes, and promised that
I would leave the tablets on which the notes
were taken in the hands of the other party.
This was agreed to. Some words of mine were
first taken down, and some statements on the
other side were dictated and recorded. After
that, the reporters, not being able to endure the
disorderly interruptions vociferated by the op-
posing party, and the increased vehemence with
which under this pressure our side maintained
the debate, gave up their task. This, however,
did not close the discussion, many things being
still said by each as he obtained an opportunity. |
This discussion of the whole question, or at least
so much of all that was said as I can remember,
I have resolved, my beloved friends, that you
shall not lose ; and you may read this letter to
Fortunius, that he may either confirm my state-
ments as true, or himself inform you, without
hesitation, of anything which his more accurate
recollection suggests.

Chap. ii. — 3. He was pleased to begin with
commending my manner of life, which he said
he had come to know through your statements
(in which I am sure there was more kindness
than truth), adding that he had remarked to
you that I might have done well all the things
which you had told him of me, if I had done
them within the Church. I thereupon asked
him what was the Church within which it was
the duty of a man so to live ; whether it was
that one which, as Sacred Scripture had long
foretold, was spread over the whole world, or
that one which a small section of Africans, or a
small part of Africa, contained. To this he at
first attempted to reply, that his communion was
in all parts of the earth. I asked him whether
he was able to issue letters of communion, which
we call regular,' to places which I might select ;
and I affirmed, what was obvious to all, that in

' Formata,


this way the question might be most simply
settled. In the event of his agreeing to this, my
intention was that we should send such letters
to those churches which we both knew, on the
authority of the apostles, to have been already
founded in their time.

4. As the falsity of his statement, however,
was apparent, a hasty retreat from it was made
in a cloud of confused words, in the midst of
which he quoted the Lord's words : " Beware
of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.
Ye shall know them by their fruits." => When I
said that these words of the Lord might also be
applied by us to them, he went on to magnify
the persecution which he affirmed that his party
had oft^n suffered ; intending thereby to prove
that his party were Christians because they en-
dured persecution. When I was preparing, as
he went on with this, to answer him from the
Gospel, he himself anticipated me in bringing
forward the passage in which the Lord says :
" Blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness' sake : for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven." 3 Thanking him for the apt quo-
tation, I immediately added that this behoved
therefore to be inquired into, whether they had
indeed suffered persecution for righteousness'
sake. In following up this inquiry I wished
this to be ascertained, though indeed it was
patent to all, whether the persecutions under
Macarius '' fell upon them while they were within
the unity of the Church, or after they had been
severed from it by schism ; so that those who
wished to see whether they had suffered perse-
cution for righteousness' sake might turn rather
to the prior question, whether they had done
rightly in cutting themselves off from the unity
of the whole world. For if they were found in
this to have done wrong, it was manifest that
they suffered persecution for unrighteousness'
sake rather than for righteousness' sake, and
could not therefore be numbered among those
of whom it is said, " Blessed are they which are
persecuted for righteousness' sake." Thereupon
mention was made of the surrender of the
sacred books, a matter about which much more
has been spoken than has ever been proved
true. On our side it was said in reply, that
their leaders rather than ours had been traditors ;
but that if they would not believe the documents
with which we supported this charge, we could
not be compelled to accept those which they
brought forward.

2 Matt. vii. 15, 16.

3 Matt. V. 10.

4 Macarius was sent in a.d. 348 by the Emperor Constans to [
Africa, to exhort all to cherish the unity of the Catholic Church, and
at the same time to collect for the relief of the poor. The vehement [
opposition with which the Donatists met him led to conflicts and,;
bloodshed, the Donatists claiming the honour of martyrdom for all of \
their party who fell in fighting with the imperial soldiers.


a til:;
iiiops

ile in ;
tier fill


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


287


Chap. hi. — 5. Having therefore laid aside
that question as one on which there was a doubt,
I aslved how they could justify their separation
of themselves from all other Christians who had
done them no wrong, who throughout the world
preserved the order of succession, and were
established in the most ancient churches, but
had no knowledge whatever as to who were trad-
itors in Africa ; and who assuredly could not
hold comniunion with others than those whom
they had heard of as occupying the episcopal
sees. He answered that the foreign churches
had done them no wrong, up to the time when
they had consented to the death of those who,
as he had said, had suffered in the Macarian per-
secution. Here I might have said that it was im-
possible for the innocence of the foreign churches
to be affected by the offence given in the time
of Macarius, seeing that it could not be proved
that he had done with their sanction what he
did. I preferred, however, to save time by
asking whether, supposing that the foreign
churches had, through the cruelties of Macarius,
lost their innocence from the time in which they
were said to have approved of these, it could
even be proved that up to that time the Dona-
tists had remained in unity with the Eastern
churches and other parts of the world.

6. Thereupon he produced a certain volume,
by which he wished to show that a Council at
Sardica had sent a letter to African bishops who
belonged to the party of Donatus. When this
was read aloud, I heard the name Donatus among
the bishops to whom the writing had been sent.
I therefore insisted upon being told whether this
I was the Donatus from whom their faction takes
I its name ; as it was possible that they had writ-
ten to some bishop named Donatus belonging
to another section [heresy], especially since in
these names no mention had been made of Africa.
How then, I asked, could it be proved that we
Imust believe the Donatus here named to be the
iDonatist bishop, when it could not even be proved
Ithat this letter had been specially directed to
[bishops in Africa? For although Donatus is a
:ommon African name, there is nothing improb-
ilble in the supposition, that either some one in
3ther countries should be found bearing an Afri-
can name, or that a native of Africa should be
lade a bishop there. We found, moreover, no
lay or name of consul given in the letter, from
irhich any certain light might have been furnished
py comparison of dates. I had indeed once
peard that the Arians, when they had separated
rem the Catholic communion, had endeavoured
10 ally the Donatists in Africa with themselves ;
md my brother Alypius recalled this to me at
|he time in a whisper. Having then taken up
le volume itself, and glancing over the decrees
Sf the said Council, I read that Athanasius,


Catholic bishop of Alexandria, who was so con-
spicuous as a debater in the keen controversies
with the Arians, and Julius, bishop of the Roman
Church, also a Catholic, had been condemned
by that Council of Sardica ; from which we were
sure that it was a Council of Arians, against which
heretics these Catholic bishops had contended
with singular fervour. I therefore wished to take
up and carry with me the volume, in order to
give more pains to find out the date of the Coun-
cil. He refused it, however, saying that I could
get it there if I wished to study anything in it.
I asked also that he would allow me to mark
the volume ; for I feared, I confess, lest, if per-
chance necessity arose for my asking to consult
it, another should be substituted in its room.
This also he refused.

Ch.4P. IV. — 7. Thereafter he began to insist
upon my answering categorically this question :
Whether I thought the persecutor or the perse-
cuted to be in the right ? To which I answered,
that the question was not fairly stated : it might
be that both were in the wrong, or that the per-
secution might be made by the one who was the
more righteous of the two parties ; and therefore
it was not always right to infer that one is on
the better side because he suffers persecution,
although that is almost always the case. A\'hen
I perceived that he still laid great stress upon
this, wishing to have the justice of the cause of
his party acknowledged as beyond dispute be-
cause they had suffered persecution, I asked
him whether he believed Ambrose, bishop of the
Church of Milan, to be a riirhteous man and a
I Christian ? He was compelled to deny expressly
that that man was a Christian and a righteous
I man ; for if he had admitted this, 1 would at
once have objected to him that he esteemed it
necessary for him to be rebaptized. When, there-
fore, he was compelled to pronounce concerning
Ambrose that he was not a Christian nor a right-
eous man, I related the persecution which he
endured when his church was surrounded with
soldiers. I also asked whether Maximianus, who
had made a schism from their party at Carthage,
was in his view a righteous man and a Christian.
He could not but deny this. I therefore re-
minded him that he had endured such perse-
cution that his church had been razed to the
foundations. By these instances I laboured to
persuade him, if possible, to give up affirming
that the suffering of persecution is the most in-
] fallible mark of Christian righteousness.
I 8. He also related that, in the infancv of their
I schism, his predecessors, being anxious to devise
, some way of hushing up the fault of Csecilianus,
j lest a schism should take place, had appointed
over the people belonging to his communion in
Carthage an interim bishop before Majorinus
I was ordained in opposition to Csecilianus. He


288


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


alleged that this interim bishop was murdered in
his own meeting house by our party. This, I
confess, I had never heard before, though so
many charges brought by them against us have
been refuted and disproved, while by us greater
and more numerous crimes have been alleged
against them. After having narrated this story,
he began again to insist on my answering whether
in this case I thought the murderer or the vic-
tim the more righteous man ; as if he had al-
ready proved that the event had taken place as
he had stated. I therefore said that we must
first ascertain the truth of the story, for we ought
not to believe without examination all that is
said : and that even were it true, it was possible
either that both were equally bad, or that one
who was bad had caused the death of another
yet worse than himself. For, in truth, it is pos-
sible that his guilt is more heinous who rebaptizes
the whole man than his who kills the body only.
9. After this there was no occasion for the
question which he afterwards put to me. He
affirmed that even a bad man should not be
killed by Christians and righteous men ; as if we
called those who in the Catholic Church do such
things righteous men : a statement, moreover,
which it is more easy for them to affirm than to
prove to us, so long as they themselves, with few
exceptions, bishops, presbyters, and clergy of all
kinds, go on gathering mobs of most infatuated
me^i, and causing, wherever they are able, so
many violent massacres, and devastations to the
injury not of Catholics only, but sometimes even
of their own partisans. In spite of these facts,
Fortunius, affecting ignorance of the most vil-
lanous doings, which were better known by him
than by me, insisted upon my giving an example
of a righteous man putting even a bad man to
death. This was, of course, not relevant to the
matter in hand ; for I conceded that wher-
ever such crimes were committed by men hav-
ing the name of Christians, they were not the
actions of good men. Nevertheless, in order to
show him what was the true question before us,
I answered by inquiring whether Elijah seemed
to him to be a righteous man ; to which he
could not but assent. Thereupon I reminded
him how many false prophets Elijah slew with
his own hand.' He saw plainly herein, as in-
deed he could not but see, that such things were
then lawful to righteous men. For they did
these things as prophets guided by the Spirit
and sanctioned by the authority of God, who
knows infallibly to whom it may be even a bene-
fit to be put to death. 2 He therefore required
me to show him one who, being a righteous man,
had in the New Testament times put any one,
even a criminal and impious man, to death.


' I Kings xviii. 40.

* Qui novit cui etiatn J>rosit occidi.


Chap. v. — to. I then returned to the argu-
ment used in my former letter,' in which I la-
boured to show that it was not right either for
us to reproach them with atrocities of which some
of their party had been guilty, or for them to re-
proach us if any such deeds were found by them
to have been done on our side. For I granted
that no example could be produced from the
New Testament of a righteous man putting any
one to death ; but I insisted that by the example
of our Lord Himself, it could be proved that the
wicked had been tolerated by the innocent.
For His own betrayer, who had already received
the price of His blood. He suffered to remain
undistinguished from the innocent who were with
Him, even up to that last kiss of peace. He
did not conceal from the disciples the fact that
in the midst of them was one capable of such
a crime ; and, nevertheless. He administered to
them all alike, without excluding the traitor, the
first sacrament of His body and blood."* When
almost all felt the force of this argument, Fortu-
nius attempted to meet it by saying, that be-
fore the Lord's Passion that communion with a
wicked man did no harm to the apostles, because
they had not as yet the baptism of Christ, but
the baptism of John only. When he said this,
I asked him to explain how it was written that
Jesus baptized more disciples than John, though
Jesus Himself baptized not, but His disciples,
that is to say, baptized by means of His disciples ?5
How could they give what they had not received
(a question often used by the Donatists them-
selves) ? Did Christ baptize with the baptism
of John? I was prepared to ask many other
questions in connection with this opinion of
Fortunius ; such as — how John himself was
interrogated as to the Lord's baptizing, and re-
plied that He had the bride, and was the Bride-
groom ?^ Was it, then, lawful for the Bridegroom
to baptize with the baptism of him who was but
a friend or servant ? Again, how could they re-
ceive the Eucharist if not previously baptized?
or how could the Lord in that case have said in
reply to Peter, who was willing to be wholly
washed by Him, " He that is washed needeth not
save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit "?'
For perfect cleansing is by the baptism, not of
John, but of the Lord, if the person receiving it
be worthy ; if, however, he be unworthy, the !
sacraments abide in him, not to his salvation, \
but to his perdition. When I was about to put ;
these questions, Fortunius himself saw that he \
ought not to have mooted the subject of the '
baptism of the disciples of the Lord.

II. From this we passed to something else,'

3 Let. XLIII. pp. 2S3, 284. I

•♦ Matt. XXVI. 20-28. \

5 John iv. 1,2. 1

^ John ill. 29.
' John xiu. 10.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


289


many on both sides discoursing to the best of
their abihty. Among other things it was alleged
that our party was still intending to persecute
them ; and he [Fortunius] said that he would
like to see how I would act in the event of such
persecution, whether I would consent to such
cruelty, or withhold from it all countenance. I
said that God saw my heart, which was unseen
by them ; also that they had hitherto had no
ground for apprehending such persecution, which
if it did take place would be the work of bad
men, who were, however, not so bad as some of
their own party ; but that it was not incumbent
on us to withdraw ourselves from communion
with the Catholic Church on the ground of any-
thing done against our will, and even in spite of
our opposition (if we had an opportunity of
testifying against it), seeing that we had learned
that toleration for the sake of peace which the
apostle prescribes in the words : " Forbearing
one another in love, endeavouring to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace." ' I
affirmed that they had not preserved this peace
and forbearance, when they had caused a schism,
within which, moreover, the more moderate
among them now tolerated more serious evils,
lest that which was already a fragment should
be broken again, although they did not, in order
to preserve unity, consent to exercise forbear-
ance .in smaller things. I also said that in the
ancient economy the peace of unity and for-
bearance had not been so fully declared and
commended as it is now by the example of the
Lord and the charity of the New Testament ; '
and yet prophets and holy men were wont to }
protest against the sins of the people, without i
endeavouring to separate themselves from the '
unity of the Jewish people, and from communion
in partaking along with them of the sacraments
then appointed.

12. After that, mention was made, I know not
in what connection, of Genethlius of blessed
memory, the predecessor of Aurelius in the see
of Carthage, because he had suppressed some
edict granted against the Donatists, and had not
suffered it to be carried into effect. They were
ail praising and commending him with the ut-
most kindness. I interrupted their commenda-
tory speeches with the remark that, for all this,
if Genethlius himself had fallen into their hands,
it would have been declared necessary to baptize
him a second time. (We were by this time all
standing, as the time of our going away was at
hand. ) On this the old man said plainly, that a
rule had now been made, according to which
-very believer who went over from us to them
iiust be baptized ; but he said this with the
T'.ost manifest reluctance and sincere regret.


Eph.


IV. 2, 3.


When he himself most frankly bewailed many
of the evil deeds of his party, making evident,
as was further proved by the testimony of the
whole community, how far he was from sharing
in such transactions, and told us what ha was
wont to say in mild expostulation to those of his
own party ; when also I had quoted the words
of Ezekiel — " As the soul of the father, so also
the soul of the son is mine : the soul that sin-
neth it shall die " ^ — it vvhich it is written that
the son's fault is not to be reckoned to his father,
nor the father's fault reckoned to his son, it
was agreed by all that in such discussions the
excesses of bad men ought not to be brought
forward by either party against the other. There
remained, therefore, only the question as to
schism. I therefore exhorted him again and again
that he should with tranquil and undisturbed
mind join me in an effort to bring to a satisfac-
tory end, by diligent research, the examination
of so important a matter. When he kindly re-
plied that I myself sought this with a single eye,
but that others who were on my side were averse
to such examination of the truth, I left him with
this promise, that I would bring to him more of
my colleagues, ten at least, who desire this ques-
tion to be sifted with the same good-will and
calmness and pious care which I saw that he
had discovered and now commended in myself.
He gave me a similar promise regarding a like
number of his colleagues.

Chap. vi. — 13. Wherefore I exhort you, and
by the blood of the Lord implore you, to put
him in mind of his promise, and to insist urgently
that what has been begun, and is now, as you
see, nearly finished, may be concluded. For, in
my opinion, you will have difficulty in finding
among your bishops another whose judgment
and feelings are so sound as we have seen that
old man's to be. The next day he came to me
himself, and we began to discuss the matter
again. I could not, however, remain long with
him, as the ordination of a bishop required my
departing from the place. I had already sent a
messenger to the chief man of the Coelicolse,^ of
whom I had heard that he had introduced a new
baptism among them, and had by this impiety
led many astray, intending, so far as my limited
time permitted, to confer with him. Fortunius,
when he learned that he was coming, perceiving
that I was to be otherwise engaged, and having
himself some other duty calling him from home,
bade me a kind and friendly farewell.

14. It seems to me that if we would avoid
the attendance of a noisy crowd, rather hindering
than helping the debate, and if we wish to com-


2 Ezek. xviii. 4.

3 The Ccelicolse are mentioned in some laws of Honorius as
heretics whose heresy, if they refused to abandon it, involved them
in civil penalties.


290


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


plete by the Lord's help so great a work begun
in a spirit of unfeigned good-will and peace, we
ought to meet in some small village in which
neither party has a church, and which is inhabited
by persons belonging to both churches, such as
Titia. Let this or any other such place be
agreed upon in the region of Tubursi or of Tha-
gaste, and let us take care to have the canonical
books at hand for reference. Let any other
documents be brought thither which either party
may judge useful ; and laying all other things
aside, uninterrupted, if it please God, by other
cares, devoting our time for as many days as we
can to this one work, and each imploring in
private the Lord's guidance, we may, by the help
of Him to whom Christian peace is most sweet,
bring to a happy termination the inquiry which
has been in such a good spirit opened. Do not
fail to write in reply what you or Fortunius think
of this.

LETTER XLV.

A short letter to Paulinus and Therasia repeating the
request made in Letter XLIL, and again complaining
of the long silence of his friend.


LETTER XLV I.

(a.d. 398.)

A letter propounding several cases of conscience.

TO MY BELOVED AND VENERABLE FATHER THE
BISHOP AUGUSTIN, PUBLICOLA SENDS GREETING.

It is written : " Ask thy father, and he will
show thee ; thy elders, and they will tell thee." "
I have therefore judged it right to " seek the law
at the mouth of the priest " in regard to a certain
case which I shall state in this letter, desiring at
the same time to be instructed in regard to
several other matters. I have distinguished the
several questions by stating each in a separate
paragraph, and I beg you kindly to give an answer
to each in order.

I. In the country of the Arzuges it is cus-
tomary, as I have heard, for the barbarians to
take an oath, swearing by their false gods, in the
presence of the decurion stationed on the fron-
tier or of the tribune, when they have come
under engagement to carry baggage to any part,
'Or to ])rotect the crops from depredation ; and
■when the decurion certifies in writing that this
oath has been taken, the owners or farmers of
land employ them as watchmen of their crops ;
or travellers who have occasion to pass through
their country hire them, as if assured of their
now being trustworthy. Now a doubt has arisen


Deut.


xxxu. 7.


in my mind whether the landowner who thus
I employs a barbarian, of whose fidelity he is per-
suaded in consequence of such an oath, does
not make himself and the crops committed to
that man's charge to share the defilement of that
j sinful oath ; and so also with the traveller who
may employ his services. I should mention,
however, that in both cases the barbarian is re-
warded for his services with money. Neverthe-
less in both transactions there comes in, besides
I the pecuniary remuneration, this oath before the
decurion or tribune involving mortal sin. I am
concerned as to whether this sin does not defile
either him who accepts the oath of the barba-
rian, or at least the things which are committed
to the barbarian's keeping. For whatever other
terms be in the arrangement, even such as the
payment of gold, and giving of hostages in
security, nevertheless this sinful oath has been a
real part of the transaction. Be pleased to re-
solve my doubts definitely and positively. For
if your answer indicate that you are in doubt
yourself, I may fall into greater perplexity than
before.

II. I have also heard that my own land-stew-
ards receive from the barbarians hired to pro-
tect the crops an oath in which they appeal to
their false gods. Does not this oath so defile
these crops, that if a Christian uses them or
takes the money realized by their sale, he is
himself defiled ? Do answer this.

III. Again, I have heard from one person that
no oath was taken by the barbarian in making
agreement with my steward, but another has said
to me that such an oath was taken. Suppose
now that the latter statement were false, tell me
if I am bound to forbear from using these crops,
or the money obtained for them, merely because
I have heard the statement made, according to 1
the scriptural rule : " If any man say unto you, '
This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not, ;
for his sake that showed it." ^ Is this case \
parallel to the case of meat offered to idols ; and i
if it is, what am I to do with the crops, or with '
the price of them?

IV. In this case ought I to examine both him ,'
who said that no oath was taken before my
steward, and the other who said that the oath
was taken, and bring witnesses to prove which
of the two spoke truly, leaving the crops or their
price untouched so long as there is uncertainty
in the matter?

V. If the barbarian who swears this sinful oath
were to require of the steward or of the tribune
stationed on the frontier, that he, being a Chris-
tian, should give him assurance of his faith-
fulness to his part of the engagement about
watching the crops, by the same oath which he

* I Cor. X. 28.


ik


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


291


himself has taken,


involving


mortal sin,


does

the oath pollute only that Christian man ? Does
it not also pollute the things regarding which he
took the oath ? Or if a pagan who has authority
on the frontier thus give to a barbarian this oath
in token of acting faithfully to him, does he not
involve in the defilement of his own sin those
in whose interest he swears ? If I send a man
to the Arzuges, is it lawful for him to take from
a barbarian that sinful oath ? Is not the Chris-
tian who takes such an oath from him also de-
filed by his sin?

VI. Is it lawful for a Christian to use wheat
or beans from the threshing-floor, wine or oil
from the press, if, with his knowledge, some part
of what has been taken thence was offered in
sacrifice to a false god?

VII. May a Christian use for any purpose
wood which he knows to have been taken from
one of their idols' groves?

VIII. If a Christian buy in the market meat
which has not been offered to idols, and have in
his mind conflicting doubts as to whether it has
been offered to idols or not, but eventually adopt
the opinion that it was not, does he sin if he
partake of this meat ?

IX. If a man does an action good in itself,
about which he has some misgivings as to
whether it is good or bad, can it be reckoned
as a sin to him if he does it believing it to be
good, although formerly he may have thought it
bad?

X. If any one has falsely said that some meat
has been offered to idols, and afterwards confess
that it was a falsehood, and this confession is
believed, may a Christian use the meat regarding
which he heard that statement, or sell it, and
use the price obtained ?

XI. If a Christian on a journey, overpowered
by want, ha\ing fasted for one, two, or several
days, so that he can no longer endure the priva-
tion, should by chance, when in the last extrem-
ity of hunger, and when he sees death close at
hand, find food placed in an idol's temple, where
there is no man near him, and no other food to
be found ; whether should he die or partake of
that food ?

XII. If a Christian is on the point of being
killed by a barbarian or a Roman, ought he to
kill the aggressor to save his own life? or ought
he even, without killing the assailant, to drive
him back and fight with him, seeing it has been
said, " Resist not evil " ? •

XIII. May a Christian put a wall for defence

■ against an enemy round his property? and if
I some use that wall as a place from which to fight

■ and kill the enemy, is the Christian the cause of
I the homicide ?

: ' Matt. V. 39.


XIV. May a Christian drink at a fountain or
well into which anything from a sacrifice has
been cast ? May he drink from a well found in
a deserted temple? If there be in a temple
where an idol is worshipped a well or fountain
which nothing has defiled, may he draw water
thence, and drink of it?

XV. May a Christian use baths ^ in places in
which sacrifice is offered to images? May he
use baths which are used by pagans on a feast-
day, either while they are there or after they have
left?

XVI. May a Christian use the same sedan-
chair 3 as has been used by pagans coming down
from their idols on a feast-day, if in that chair
they have performed any part of their idolatrous
service, and the Christian is aware of this?

XVII. If a Christian, being the guest of an-
other, has forborne from using meat set before
him, concerning which it was said to him that it
had been offered in sacrifice, but afterwards by
some accident finds the same meat for sale and
buys it, or has it presented to him at another
man's table, and then eat of it, without knowing
that it is the same, is he guilty of sin ?

XVIII. May a Christian buy and use vegetables
or fruit which he knows to have been brought
from the garden of a temple or of the priests of
an idol?

That you may not be put to trouble in search-
ing the Scriptures concerning the oath of which
I have spoken and the idols, I resolved to set
before you those texts which, by the Lord's help,
I have found ; but if you have found anything
better or more to the purpose in Scripture, be
so good as let me know. For example, when
Laban said to Jacob, "The God of Abraham and
the God of Nahor judge betwixt us," •* Scripture
does not declare which god is meant. Again,
when Abimelech came to Isaac, and he and those
who were with him sware to Isaac, we are not
told what kind of oath it was. 5 As to the idols,
Gideon was commanded by the Lord to make
a whole burnt-offering of the bullock which he
killed.^ And in the book of Joshua the son of
Nun, it is said of Jericho that all the silver, and
gold, and brass should be brought into the treas-
ures of the Lord, and the things found in the
accursed city were called sacred. ^ Also we read
in Deuteronomy : ^ " Neither shalt thou bring an
abomination into thine house, lest thou be a
cursed thing like it."

May the Lord preserve thee. I salute thee.
Pray for me.


2 Balneh vel therviis.

3 I'he Benedictine Fathers ttanslate this, in their note, sitz-bath.
■4 Gen. xxxi. 53.

' Gen. xxvi. 31.
6 Judg. vi. 26.
' josh. vi. ig.
8 Deut. vii. 26.


292


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


LETTER XLVII.

(a.d. 398.)

to the honourable purlicola, my much beloved
son, augustin sends greeting in the lord.

1. Your perplexities have, since I learned them
by your letter, become mine also, not because all
those things by which you tell me that you are
disturbed, disturb my mind : but I have been
much perplexed, I confess, by the question how
your perplexities were to be removed ; especially
since you require me to give a conclusive answer,
lest you should fall into greater doubts than you
had before you applied to me to have them re-
solved. For I see that I cannot give this, since,
though I may write things which appear to me
most certain, if I do not convince you, you must
be beyond question more at a loss than before ;
and though it is in my power to use arguments
which weigh with myself, I may fail of convincing
another by these. However, lest I should refuse
the small service which your love claims, I have
resolved after some consideration to write in
reply.

2. One of your doubts is as to using the ser-
vices of a man who has guaranteed his fidelity
by swearing by his false gods. In this matter
I beg you to consider whether, in the event of
a man faiUng to keep his word after having
pledged himself by such an oath, you would not
regard him as guilty of a twofold sin. For if
he kept the engagement which he had confirmed
by this oath, he would be pronounced guilty in
this only, that he swore by such deities ; but no
one would justly blame him for keeping his en-
gagement. But in the case supposed, seeing
that he both swore by those whom he should
not worship, and did, notwithstanding his prom-
ise, what he should not have done, he was guilty
of two sins : whence it is obvious that in using,
not for an evil work, but for some good and law-
ful end, the service of a man whose fidelity is
known to have been confirmed by an oath in
the name of false gods, one participates, not in the
sin of swearing by the false gods, but in the good
faith with which he keeps his promise. The
faith which I here speak of as kept is not that
on account of which those who are baptized in
Christ are called faithful : that is entirely differ-
ent and far removed from the faith desiderated
in regard to the arrangements and compacts of
men. Nevertheless it is, beyond all doubt,
worse to swear falsely by the true God than to
swear truly by the false gods ; for the greater
the holiness of that by which we swear, the
greater is the sin of perjury. It is therefore a
different question whether he is not guilty who
requires another to pledge himself by taking an
oath in the name of his gods, seeing that he


worships false gods. In answering this ques-
tion, we may accept as decisive those examples
which you yourself quoted of Laban and of
Abimelech (if Abimelech did swear by his gods,
as Laban swore by the god of Nahor). This is,
as I have said, another question, and one which
would perchance perplex me, were it not for
those examples of Isaac and Jacob, to which,
for aught I know, others might be added. It
may be that some scruple miglit yet be suggested
by the precept in the New Testament, " Swear
not at all ; " ' words which were in my opinion
spoken, not because it is a sin to swear a true
oath, but because it is a heinous sin to forswear
oneself: from which crime our Lord would have
us keep at a great distance, when He charged
us not to swear at all. I know, however, that
your opinion is different : wherefore it should
not be discussed at present ; let us rather treat
of that about which you have thought of asking
my advice. On the same ground on which you
forbear from swearing yourself, you may, if such
be your opinion, regard it as forbidden to exact
an oath from another, altliough it is expressly
said. Swear not ; but I do not remember read-
ing anywhere in Holy Scripture that we are not
to take another's oath. The question whether
we ought to take advantage of the concord
which is established between other parties by
their exchange of oaths is entirely different. If
we answer this in the negative, I know not
whether we could find any place on earth in
which we could live. For not only on the fron-
tier, but throughout all the provinces, the security
of peace rests on the oaths of barbarians. And
from this it would follow, that not only the crops
which are guarded by men who have sworn
fidelity in the name of their false gods, but all
things which enjoy the protection secured by
the peace which a similar oath has ratified, are
defiled. If this be admitted by you to be a
complete absurdity, dismiss with it your doubts
on the cases which you named.

3. Again, if from the threshing-floor or wine-
press of a Christian anything be taken, with his
knowledge, to be offered to false gods, he is
guilty in permitting this to be done, if it be in
his power to prevent it. If he finds that it has
been done, or has not the power to prevent it,
he uses without scruple the rest of the grain or
wine, as uncontaminated, just as we use foun-
tains from which we know that water has been
taken to be used in idol-worship. The same
principle decides the question about baths. For
we have no scruple about inhaling the air into
which we know that the smoke from all the
altars and incense of idolaters ascends. From
which it is manifest, that the thing forbidden is

I Matt. V. 34, 36.


V

lit


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


293


our devoting anything to the honour of the false
gods, or appearing to do this by so acting as to
encourage in such worship those who do not
know our mind, although in our heart we despise
their idols. And when temples, idols, groves,
etc., are thrown down by permission from the
authorities, although our taking part in this work
is a clear proof of our not honouring, but rather
abhorring, these things, we must nevertheless
forbear from appropriating any of them to our
own personal and private use ; so that it may
be manifest that in overthrowing these we are
influenced, not by greed, but by piety. When,
however, the spoils of these places are applied
to the benefit of the community or devoted to
the service of God, they are dealt with in the
same manner as the men themselves when they
are turned from impiety and sacrilege to the true
religion. We understand this to be the will of
God from the examples quoted by yourself: the
grove of the false gods from which He com-
manded wood to be taken [by Gideon] for the
burnt-offering ; and Jericho, of which all the
gold, silver, and brass was to be brought into
the Lord's treasury. Hence also the precept in
Deuteronomy : " Thou shalt not desire the silver
or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee,
lest thou be snared therein ; for it is an Abomi-
nation to the Lord thy God. Neither shalt thou
bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou
become a cursed thing like it : but thou shalt
utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it ;
for it is a cursed thing." ' From which it appears
plainly, that either the appropriation of such
spoils to their own private use was absolutely
forbidden, or they were forbidden to carry any-
thing of that kind into their own houses with
the intention of giving to it honour ; for then
this would be an abomination and accursed in
the sight of God ; whereas the honour impiously
given to such idols is, by their public destruc-
tion, utterly abolished.

4. As to meats offered to idols, I assure you
we have no duty beyond observing what the
apostle taught concerning them. Study, there-
fore, his words on the subject, which, if they
were obscure to you, I would explain as well as
I could. He does not sin who, unwittingly,
afterwards partakes of food which he formerly
refused because it had been offered to an idol.
A kitchen-herb, or any other fruit of the ground,
belongs to Him who created it ; for " the earth
is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof," and
'every creature of God is good." ^ But if that
which the earth has borne is consecrated or
1 offered to an idol, then we must reckon it
among the things offered to idols. We must
1 beware lest, in pronouncing that we ought not


■ Deut. vii. 25, 26.

* Ps. xxiv. i; 1 Cor. x. 25, 26; and i Tim. iv. 4.


to eat the fruits of a garden belonging to an
idol-temple, we be involved in the inference
that it was wrong for the apostle to take food
in Athens, since that city belonged to Minerva,
and was consecrated to her as the guardian deity.
The same answer I would give as to the well or
fountain enclosed in a temple, though my scru-
ples would be somewhat more awakened if some
part of the sacrifices be thrown into the said
well or fountain. But the case is, as I have
said before, exactly parallel to our using of the
air which receives the smoke of these sacrifices ;
or, if this be thought to make a difference, that
the sacrifice, the smoke whereof mingles with
the air, is not offered to the air itself, but to
some idol or false god, whereas sometimes offer-
ings are cast into the water with the intention of
sacrificing to the waters themselves, it is enough
to say that the same principle would preclude
us from using the light of the sun, because
wicked men continually worship that luminary
wherever they are tolerated in doing so. Sacri-
fices are offered to the winds, which we never-
theless use for our convenience, although they
seem, as it were, to inhale and swallow greedily
the smoke of these sacrifices. If any one be
in doubt regarding meat, whether it has been
offered to an idol or not, and the fact be that
it has not, when he eats that meat under the
impression that it has not been offered to an
idol, he by no means does wrong ; because
neither in fact, nor now in his judgment, is it
food offered to an idol, although he formerly
thought it was. For surely it is lawful to correct
false impressions by others that are true. But
if any one believes that to be good which is evil,
and acts accordingly, he sins in entertaining that
belief; and these are all sins of ignorance, in
which one thinks that to be right which it is
wrong for him to do.

5. As to killing others in order to defend
one's own life, I do not approve of this, unless
one happen to be a soldier or public functionary
acting, not for himself, but in defence of others
or of the city in which he resides, if he act ac-
cording to the commission lawfully given him,
and in the manner becoming his office.^ When,
however, men are prevented, by being alarmed,
from doing wrong, it may be said that a real
service is done to themselves. The precept,
" Resist not evil," •* was given to prevent us from
taking pleasure in revenge, in which the mind is
gratified by the sufferings of others, but not to
make us neglect the duty of restraining men
from sin. From this it follows that one is not
guilty of homicide, because he has put up a wall

3 For Augustin's mature view on this subject, see his work. Dg
Libern Arbitrio, i. 5. 13: " That it is wrong to shed the blood of
our fellow-men in defence of those things which ought to be despised
by us."

4 Matt. V. 39.


294


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


round his estate, if any one is killed by the wall
falling upon him when he is throwing it down.
For a Christian is not guilty of homicide though
his ox may gore or his horse kick a man, so that
he dies. On such a principle, the oxen of a
Christian should have no horns, and his horses
no hoofs, and his dogs no teeth. On such a prin-
ciple, when the Apostle Paul took care to inform
the chief captain that an ambush was laid for
him by certain desperadoes, and received in
consequence an armed escort,' if the villains who
plotted his death had thrown themselves on the
weapons of the soldiers, Paul would have had
to acknowledge the shedding of their blood as
a crime with which he was chargeable. God
forbid that we should be blamed for accidents
which, without our desire, happen to others
through things done by us or found in our
possession, which are in themselves good and
lawful. In that event, we ought to have no iron
implements for the house or the field, lest some
one should by them lose his own life or take
another's ; no tree or rope on our premises, lest
some one hang himself; no window in our house,
lest some one throw himself down from it. But
why mention more in a list which must be in-
terminable? For what good and lawful thing
is there in use among men which may not be- i
come chargeable with being an instrument of
destruction ?

6. I have now only to notice (unless I am
mistaken) the case which you mentioned of a
Christian on a journey overcome by the extrem-
ity of hunger ; whether, if he could find noth-
ing to eat but meat placed in an idol's temple,
and there was no man near to relieve him, it
would be better for him to die of starvation
than to take that food for his nourishment?
Since in this question it is not assumed that the
food thus found was offered to the idol (for it
might have been left by mistake or designedly
by persons who, on a journey, had turned aside
there to take refreshment ; or it might have
been put there for some other purpose), I an-
swer briefly thus : Either it is certain that this
food was offered to the idol, or it is certain that
it was not, or neither of these things is known.
If it is certain, it is better to reject it with Chris-
tian fortitude. In either of the other alterna-
tives, It may be used for his necessity without
any conscientious scruple.


LETTER XLVIII.
(a.d. 398.)

TO MY LORD EUDOXIUS, MY BROTHER AND FEL-
LOW-PRESBYTER, BELOVED AND LONGED FOR,


AND TO THE BRETHREN WHO ARE WITH HIM,^
AUGUSTIN AND THE BRETHREN WHO ARE HERE
SEND GREETING.

I. When we reflect upon the undisturbed rest
which you enjoy in Christ, we also, although
engaged in labours manifold and arduous, find
rest with you, beloved. We are one body under
I one Head, so that you share our toils, and we
share your repose : for " if one member suffer,
all the members suffer with it ; or if one mem-
ber be honoured, all the members rejoice with
it." 3 Therefore we earnesdy exhort and be-
seech you, by the deep humility and most com-
passionate majesty of Christ, to be mindful of
us in your holy intercessions ; for we believe you
to be more lively and undistracted in prayer
than we can be, whose prayers are often marred
and weakened by the darkness and confiision
arising from secular occupations : not that we
have these on our own account, but we can
scarcely breathe for the pressure of such duties
imposed upon us by men compelling us, so to
speak, to go with them one mile, with whom we
are commanded by our Lord to go farther than
they ask.-t We believe, nevertheless, that He
before whom the sighing of the prisoner comes s
will look on us persevering in the ministry in
which He was pleased to put us, with promise
of reward, and, by the assistance of your
prayers, will set us free from all distress.

2. We exhort you in the Lord, brethren, to be
stedfast in your purpose, and persevere to the
end ; and if the Church, your Mother, calls you
to active service, guard against accepting it, on
the one hand, with too eager elation of spirit, or
declining it, on the other, under the solicitations
of indolence ; and obey God with a lowly heart,
submitting yourselves in meekness to Him who
governs you, who will guide the meek in judg-
ment, and will teach them His way.*^ Do not
prefer your own ease to the claims of the Church ;
for if no good men were willing to minister to
her in her bringing forth of her spiritual children,
the beginning of your own spiritual life would
have been impossible. As men must keep the
way carefully in walking between fire and water,
so as to be neither burned nor drowned, so must
we order our steps between the pinnacle of pride
and the whirlpool of indolence ; as it is written,
"declining " '


neither to the righ<- hand nor to the
left." ^ For some, while guarding too anxiously
against being lifted up and raised, as it were, to
the dangerous heights on the right hand, have


' Acts xxiii. 17-24.


2 The monastery of these brethren was in the island of Capraria
— the same, I suppose, with Caprera — now so widely famous as
Garibaldi's home.

■3 I Cor. xii. 26,

•♦ Matt. V. 41.

s Ps. Ixxix. II.

* Ps. XXV. g.

' Deut. xvii. II.


?"filli)'


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


295


fallen and been engulphed in the depths on the
left. Again, others, while turning too eagerly
from the danger on the left hand of being im-
mersed in the torpid effeminacy of inaction, are,
on the other hand, so destroyed and consumed
by the extravagance of self-conceit, that they
vanish into ashes and smoke. See then, beloved,
that in your love of ease you restrain yourselves
from all mere earthly delight, and remember that
there is no place where the fowler who fears
lest we fly back to God may not lay snares for
us ; let us account him whose captives we once
were to be the sworn enemy of all good men ;
let us never consider ourselves in possession of
perfect peace until iniquity shall have ceased,
and "judgment shall have returned unto right-
eousness." '

3. Moreover, when you are exerting yourselves
with energy and fervour, whatever you do,
whether labouring diligently in prayer, fasting,
or almsgiving, or distributing to the poor, or for-
giving injuries, " as God also for Christ's sake
hath forgiven us," ^ or subduing evil habits, and
chastening the body and bringing it into subjec-
tion,3 or bearing tribulation, and especially bear-
ing with one another in love (for what can he
bear who is not patient with his brother?), or
guarding against the craft and wiles of the tempt-
er, and by the shield of faith averting and extin-
guishing his fiery darts,'' or " singing and making
melody to the Lord in your hearts," or with
voices in harmony with your hearts ;5 — whatever
you do, I say, "do all to the glory of God,"^
who " worketh all in all," ^ and be so " fervent
in spirit"^ that your "soul may make her boast
in the Lord." ^ Such is the course of those who
walk in the "straight way," whose "eyes are ever
upon the Lord, for He shall pluck their feet out
of the net." '° Such a course is neither inter-
rupted by business, nor benumbed by leisure,
neither boisterous nor languid, neither presump-
tuous nor desponding, neither reckless nor supine.
"These things do, and the God of peace shall
be with you." "

4. Let your charity prevent you from account-
ing me forward in wishing to address you by
letter. I remind you of these things, not because
I think you come short in them, but because I
thought that I would be much commended unto
God by you, if, in doing your duty to Him, you
do it with a remembrance of my exhortation.
For good report, even before the coming of the


' Ps. Ivii. I and xciv. 15.

* Eph. iv. 32.

' I Cor. ix. 27.

* Eph. vi. 16.
5 Eph. V. 19.

* I Cor. X. 31.
^ I Cor. xii. 6.
' Rom xii. II.
9 Ps. xxxiv. 2.

*° Ps. XXV. 15.

" Phil. iv. 9.


brethren Eustasius and Andreas from you, had
brought to us, as they did, the good savour of
Christ, which is yielded by your holy conversa-
tion. Of these, Eustasius has gone before us to
that land of rest, on the shore of which beat no
rude waxes such as those which encompass your
island home, and in which he does not regret
Caprera, for the homely raiment '^ with which it
furnished him he wears no more.

LETTER XLIX.

This letter, written to Honoratus, a Donatist bishop,
contains nothing on the Donatist schism which is not
already found in Letters XLIII. and XLIV., or supplied
in Letter LIIL

LETTER L.'3
(A.D. 399.)

TO THE MAGISTRATES AND LEADING MEN, OR
ELDERS, OF THE COLONY OF SUFFECTUM, BISHOP
AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.

Earth reels and heaven trembles at the report
of the enormous crime and unprecedented cru-
elty which has made your streets and temples
run red with blood, and ring with the shouts of
murderers. You have buried the laws of Rome
in a dishonoured grave, and trampled in scorn
the reverence due to equitable enactments. The
authority of emperors you neither respect nor
fear. In your city there has been shed the in-
nocent blood of sixty of our brethren ; and
whoever approved himself most active in the
massacre, was rewarded with your applause, and
with a high place in your Council. Come now,
let us arrive at the chief pretext for this outrage.
If you say that Hercules belonged to you, by all
means we will make good your loss : we have
metals at hand, and there is no lack of stone ;
nay, we have several varieties of marble, and a
host of artisans. Fear not, your god is in the
hands of his makers, and shall be with all dili-
gence hewn out and polished and ornamented.
We will give in addition some red ochre, to
make him blush in such a way as may well har-
monize with your devotions. Or if you say that
the Hercules must be of your own making, we
will raise a subscription in pennies,'^ and buy a
god from a workman of your own for you. Only
do you at the same time make restitution to us ;
and as your god Hercules is given back to you,
let the lives of the many men whom your vio-
lence has destroyed be given back to us.

*^ Cilicium, the garment of goats' hair worn by the brethren.
These were the staple article of manufacture in Caprera, " the goat
island."

'3 This letter is found only in the Vatican .\is. On this ground,
and because of its tone and style, its composition has been ascribed
to another hand than Augustin's. The reader may judge for himself.
The sixty Christians of Suffcctum (a town in the territory of Tunis),
whose death is here mentioned, are commemorated in the martyrology
of the Roman Catholic Church. Their day in the Calendar is Aug. 30.

'^ Singulis nummis.


296


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


LETTER LI.

(a.D. 399 OR 400.)

An invitation to Crispinus, Donatist bishop at Calama, to
discuss the whole question of the Donatist schism.

(No salutation at the beginning of the letter.)

I. I have adopted this plan in regard to the
heading of tliis letter, because your party are
offended by the humility which I have shown in
the salutations prefixed to others. I migiit be
supposed to have done it as an insult to you,
were it not that I trust that you will do the same :
in your reply to me. Why should I say much
regarding your promise at Carthage, and my
urgency to have it fulfilled? Let the manner
in which we then acted to each other be for-
gotten with the past, lest it should obstruct fu-
ture conference. Now, unless I am mistaken,
there is, by the Lord's help, no obstacle in the
way : we are both in Numidia, and located at no
great distance from each other. I have heard it
said that you are still willing to examine, in de-
bate with me, the question which separates us
from communion with each other. See how
promptly all ambiguities may be cleared away :
send me an answer to this letter if you please,
and perhaps that may be enough, not only for
us, but for those also who desire to hear us ; or if
it is not, let us exchange letters again and again
until the discussion is exhausted. For what
greater benefit could be secured to us by the
comparative nearness of the towns which we in-
habit? I have resolved to debate with you in
no other way than by letters, in order both to
prevent anything that is said from escaping from
our memory, and to secure that others interested
in the question, but unable to be present at a
debate, may not forfeit the instruction. You are
accustomed, not with any intention of falsehood,
but by mistake, to reproach us with charges such
as may suit your purpose, concerning past trans-
actions, which we repudiate as untrue. There-
fore, if you please, let us weigh the question in
the light of the present, and let the past alone.
You are doubtless aware that in the Jewish dis-
pensation the sin of idolatry was committed by
the people, and once the book of the prophet
of God was burned by a defiant king ; ' the pun-
ishment of the sin of schism would not have
been more severe than that with which these two
were visited, had not the guilt of it been greater.
You remember, of course, how the earth open-
ing swallowed up alive the leaders of a schism,
and fire from heaven breaking forth destroyed
their accomplices.^ Neither the making and
■worshipping of an idol, nor the burning of the
Holy Book, was deemed worthy of such punish-
ment.

' Jer. xxxvi. 23.
^ Num. xvi. 31-35.


2. You are wont to reproach us with a crime,
not proved against us, indeed, though proved
beyond question against some of your own party,
— the crime, namely, of yielding up, through fear
of persecution, the Scriptures ^ to be burned.
Let me ask, therefore, why you have received
back men whom you condemned for the crime
of schism by the " unerring voice of your plenary
Council" (I quote from the record), and re-
placed them in the same episcopal sees as they
were in at the time when you passed sentence
against them? I refer to Felicianus of Musti
and Prastextatus of Assuri.'* These were not, as
you would have the ignorant believe, included
among those to whom your Council appointed
and intimated a certain time, after the lapse of
which, if they had not returned to your com-
munion, the sentence would become final ; but
they were included among the others whom you
condemned, without delay, on the day on which
you gave to some, as I have said, a respite. I
can prove this, if you deny it. Your own Coun-
cil is witness. We have also the proconsular
Acts, in which you have not once, but often,
affirmed this. Provide, therefore, some other
line of defence if you can, lest, denying what I
can prove, you cause loss of time. If, then,
Felicianus and Praetextatus were innocent, why
were they thus condemned ? If they were guilty,
why were they thus restored ? If you prove them
to have been innocent, can you object to our
believing that it was possible for innocent men,
falsely charged with being traditors, to be con-
demned by a much smaller number of your
predecessors, if it is found possible for innocent
men, falsely charged with being schismatics, to be
condemned by three hundred and ten of their
successors, whose decision is magniloquently
described as proceeding from " the unerring
voice of a plenary Council"? If, however, you
prove them to have been justly condemned, what
can you plead in defence of their being restored
to office in the same episcopal sees, unless, mag-
nifying the importance and benefit of peace, you
maintain that even such things as these should
be tolerated in order to preserve unbroken the
bond of unity ? Would to God that you would
urge this plea, not with the lips only, but with
the whole heart ! You could not fail then to
perceive that no calumnies whatever could justify
the breaking up of the peace of Christ through-
out the world, if it is lawful in Africa for men, once
condemned for impious schism, to be restored to
the same office which they held, rather than break
up the peace of Donatus and his party.


3 Doniim'cz Ubri.

< Felicianus and Praetextatus were two of the twelve bishops by
whom Maximianus was ordained. They were condemned by the
Donatist Council of Bagae; but finding it impossible to eject them
from their sees, the Donatists yielded after a time, and restored them
to their office. See Letter LIII. p. 299.


mM


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


297


3. Again, you are wont to reproach us with
persecuting you by the help of the civil power.
In regard to this, I do not draw an argument
either from the demerit involved in the enormity
of so great an impiety, nor from the Christian
meekness moderating the severity of our meas-
ures. I take up tliis position : if this be a crime,
why have you harshly persecuted the Maximi-
anists by the help of judges appointed by those
emperors whose spiritual birth by the gospel was
due to our Church ? Why have you driven them,
by the din of controversy, the authority of edicts,
and the violence of soldiery, from those build-
ings for worship which they possessed, and in
which they were when they seceded from you?
The wrongs endured by them in that struggle in
every place are attested by the existing traces
of events so recent. Documents declare the
orders given. The deeds done are notorious
throughout regions in which also the sacred
memory of your leader Optatus is mentioned
with honour.

4. Again, you are wont to say that we have
not the baptism of Christ, and that beyond your
communion it is not to be found. On this I
would enter into a more lengthened argument ;
but in dealing with you this is not necessary,
seeing that, along with Felicianus and Praetexta-
tus, you admitted also the baptism of the Max-
im ianists as valid. For all whom these bishops
baptized so long as they were in communion
with Maximianus, while you were doing your
utmost in a protracted contest in the civil courts
to expel these very men [Felicianus and Prse-
textatus] from their churches, as the Acts testify,
— all those, I say, whom they baptized during |
that time, they now have in fellowship with them
and with you ; and though these were baptized
by them when excommunicated and in the guilt
of schism, not only in cases of extremity through
dangerous sickness, but also at the Easter ser-
vices, in the large number of churches belonging
to their cities, and in these important cities
themselves, — in the case of none of them has
the rite of baptism been repeated. And I wish
you could prove that those whom Felicianus and
Praitextatus had baptized, as it were, in vain,
when they were excommunicated and in the guilt
of schism, were satisfactorily baptized again by \
them when they were restored. For if the re- 1
newal of baptism was necessary for the people, ■
the renewal of ordination was not less necessary i
for the bishops. For they had forfeited their [
episcopal office by leaving you, if they could not

, baptize beyond your communion ; because, if
I they had not forfeited their episcopal office by
leaving you, they could still baptize. But if
they had forfeited their episcopal office, they
should have received ordination when they re-
turned, so that what they had lost might be


restored. Let not this, however, alarm you. As
it is certain that they returned with the same
standing as bishops with which they had gone
forth from you, so is it also certain that they
brought back with themselves to your com-
munion, without any repetition of their baptism,
all those whom they had baptized in the schism
of Maximianus.

5. How can we weep enough when we see the
bapdsm of the Maximianists acknowledged by
you, and the baptism of the Church universal
despised ? Whether it was with or without hear-
ing their defence, whether it was justly or unjustly,
that you condemned Felicianus and Prgetextatus,
I do not ask ; but tell me what bishop of the
Corinthian Church ever defended himself at your
bar, or received sentence from you? or what
bishop of the Galatians has done so, or of the
Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians, Thessalonians,
or of any of the other cities included in the
promise : " All the kindreds of the nations shall
worship before Thee " ? ' Yet you accept the
baptism of the former, while that of the latter is
despised ; whereas baptism belongs neither to
the one nor to the other, but to Him of whom
it was said : " This same is He that baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost." ^ I do not, however,
dwell on this in the meantime : take notice of
the things which are beside us — behold what
might make an impression e\'en on the blind !
\\'here do we find the baptism which you ac-
knowledge? With those, forsooth, whom you
have condemned, but not with those who were
never even tried at your bar ! — with those who
were denounced by name, and cast forth from
you for the crime of schism, but not with those
who, unknown to you, and dwelling in remote
lands, never were accused or condemned by you 1
— with those who are but a fraction of the in-
habitants of a fragment of Africa, but not with
those from whose country the gospel first came
to Africa ! Why should I add to your burden ?
Let me have an answer to these things. Look
to the charge made by your Council against the
Maximianists as guilty of impious schism : look
to the persecutions by the civil courts to which
you appealed against them : look to the fact that
you restored some of them without re-ordination,
and accepted their baptism as valid : and answer,
if you can, whether it is in your power to hide,
even from the ignorant, the question why you
have separated yourselves from the whole world,
in a schism much more heinous than that which
you boast of having condemned in the Maximi-
anists? May the peace of Christ triumph in
your heart ! Then all shall be well.^


' Ps. xxii. 27.
^ John i. 33.

3 We conjecture this to be the meaning of the elliptical expression
EYTYXni with which the letter ends.


298


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


LETTER LII.

This letter to his kinsman Scverinus, exhorting him
to withdraw from the Donatists, contains no new argu-
ment.

LETTER LIIL

(a.d. 400,)

to generosus, our most loved and honour-
able brother, fortunatus, alypius, and
augustin send greeting in the lord.

Chap, l — i. Since you were pleased to ac-
quaint us witli the letter sent to you by a Dona-
tist presbyter, altliough, with the spirit of a true
Catholic, you regarded it with contempt, never-
theless, to aid you in seeking his welfare if his
folly be not incurable, we beg you to forward to
him the following reply. He wrote that an
angel had enjoined him to declare to you the
episcopal succession ' of the Christianity of your
town ; to you, forsooth, who hold the Christianity
not of your own town only, nor of Africa only,
but of the whole world, the Christianity which
has been published, and is now published to all
nations. This proves that they think it a small
matter that they themselves are not ashamed of
being cut off, and are taking no measures, while
they may, to be engrafted anew ; they are not
content unless they do their utmost to cut others
off, and bring them to share their own fate, as
withered branches fit for the flames. Wherefore,
even if you had yourself been visited by that
angel whom he affirms to have appeared to him,
— a statement which we regajrd as a cunning
fiction ; and if the angel had said to you the
very words which he, on the warrant of the al-
leged command, repeated to you, — even in
that case it would have been your duty to re-
member the words of the apostle : " Though
we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
gospel unto you than that we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed." ^ For to you
it was proclaimed by the voice of the Lord
Jesus Christ Himself, that His " gospel shall be
preached unto all nations, and then shall the
end come." ^ To you it has moreover been
proclaimed by the writings of the prophets and
of the apostles, that the promises were given to
Abraham and to his seed, which is Christ,"* when
God said unto him : " In thy seed shall all
nations of the earth be blessed." Having then
such promises, if an angel from heaven were to
say to thee, " Let go the Christianity of the
whole earth, and cling to the faction of Dona-
tus, the episcopal succession of which is set forth

' " Ordo." The phrase is afterwards given (sec. 2) more- fully,
" ordo episcoporum sibi succedentium."

2 Gal. i. 8.

3 Matt. xxiv. 14.
* Gal. iii. 16


in a letter of their bishop in your town," he
ought to be accursed in your estimation ; because
he would be endeavouring to cut you off from
the whole Church, and tlirust you into a small
party, and make you forfeit your interest in the
promises of God.

2. For if the lineal succession of bishops is to
be taken into account, with how much more cer-
tainty and benefit to the Church do we reckon
back till we reach Peter himself, to whom, as
bearing in a figure the whole Church, 5 the Lord
said : " Upon this rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it ! " "^ The successor of Peter was Linus, and
his successors in unbroken continuity were these :
— Clement, Anacletus, Evaristus, Alexander, Six-
tus, Telesphorus, Iginus, Anicetus, Pius, Soter,
Eleutherius, Victor, Zephirinus, Calixtus, Urba-
nus, Pontianus, Antherus, Fabianus, Cornelius,
Lucius, Stephanus, Xystus, Dionysius, Felix,
Eutychianus, Gaius, Marcellinus, Marcellus, Euse-
bius, Miltiades, Sylvester, Marcus, Julius, Liberius,
Damasus, and Siricius, whose successor is the
present Bishop Anastasius. In this order of
succession no Donatist bishop is found. But,
reversing the natural course of things, the Dona-
tists sent to Rome from Africa an ordained
bishop, who, putting himself at the head of a
few Africans in the great metropolis, gave some
notoriety to the name of " mountain men," or
Cutzupits, by which they were known.

3. Now, even although some traditor had in
the course of these centuries, through inadvert-
ence, obtained a place in that order of bishops,
reaching from Peter himself to Anastasius, who
now occupies that see, — this fact would do no
harm to the Church and to Christians having
no share in the guilt of another ; for the Lord,
providing against such a case, says, concerning
officers in the Church who are wicked : " All
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe
and do ; but do not ye after their works : for
they say, and do not." ^ Thus the stability of
the hope of the faithful is secured, inasmuch as
being fixed, not in man, but in the Lord, it never
can be swept away by the raging of impious
schism ; whereas they themselves are swept
away who read in the Holy Scriptures the names
of churches to which the apostles wrote, and
in which they have no bishop. For what could
more clearly prove their perversity and their
folly, than their saying to their clergy^ when they
read these letters, " Peace be with thee," ^ at
the very time that they are themselves disjoined
from the peace of those churches to which the
letters were originally wTitten ?

5 Totius Ecclesia figitram gere7tti.

6 Matt. xvi. 18.

7 Matt, xxiii. 3.

^ Compare the allusion to the same custom in Letter XLIII. sec.
21, p. 155.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


299


Chap. ii. — 4. Lest, however, he should con- 1
gratulate himself too much on the succession of
bishops in Constantina, your own city, read to
him the records of proceedings before Muna-
tius Felix, the resident Flamen [heathen priest],
who was governor of your city in the consulship
of Diocletian for the eighth time, and Maximian
for the seventh, on the eleventh day before the
calends of June. By these records it is proved
that the bishop Paulus was a traditor ; the fact
being that Sylvanus was then one of his sub-
deacons, and, along with him, produced and sur-
rendered certain things belonging to the Lord's
house, which had been most carefully concealed,
namely a box ' and a lamp of silver, upon see- \
ing which a certain Victor is reported to have
said, " You would have been put to death if you
had not found these." Your Donatist priest
makes great account of this Sylvanus, this
clearly convicted traditor, in the letter which
he writes you, mentioning him as then ordained
to the office of bishop by the Primate Secundus
of Tigisis. Let them keep their proud tongues
silent, let them admit the charges which may
truly be brought against themselves, and not
utter foolish calumnies against others. Read to
him also, if he permits it, the ecclesiastical
records of the proceedings of this same Secun-
dus of Tigisis in the house of Urbanus Donatus,
in which he remitted to God, as judge, men who
confessed themselves to have been traditors —
Donatus of Masculi, Marinus of Aquae Tibili- i
tanae, Donatus of Calama, with whom as his
colleagues, though they were confessed traditors,
he ordained their bishop Sylvanus, of whose
guilt in the same matter I have given the history
above. Read to him also the proceedings be-
fore Zenophilus, a man of consular rank, in the 1
course of which a certain deacon of theirs. Nun- !
dinarius, being angry with Sylvanus for having
excommunicated him, brought all these facts
into court, proving them incontestably by au- !
thendc documents, and the questioning of wit-
nesses, and the reading of public records and
many letters.

5. There are many other things which you
might read in his hearing, if he is disposed not
to dispute angrily, but to listen prudently, such
as : the petition of the Donatists to Constantine,
begging him to send from Gaul bishops who
should settle this controversy which divided the
African bishops ; the Acts recording what took
place in Rome, when the case was taken up and
decided by the bishops whom he sent thither :
also you might read in other letters how the
Emperor aforesaid states that they had made a
complaint to him against the decision of their
peers — the bishops, namely, whom he had sent

' Capitulata.


to Rome ; how he appointed other bishops to
try the case over again at Aries ; how they ap-
pealed from that tribunal also to the Emperor
again ; how at last he himself investigated the
matter ; and how he most emphatically declares
that they were vanquished by the innocence of
Caecilianus. Let him listen to these things if
he be willing, and he will be silent and desist
from plotting against the truth.

Chap. hi. — 6. We rely, however, not so much
on these documents as on the Holy Scriptures,
wherein a dominion extending to the ends of the
earth among all nations is promised as the heri-
tage of Christ, separated from which by their
sinful schism they reproach us with the crimes
which belong to the chaff in the Lord's threshing-
floor, which must be permitted to remain mixed
with the good grain until the end come, until the
whole be winnowed in the final judgment. From
which it is manifest that, whether these charges
be true or false, they do not belong to the Lord's
wheat,2 which must grow until the end of the
world throughout the whole field, i.e. the whole
earth ; as we know, not by the testimony of a
false angel such as confirmed your correspondent
in his error, but from the words of the Lord in
the Gospel. And because these unhappy Do-
natists have brought the reproach of many false
and empty accusations against Christians who
were blameless, but who are throughout the world
mingled with the chaff or tares, i.e. with Chris-
tians unworthy of the name, therefore God has, in
righteous retribution, appointed that they should,
by their universal Council, condemn as schis-
matics the Maximianists, because they had con-
demned Priraianus, and baptized while not in
communion with Primianus, and rebaptized those
whom he had baptized, and then after a short
interval should, under the coercion of Optatus'j
the minion of Gildo, reinstate in the honours of
their office two of these, the bishops Felicianus
of Musti and Praetextatus of Assuri, and ac-
knowledge the baptism of all whom they, while
under sentence and excommunicated, had bap-
tized. If, therefore, they are not defiled by com-
munion with the men thus restored again to their
office, — men whom with their own mouth they
had condemned as wicked and impious, and
whom they compared to those first heretics whom
the earth swallowed up alive,^ — let them at last
awake and consider how great is their blindness
and folly in pronouncing the whole world defiled
by unknown crimes of Africans, and the heritage
of Christ (which according to the promise has
been shown unto all nations) destroyed through
the sins of these Africans by the maintenance of
communion with them ; while they refuse to ac-
knowledge themselves to be destroyed and defiled

2 Matt. xiii. 30.

3 Num. xvi. 31-33.


lOO


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


by communicating with men whose crimes they
had both known and condemned.

7. Wherefore, since the Apostle Paul says in
another place, that even Satan transforms himself
into an angel of light, and that therefore it is not
strange that his servants should assume the guise
of ministers of righteousness : ' if your corre-
spondent did indeed see an angel teaching him
error, and desiring to separate Christians from
the Catholic unity, he has met with an angel of
Satan transforming himself into an angel of light.
If, however, he has lied to you, and has seen no
such vision, he is himself a servant of Satan, as-
suming the guise of a minister of rigliteousness.
And yet, if he be not incorrigibly obstinate and
perverse, he may, by considering all the things
now stated, be delivered both from misleading
others, and from being himself misled. P'or,
embracing the opportunity which you have given,
we have met him without any rancour, remem-
bering in regard to him the words of the apostle :
" The servant of the Lord must not strive ; but
be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient ; in
meekness instructing those that oppose them-
selves ; if God peradventure will give them re-
pentance to the acknowledging of the truth ; and
that they may recover themselves out of the snare
of the devil, who are taken captive by him at
his will." ^ If, therefore, we have said anything
severe, let him know that it arises not from the
bitterness of controversy, but from love vehe-
mently desiring his return to the right path. May
you live safe in Christ, most beloved and hon-
ourable brother !

LETTER LIV.

Styled also Book I. of Replies to Questions of
Januarius.

(a.d. 400.)

to his beloved son januarius, augustin sends
greeting in the lord.

Chap. i. — i. In regard to the questions which
you have asked me, I would like to have known
what your own answers would have been ; for
thus I might have made my reply in fewer words,
and might most easily confirm or correct your
opinions, by approving or amending the answers
which you had given. This I would have gready
preferred. But desiring to answer you at once,
I think it better to write a long letter than incur
loss of time. I desire you therefore, in the first
place, to hold fast this as the fundamental prin-
ciple in the present discussion, that our Lord
Jesus Christ has appointed to us a " light yoke "
and an "easy burden," as He declares in the
Gospel : 3 in accordance with which He has

' 2 Cor. xi. 13-15.
^ 2 Tim. ii. 24-26.
3 Malt. xi. 30.


bound His people under the new dispensation
together in fellowship by sacraments, which are
in number very few, in observance most easy,
and in significance most excellent, as baptism
solemnized in the name of the Trinity, the com-
munion of His body and blood, and such other
things as are prescribed in the canonical Scrip-
tures, with the exception of those enactments
which were a yoke of bondage to God's ancient
people, suited to their state of heart and to the
times of the prophets, and which are found in
the five l)Ooks of Moses. As to those other
things which we hold on the authority, not of
Scripture, but of tradition, and which are observed
throughout the whole world, it may be understood
that they are held as approved and instituted
either by the apostles themselves, or by plenary
Councils, whose authority in the Church is most
useful, e.g. the annual commemoration, by special
solemnities, of the Lord's passion, resurrection,
and ascension, and of the descent of the Holy
Spirit from heaven, and whatever else is in like
manner observed by the whole Church wherever
it has been established.

Chap. ii. — 2. There are other things, how-
ever, which are different in different places and
countries : e.g., some fast on Saturday, others do
not ; some partake daily of the body and blood
of Christ, others receive it on stated davs : in'
some places no day passes without the sacrifice!
being offered ; in others it is only on Saturday'
and the Lord's day, or it may be only on the!
Lord's day. In regard to these and all other va-
riable observances which may be met anywhere,
one is at liberty to comply with them or not as
he chooses ; and there is no better rule for the
wise and serious Christian in this matter, than to
conform to the practice which he finds prevail-
ing in the Church to which it may be his lot to
come. For such a custom, if it is clearly not
contrary to the faith nor to sound morality, is to
be held as a thing indifferent, and ought to be
observed for the sake of fellowship with those
among whom we hve.

3. I think you may have heard me relate
before,-* what I will nevertheless now mendon.
When my mother followed me to Milan, she
found the Church there not fasting on Saturday.
She began to be troubled, and to hesitate as to \
what she should do; upon which I, though not]
taking a personal interest then in such things,!
applied on her behalf to Ambrose, of mosti
blessed memory, for his advice. He answered*
that he could not teach me anything but what
he himself practised, because if he knew any!
better rule, he would observe it himself. Wheni
I supposed that he intended, on the ground of:
his authority alone, and without supporting it by

4 Compare Letter XXXVI. sec. 32, p. 270.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


;oi


any argument, to recommend us to give up fast-
ing on Saturday, he followed me, and said :
" When I visit Rome, I fast on Saturday ; when
I am here, I do not fast. On the same principle,
do you observe the custom prevailing in what-
ever Church you come to, if you desire neither
to give offence by yopr conduct, nor to find cause
of offence in another's." When I reported this
to my mother, she accepted it gladly ; and for
myself, after frequently reconsidering his decision,
I have always esteemed it as if I had received it
by an oracle from heaven. For often have I per-
ceived, with extreme sorrow, many disquietudes '
caused to weak brethren by the contentious \
pertinacity or superstitious vacillation of some !
who, in matters of this kind, which do not admit |
of final decision by the authority of Holy Scrip-
ture, or by the tradition of the universal Church,
or by their manifest good influence on manners,
raise questions, it may be, from some crotchet
of their own, or from attachment to the custom
followed in one's own country, or from prefer-
ence for that which one has seen abroad, sup-
posing that wisdom is increased in proportion to
the distance to which men travel from home, and
agitate these questions with such keenness, that
they think all is wrong except what they do
themselv'es.

Chap. hi. — 4. Some one may say, "The Eu-
charist ought not to be taken every day." You
ask, " On what grounds ? " He answers, " Because,
in order that a man may approach worthily to
so great a sacrament, he ought to choose those
days upon which he lives in more special purity
and self-restraint ; for ' whosoever eateth and
drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judg-
ment to himself.' " ' Another answers, " Cer-
tainly ; if the wound inflicted by sin and the
violence of the soul's distemper be such that
the use of these remedies must be put off for a
time, every man in this case should be, by the
authority of the bishop, forbidden to approach the
altar, and appointed to do penance,^ and should
be afterwards restored to privileges by the same
authority ; for this would be partaking unworthily,
if one should partake of it at a time when he
ought to be doing penance ; and it is not a matter
to be left to one's own judgment to withdraw
himself from the communion of the Church, or
restore himself, as he pleases. If, however, his
sins are not so great as to bring him justly under
sentence of excommunication, he ought not to
withdraw himself from the daily use of the Lord's
body for the healing of his soul." Perhaps a
third party interposes with a more just decision
of the question, reminding them that the prin-
cipal thing is to remain united in the peace of
Christ, and that each should be free to do what.


' I Cor. xi. 29.

* Agere poenitentiatn.


according to his belief, he conscientiously regards
as his duty. For neither of them lightly esteems
the body and blood of the Lord ; on the contrary,
both are contending who shall most highly honour
the sacrament fraught with blessing. There was
no controversy between those two mentioned in
the Gospel, Zacchaeus and the Centurion ; nor
did either of them think himself better than the
other, though, whereas the former received the
Lord joyfully into his house, 3 the latter said, " I
am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under
my roof,"-* — both honouring the Saviour, though
in ways diverse and, as it were, mutually opposed ;
both miserable through sin, and both obtaining
the mercy they required. We may further bor-
row an illustration here, from the fact that the
manna given to the ancient people of God tasted
in each man's mouth as he desired that it might.5
It is the same with this world-sul)duing sacra-
ment in the heart of each Christian. For he
that dares not take it every day, and he who
dares not omit it any day, are both alike moved
by a desire to do it honour. That sacred food
will not submit to be despised, as the manna
could not be loathed with impunity. Hence the
apostle says that it was unworthily partaken of
by those who did not distinguish between this
and all other meats, by yielding to it the special
veneration which was due ; for to the words
quoted already, " eateth and drinketh judgment
to himself," he has added these, "not discerning
the Lord's body ; " and this is apparent from the
whole of that passage in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, if it be carefully studied.

Chap. iv. — 5. Suppose some foreigner visit a
place in which during Lent it is customary to
abstain from the use of the bath, and to continue
fasting on Thursday. " I will not fast to-day,"
he says. The reason being asked, he says,
" Such is not the custom in my own country."
Is not he, by such conduct, attempting to assert
the superiority of his custom over theirs? For
he cannot quote a decisive passage on the subject
from the Book of God ; nor can he prove his
opinion to be right by the unanimous voice of
the universal Church, wherever spread abroad ;
nor can he demonstrate that they act contrary to
the faith, and he according to it, or that they are
doing what is prejudicial to sound morality, and
he is defending its interests. Those men injure
their own tranquillity and peace by quarrelling
on an unnecessary question. I would rather
recommend that, in matters of this kind, each


3 Luke xix. 5.

•♦ Matt. viii. 8.

5 In his Retractatwts, b. ii. ch. xx., Augustin remarks on this
statement: "I do not recollect any passage by which it could be
substantiated, except from the book of Wisdom (ch. xvi. 21), which
the Jews do not admit to be of canonical authority." He says, in the
same place, that this peculiarity of the manna must have been enjoyed
only by the pious in Israel, not by the murmurers who said, "Our
soul loatheth this light bread" (Num. xxi. 5).


;o2


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


man should, when sojourning in a country in
which he iinds a custom different from his own,
consent to do as others do. If, on the other
hand, a Christian, when traveUing abroad in some
region where the people of God are more nu-
merous, and more easily assembled together,
and more zealous in religion, has seen, e.g., the
sacrifice twice offered, both morning and even-
ing, on the Thursday of the last week in Lent,
and therefore, on his coming back to his own
country, where it is offered only at the close of
the day, protests against this as wrong and un-
lawful, because he has himself seen another cus-
tom in another land, this would show a childish
weakness of judgment against which we should
guard ourselves, and which we must bear with
in others, but correct in all who are under our
influence.

Chap. v. — 6. Observe now to which of these
three classes the first question in your letter is
to be referred. You ask, " What ought to be
done on the Thursday of the last week of Lent ?
Ought we to offer the sacrifice in the morning,
and again after supper, on account of the words
in the Gospel, ' Likewise also . . . after sup-
per ' ? ' Or ought we to fast and offer the sacri-
fice only after supper? Or ought we to fast
until the offering has been made, and then take
supper as we are accustomed to do ? " I answer,
therefore, that if the authority of Scripture has
decided which of these methods is right, there
is no room for doubting that we should do ac-
cording to that which is written ; and our
discussion must be occupied with a question,
not of duty, but of interpretation as to the
meaning of the divine institution. In Hke
manner, if the universal Church follows any one
of these methods, there is no room for doubt as
to our duty ; for it would be the height of arro-
gant madness to discuss whether or not we should
comply with it. But the question which you
propose is not decided either by Scripture or by
universal practice. It must therefore be referred
to the third class — as pertaining, namely, to
things which are different in different places and
countries. Let every man, therefore, conform
himself to the usage prevailing in the Church to
which he may come. For none of these
methods is contrary to the Christian faith or the
interests of morality, as favoured by the adoption
of one custom more than the other. If this were
the case, that either the faith or sound morality
were at stake, it would be necessary either to
change what was done amiss, or to appoint the
doing of what had been neglected. But mere
change of custom, even though it may be of
advantage in some respects, unsettles men by
reason of the novelty : therefore, if it brings no

* Luke xxii. 20.


advantage, it does much harm by unprofitably
disturbing the Church.

7. Let me add, that it would be a mistake
to suppose that the custom prevalent in many
places, of offering the sacrifice on that day after
partaking of food, is to be traced to the words,
" Likewise after supper," etc. For the Lord
might give the name of supper to what they had
received, in already partaking of His body, so
that it was after this that they partook of the cup :
as the apostle says in another place, " When ye
come together into one place, this is not to eaf^
the Lord's Supper," ^ giving to the receiving
of the Eucharist to that extent {i.e. the eating of
the bread) the name of the Lord's Supper.

Chap. vi. — As to the question whether upon
that day it is right to partake of food before
either offering or partaking of the Eucharist,
these words in the Gospel might go far to decide
our minds, " As they were eating, Jesus took
bread and blessed it ; " taken in connection
with the words in the preceding context, " When
the even was come, He sat down with the
twelve : and as they did eat. He said. Verily I
say unto you, that one of you shall betray Me."
For it was after that that He instituted the
sacrament ; and it is clear that when the disci-
ples first received the body and blood of the
Lord, they had not been fasting,

8. Must we therefore censure the universal
Church because the sacrament is everywhere
partaken of by persons fasting? Nay, verily,
for from that time it pleased the Holy Spirit to
appoint, for the honour of so great a sacrament,
that the body of the Lord should take the pre-
cedence of all other food entering the mouth of
a Christian ; and it is for this reason that the
custom referred to is universally observed. For
the fact that the Lord instituted the sacrament
after other food had been partaken of, does not
prove that brethren should come together to
partake of that sacrament after having dined or
supped, or imitate those whom the apostle re-
proved and corrected for not distinguishing
between the Lord's Supper and an ordinary meal.
The Saviour, indeed, in order to commend the
depth of that mystery more affectingly to His
disciples, was pleased to impress it on their
hearts and memories by making its institution
His last act before going from them to His
Passion. And therefore He did not prescribe
the order in which it was to be observed, reserv-
ing this to be done by the apostles, through
whom He intended to arrange all things pertain-
ing to the Churches. Had He appointed that
the sacrament should be always partaken of
after other food, I believe that no one would
have departed from that practice. But when,

2 Manducare.

3 I Coi. xi. 20.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


303


the apostle, speaking of this sacrament, says,
" Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come to-
gether to eat, tarry one for another : and if any
man hunger, let him eat at home ; that ye come
not together unto condemnation," he immediately
adds, " and the rest will I set in order when I
come." ■ Whence we are given to understand
that, since it was too much for him to prescribe
completely in an epistle the method observed by
the universal Church throughout the world, it was
one of the things set in order by him in person,
for we find its observance uniform amid all the
variety of other customs.

Chap. vii. — 9. There are, indeed, some to
whom it has seemed right (and their view is
not unreasonable), that it is lawful for the body
and blood of the Lord to be offered and received
after other food has been partaken of, on one
fixed day of the year, the day on which the Lord
instituted the Supper, in order to give special
solemnity to the service on that anniversary. I
think that, in this case, it would be more seemly
to have it celebrated at such an hour as would
leave it in the power of any who have fasted to
attend the service before - the repast which is
customary at the ninth hour. Wherefore we
neither compel nor do we dare to forbid any one
to break his fast before the Lord's Supper on
that day. I believe, however, that the real ground
upon which this custom rests is, that many, nay,
almost all, are accustomed in most places to use
the bath on that day. And because some con-
tinue to fast, it is offered in the morning, for those
who take food, because they cannot bear fasting
and the use of the bath at the same time ; and in
the evening, for those who have fasted all day.

10. If you ask me whence originated the cus-
tom of using the bath on that day, nothing occurs
to me, when I think of it, as more likely than
that it was to avoid the offence to decency which
must have been given at the baptismal font, if
the bodies of those to whom that rite was to be
administered were not washed on some preced-
ing day from the uncleanness consequent upon
their strict abstinence from ablutions during Lent ;
and that this particular day was chosen for the
purpose because of its being the anniversary of
the institution of the Supper. And this being
granted to those who were about to receive bap-
tism, many others desired to join them in the
luxury of a bath, and in relaxation of their fast.

Having discussed these questions to the best
of my ability, I exhort you to observe, in so far
as you may be able, what I have laid down, as
becomes a wise and peace-loving son of the
Church. The remainder of your questions I pur-
pose, if the Lord will, to answer at another time.


I I 9°''- ^^- 33' 34- .
_ ^ ^ Ante_ IS the reading of seven MSS. The Benedictine edition
gives " post " in the text. We think the former gives better sense.


LETTER LV.

Or Book II. of Replies to Questions of Januarius.

(a.d. 400.)

Chap. i. — i . Having read the letter in which
you have put me in mind of my obligation to
give answers to the remainder of those questions
which you submitted to me a long time ago, I
cannot bear to defer any longer the gratification
of that desire for instruction which it gives me
so much pleasure and comfort to see in you ;
and although encompassed by an accumulation
of engagements, I have given the first place to
the work of supplying you with the answers de-
sired. I will make no further comment on the
contents of your letter, lest my doing so should
prevent me from paying at length what I owe.

2. You ask, " Wherefore does the anniversary
on which we celebrate the Passion of the Lord
not fall, like the day which tradition has handed
down as the day of His birth, on the same day
every year?" and you add, "If the reason of
this is connected with the week and the month,
what have we to do with the day of the week or
the state of the moon in this solemnity?" The
first thing which you must know and remember
here is, that the observance of the Lord's natal
day is not sacramental, but only commemorative
of His birth, and that therefore no more was in
this case necessary, than that the return of the
day on which the event took place should be
marked by an annual religious festival. The cele-
bration of an event becomes sacramental in its
nature, only when the commemoration of the
event is so ordered that it is understood to be
significant of something which is to be received
with reverence as sacred.3 Therefore we observe
Easter ■* in such a manner as not only to recall
the facts of the death and resurrection of Christ
to remembrance, but also to find a place for all
the other things which, in connection with these
events, give evidence as to the import of the
sacrament. For since, as the apostle wrote,
" He was delivered for our offences, and was
raised again for our justification," s a certain
transition from death to life has been consecrated
in that Passion and Resurrection of the Lord.
For the word Pascha itself is not, as is commonly
thought, a Greek word : those who are acquainted
with both languages affirm it to be a Hebrew
word. It is not derived, therefore, from the
Passion, because of the Greek word Trdcrxety,
signifying to suffer, but it takes its name from
the transition, of which I have spoken, from
death to life ; the meaning of the Hebrew word
Pascha being, as those who are acquainted with


3 Sancte accipiendutn
* Pascha.
S Rom. iv. 25.


304


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


it assure us,' a passing over or transition. To
this the Lord Himself designed to allude, when
He said, " He that believeth in Me is passed from
death to life." - And the same evangelist who
records that saying is to be understood as desir-
ing to give emphatic testimony to this, when,
speaking of the Lord as about to celebrate with
His disciples the passover, at which He instituted
the sacramental supper, he says, " When Jesus
knew that His hour was come, that He should
depart ^ from this world unto the Father." •♦ This
passing over from this mortal life to the other,
the immortal life, that is, from death to life, is
set forth in the Passion and Resurrection of the
Lord.

Chap. ii. — 3. This passing from death to life
is meanwhile wrought in us by faith, which we
have for the pardon of our sins and the hope of
eternal life, when we love God and our neighbour ;
" for faith worketh by love," 5 and " the just shall
live by his faith ;" ^ " and hope that is seen is
not hope : for what a man seeth, why doth he
yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see
not, then do we with patience wait for it." ^
According to this faith and hope and love, by
which we have begun to be " under grace," we
are already dead together with Christ, and buried
together with Him by baptism into death ; ^ as
the apostle hath said, " Our old man is crucified
with Him ;" 9 and we have risen with Him, for
" He hath raised us up together, and made us
sit with Him in heavenly places." '° Whence also
he gives this exhortation : " If ye then be risen
with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.
Set your affection on things above, not on things
on the earth," " In the next words, " For ye are
dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God ;
when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with Him in glory," '^ he
plainly gives us to understand that our passing
in this present time from death to life by faith is
accomplished in the hope of that future final
resurrection and glory, when " this corruptible,"
that is, this flesh in which we now groan, " shall
put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality." '^ For now, indeed, we have by
faith '• the first-fruits of the Spirit ; " but still we
" groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption.


' Had Augustin not been obliged to take his Hebrew at second
hand, he might have seen that the word T\Q2 does not bear out his

interpretation. Ex. xii. 13, 27.
- John V. 24.
3 Tra ttsiret,
* John xiii. i.

5 Gal. V. 6.

6 Hab. ii. 4.

7 Rom. viii. 24, 25.

8 Col ii. 12 and Rom. vi. 4

9 Rom. vi. 6.
»o Eph. ii. 6.

" Col. iii. I, 2.
'2 Col. iii. 3, 4.
•3 I Cor. XV. 53.


to wit, the redemption of the body : for we are
saved by hope." While we are in this hope,
" the body indeed is dead because of sin, but the
spirit is life because of righteousness." Now
mark what follows : " But if the Spirit of Him
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you.
He that raised up Christ from the dead shall
also quicken your mortal bodies by His Sjjirit
that dwelleth in you." '^ The whole Church,
therefore, while here in the conditions of pil-
grimage and mortality, expects that to be accom-
plished in her at the end of the world which has
been shown first in the body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is " the first-begotten from the dead,"
seeing that the body of which He is the Head
is none other than the Church. '5

Cr-vp. III. — 4. Some, indeed, studying the
words so frequently used by the apostle, about
our being dead with Christ and raised together
with Him, and misunderstanding the sense in
which they are used, have thought that the resur-
rection is already past, and that no other is to be
hoped for at the end of time : " Of whom," he
says, " are Hymenseus and Philetus ; who con-
cerning the truth have erred, saying that the res-
urrection is past already ; and overthrow the faith
of some." ''' The same apostle who thus reproves
and testifies against them, teaches nevertheless
that we are risen with Christ. How is the ap-
parent contradiction to be removed, unless he
means that this is accomplished in us by faith
and hope and love, according to the first-fruits
of the Spirit? But because " hope which is seen
is not hope," and therefore " if we hope for that
we see not, we do with patience wait for it," it
is beyond question that there remains, as still
future, the redemption of the body, in longing
for which we " groan within ourselves." Hence
also that saying, " Rejoicing in hope, patient in
tribulation." '?

5. This renewal, therefore, of our life is a kind
of transition from death to life which is made
first by faith, so that we rejoice in hope and are
patient in tribulation, while still " our outward
man perisheth, but the inward man is renewed
day by day." '^ It is because of this beginning
of a new life, because of the new man which we
are commanded to put on, putting off the old
man, '9 " purging out the old leaven, that we may
be a new lump, because Christ our passover is
sacrificed for us ; " ^° it is, I say, because of this ,
newness of life in us, that the first of the months '
of the year has been appointed as the season
of this solemnity. This very name is given to


'■* Rom. viii. 23, 24, 10, ii.

15 Col. i. 18.

■6 2 Tim. ii. 17.

'7 Rom. xii. 12.

" 2 Cor. iv. 16.

■9 Col. iii. 9, 10.

^° I Cor. V. 7.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


305


it, the month Abib, or beginning of months.'
Again, the resurrection of the Lord was upon the
third day, because with it the third epoch of
the world began. The first Epoch was before the
Law, the second under the Law, the third under
Grace, in which there is now the manifestation
of the mystery,^ which was formerly hidden
under dark prophetic sayings. This is accord-
ingly signified also in the part of the month
appointed for the celebration ; for, since the
number seven is usually employed in Scripture
as a mystical number, indicating perfection
of some kind, the day of the celebration of
Easter is within the third week of the month,
namely, between the fourteenth and the twenty-
first day.

Chap. iv. — 6. There is in this another mys-
tery,- and you are not to be distressed if perhaps
it be not so readily perceived by you, because
of your being less versed in such studies ; nor
are you to think me any better than you, because
I learned these things in early years : for the
Lord saith, " Let him that glorieth glory in this,
that he understandeth and knoweth Me, that I
am the Lord." ^ Some men who give attention
to such studies, have investigated many things
concerning the numbers and motions of the heav-
enly bodies. And those who have done this most
ably have found that the waxing and waning of
the moon are due to the turning of its globe, and
not to any such actual addition to or diminution
of its substance as is supposed by the foolish
Manichseans, who say that as a ship is filled, so
the moon is filled with a fugitive portion of the
Divine Being, which they, with impious heart and
lips, do not hesitate to believe and to declare to
have become mingled with the rulers of darkness,
and contaminated with their pollution. And
they account for the waxing of the moon by say-
ing that it takes place when that lost portion of
the Deity, being purified from contamination by
great labours, escaping from the whole world,-*
and from all foul abominations,5 is restored to the
Deity, who mourns till it returns ; that by this
the moon is filled up till the middle of the month,
and that in the latter half of the month this is
poured back into the sun as into another ship.
Amid these execrable blasphemies, they have
never succeeded in devising any way of explain-
ing why the moon in the beginning or end of
its brightness shines with its light in the shape
of a horn, or why it begins at the middle of the
month to wane, and does not go on full until it
pour back its increase into the sun.

7. Those, however, to whom I refer have in-
quired into these things with trustworthy calcu-

' Ex. xxiii. 15.
^ Sacramentum,
^ Jer. ix. 24.

* Mundus.

* Cloacis,


lations, so that they can not only state the reason
of eclipses, both solar and lunar, but also predict
their occurrence long before they take place, and
are able to determine by mathematical computa-
tion the precise intervals at which these must
happen, and to state the results in treatises, by
reading and understanding which any others may
foretell as well as they the coming of these
eclipses, and find their prediction verified by the
event. Such men, — and they deserve censure,
as Holy Scripture teaches, because " though they
had wisdom enough to measure the periods of
this world, they did not much more easily come,"
as by humble piety they might have done, " to
the knowledge of its Lord,"^ — such men, I say,
have inferred from the horns of the moon, which
both in waxing and in waning are turned from
the sun, either that the moon is illuminated by
the sun, and that the farther it recedes from the
sun the more fully does it lie exposed to its rays
on the side which is visible from the earth ; but
that the more it approaches the sun, after the
middle of the month, on the other half of its
orbit, it becomes more fully illuminated on the
upper part, and less and less open to receive
the sun's rays on the side which is turned to the
earth, and seems to us accordingly to decrease :
or, that if the moon has light in itself, it has this
light in the hemisphere on one side only, which
side it gradually turns more to the earth as it
recedes from the sun, until it is fully displayed,
thereby exhibiting an apparent increase, not by
the addition of what was deficient, but by dis-
closing what was already there ; and that, in like
manner, going towards the sun, the moon agaim
gradually turns from our view that which had
been disclosed, and so appears to decrease..
Whichever of these two theories be correct, thi&
at least is plain, and is easily discovered by any
careful observer, that the moon does not to our
eyes increase except when it is receding from
the sun, nor decrease except when returning
towards the sun.

Chap. v. — 8. Now mark what is said in Prov-
erbs : " The wise man is fixed like the sun ; but
the fool changes like the moon." ? And who
is the wise that has no changes, but that Sun of
Righteousness of whom it is said, "The Sun
of righteousness has risen upon me," and of
which the wicked shall say, when mourning in
the day of judgment that it has not risen upon
them, "The fight of righteousness hath not
shone upon us, and the sun hath not risen upon
us "?^ For that sun which is visible to the eye
of sense, God makes to rise upon the evil and
the good alike, as He sendeth rain upon the just
and the unjust ; ^ but apt similitude^ are often

* Wisd. xiii. g.

' Ecclus. xxvii. 12.

8 Wisd. V. 6.

9 Matt. V. 43.


3o6


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


borrowed from things visible to explain things in-
visible. Again, who is the "fool" who "changes
like the moon," if not Adam, in whom all have
sinned? For the soul of man, receding from
the Sun of righteousness, that is to say, from the
internal contemplation of unchangeable truth,
turns all its strength towards external things, and
becomes more and more darkened in its deeper
and nol)ler powers ; but when the soul begins to
return to that unchangeable wisdom, the more
it draws near to it with pious desire, the more does
the outward man perish, but the inward man is
renewed day by day, and all that light of the soul
which was inclining to things that are beneath is
turnetl to the things that are above, and is thus
withdrawn from the things of earth ; so that it
dies more and more to this world, and its life is
hid with Christ in God.

9. It is therefore for the worse that the soul
is changed when it moves in the direction of
external things, and throws aside that which per-
tains to the inner life ; and to the earth, i.e. to
those who mind earthly things, the soul looks
better in such a case, for by them the wicked is
commended for his heart's desire, and the un-
righteous is blessed.' But it is for the better
that the soul is changed, when it gradually turns
away its aims and ambition from earthly things,
which appear important in this world, and directs
them to things nobler and unseen ; and to the
earth, i.e. to men who mind earthly things, the
soul in such a case seems worse. Hence those
wicked men who at last shall in vain repent of
their sins, will say this among other things :
" These are the men whom once we derided and
reproached ; we in our folly esteemed their way
of life to be madness." ^ Now the Holy Spirit,
drawing a comparison from things visible to
things invisible, from things corporeal to spiritual
mysteries, has been pleased to appoint that the
feast symbolical of the passing from the old life
to the new, which is signified by the name Pascha,
should be observed between the 14th and 21st
days of the month, — after the 14th, in order
that a twofold illustration of spiritual realities
might be gained, both with respect to the third
epoch of the world, which is the reason of its
occurrence in the third week, as I have already
said, and with respect to the turning of the soul
from external to internal things, — a change cor-
responding to the change in the moon when on
the wane; not later than the 21st, because of
the number 7 itself, which is often used to repre-
sent the notion of the universe, and is also applied
to the Church on the ground of her likeness to
the universe.

Ch.4p. VI. — 10. For this reason the Apostle
John writes in the Apocalypse to seven churches.

' Ps. X. 3, as rendered by Aug.
2 Wisd. V. 3, 4.


The Church, moreover, while it remains under
the conditions of our mortal life in the flesh, is,
on account of her liability to change, spoken of
in Scripture by the name of the moon ; e.g.,
" They have made ready their arrows in the
quiver, that they may, while the moon is ob-
scured, wound those who are upright in heart." 3
For before that comes to pass of which the apos-
tle says, " When Christ, who is our life, shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in
glory,"'* the Church seems in the time of her
pilgrimage obscured, groaning under many in-
iquities ; and at such a time, the snares of those
who deceive and lead astray are to be feared,
and these are intended by the word " arrows " in
this passage. Again, we have another instance
in Psalm lxxxix.,5 where, because of the faithful
witnesses which she everywhere brings forth on
the side of truth, the Church is called "the moon,
a faithful witness in heaven." And when the
Psalmist sang of the Lord's kingdom, he said,
" In His days shall be righteousness and abun-
dance of peace, until the moon be destroyed ; "^
i.e. abundance of peace shall increase so greatly,
until He shall at length take away all the change-
ableness incidental to this mortal condition. Then
shall death, the last enemy, be destroyed ; and
whatever obstacle to the perfection of our peace
is due to the infirmity of our flesh shall be utter-
ly consumed when this corruptible shall have put
on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put
on immortality.7 We have another instance in
this, that the walls of the town named Jericho —
which in the Hebrew tongue is said to signify
"moon" — fell when they had been compassed
for the seventh time by the ark of the covenant
borne round the city. For what else is conveyed
by the promise of the coming of the heavenly
kingdom, which was symbolized in the carrying
of the ark round Jericho, than that all the strong-
holds of this mortal life, i.e. every hope pertain-
ing to this world which resists the hope of the
world to come, must be destroyed, with the soul's
free consent, by the sevenfold gift of the Holy
Spirit. Therefore it was, that when the ark was
going round, those walls fell, not by violent as-
sault, but of themselves. There are, besides these,
other passages in Scripture which, speaking of
the moon, impress upon us under that figure the
condition of the Church while here, amid cares
and labours, she is a pilgrim under the lot of
mortality, and far from that Jerusalem of which
the holy angels are the citizens.

1 1 . These foolish men who refuse to be changed
for the better have no reason, however, to imagine


3 Ps. xi. 3; in the LXX. version, toC KaraTofeOa'at kv ctkoto-
it.'i)vr] TOU9 ev^et9 T7y «ap6ta.
^ Col. iii. 4.

5 Ver. 39.

6 Ps. Ixxii. 7, Septuagint version.
^ I Cor. XV. 26, 53, 54.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


307


that worship is due to those heavenly luminaries
because a similitude is occasionally borrowed
from them for the representation of divine mys-
teries ; for such are borrowed from every created
thing. Nor is there any reason for bur incurring
the sentence of condemnation which is pro-
nounced by the apostle on some who worshipped
and served the creature more than the Creator,
who is blessed for ever.' We do not adore sheep
or cattle, although Christ is called both a Lamb,^
and by the prophet a young bullock ; ^ nor any
beast of prey, though He is called the Lion of
the tribe of Judah ; ■* nor a stone, although Christ
is called a Rock ; 5 nor Mount Zion, though in it
there was a type of the Church.*^ And, in like
manner, we do not adore the sun or the moon,
although, in order to convey instruction in holy
mysteries, tigures of sacred things are borrowed
from these celestial works of the Creator, as they
are also from many of the things which He hath
made on earth.

Chap. vii. — 12. We are therefore bound to
denounce with abhorrence and contempt the
ravings of the astrologers, who, when we find
fault with the empty inventions by which they
cast other men down into the delusions where-
into they themselves have fallen, imagine that
they answer well when they say, " Why, then, do
you regulate the time of the observance of Easter
by calculation of the positions of the sun and
moon?" — as if that with which we find fault
was the arrangements of the heavenly bodies, or
the succession of the seasons, which are appointed
by God in His infinite power and goodness, and
not their perversity in abusing, for the support
of the most absurd opinions, those things which
God has ordered in perfect wisdom. If the
astrologer may on this ground forbid us from
drawing comparisons from the heavenly bodies
for the mystical representation of sacramental
realities, then the augurs may with equal reason
prevent the use of these words of Scripture, " Be
harmless as doves ; " and the snake-charmers
may forbid that other exhortation, " Be wise as
serpents ; " ^ while the play-actors may interfere
with our mentioning the harp in the book of
Psalms. Let them therefore say, if they please,
that, because similitudes for the exhibition of the
mysteries of God's word are taken from the
things which I have named, we are chargeable
either with consulting the omens given by the
flight of birds, or with concocting the poisons of
the charmer, or with taking pleasure in the ex-
cesses of the theatre, — a statement which would
be the chmax of absurdity.

' Rom. i. 25.

^ John i. 29.

3 Ezek. xliii. 19.

* Rev. V. 5.

5 t Cor. X. 4.

^ I Pet. ii. 4.

' Matt X. 16.


13. We do not forecast the issues of our enter-
prises by studying the sun and moon, and the
times of the year or of the month, lest in the
most trying emergencies of life, we, being dashed
against the rocks of a wretched bondage, shall
make shipwreck of our freedom of will ; but with
the most pious devoutness of spirit, we accept
similitudes adapted to the illustration of holy
things, which these heavenly bodies furnish, just
as from all other works of creation, the winds,
the sea, the land, birds, fishes, cattle, trees, men,
etc., we borrow in our discourses manifold figures ;
and in the celebration of sacraments, the very
few things which the comparative liberty of the
Christian dispensation has prescribed, such as
water, bread, wine, and oil. Under the bondage,
I however, of the ancient dispensation many rites
were prescribed, which are made known to us
only for our instruction as to their meaning. We
do not now observe years, and months, and sea-
sons, lest the words of the apostle apply to us,
" I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon
you labour in vain." ^ For he blames those who
say, " X will not set out to-day, because it is an
unlucky day, or because the moon is so and so ; "
or, " I will go to-day, that things may prosper
with me, because the position of the stars is this
or that ; I will do no business this month, be-
cause a particular star rules it ; " or, " I will do
business, because another star has succeeded in
its place ; I will not plant a vineyard this year,
because it is leap year." No man of ordinary
sense would, however, suppose that those men
deserve reproof for studying the seasons, who
say, e.g., " I will not set out to-day, because a
storm has begun ; " or, " I will not put to sea,
because the winter is not yet past ; " or, " It is
time to sow my seed, foi the earth has been
saturated with the showers of autumn ; " and so
on, in regard to any other natural effects of the
motion and moisture of the atmosphere which
have been observed in connection with that con-
summately ordered revolution of the heavenly
bodies concerning which it was said when they
were made, " Let them be for signs, and for sea-
sons, and for days, and for years." 9 And in
like manner, whensoever illustrative symbols are
borrowed, for the declaration of spiritual mys-
teries, from created things, not only from the
heaven and its orbs, but also from meaner crea-
tures, this is done to give to the doctrine of
salvation an eloquence adapted to raise the af-
fections of those who receive it from things seen,
corporeal and temporal, to things unseen, spirit-
ual and eternal.

Chap. viii. — 14. None of us gives any con-
sideration to the circumstance that, at the time at
which we observe Easter, the sun is in the Ram,


8 Gal. iv. II.

9 Gen. i 14.


;o8


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


as they call a certain region of the heavenly
bodies, in which the sun is, in fact, found at the
beginning of the months ; but whether they
choose to call that part of the heavens the Ram
or anything else, we have learned this from the
Sacred Scriptures, that God made all the heav-
enly bodies, and appointed their places as it
pleased Him ; and whatever the parts may be
into which astronomers divide the regions set
apart and ordained for the different constella-
tions, and whatever the names by which they
distinguish them, the place occupied by the sun
in the first month is that in which the celebra-
tion of this sacrament behoved to find that lumi-
nary, because of the illustration of a holy mystery
in the renovation of life, of which I have already
spoken sufficiently. If, however, the name of
Ram could be given to that portion of the heav-
enly bodies because of some correspondence
between their form and the name, the word of
God would not hesitate to borrow from anything
of this kind an illustration of a holy mystery, as
it has done not only from other celestial bodies,
but also from terrestrial things, e.g. from Orion
and the Pleiades, Mount Zion, Mount Sinai, and
the rivers of which the names are given, Gihon,
Pison, Tigris, Euphrates, and particularly from
the river Jordan, which is so often named in the
sacred mysteries.

15. But who can fail to perceive how great is
the difference between useful observations of the
heavenly bodies in connection with the weather,
such as farmers or sailors make ; or in order to
mark the part of the world in which they are,
and the course which they should follow, such as
are made by pilots of ships or men going through
the trackless sandy deserts of southern Africa ; or
in order to present some useful doctrine under
a figure borrowed from some facts concerning
heavenly bodies ; — and the vain hallucinations
of men who observe the heavens not to know
the weather, or their course, or to make scientific
calculations, or to find illustrations of spiritual
things, but merely to pry into the future and
learn now what fate has decreed ?

Chap. ix. — 16. Let us now direct our minds
to observe the reason why, in the celebration of
Easter, care is taken to appoint the day so
that Saturday precedes it : for this is peculiar to
the Christian religion. The Jews keep the Pass-
over from the 14th to the 21st of the first month,
on whatever day that week begins. But since
at the Passover at which the Lord suffered, it
was the case that the Jewish Sabbath came in
between His death and His resurrection, our
fathers have judged it right to add this specialty
to their celebration of Easter, both that our feast
might be distinguished from the Jewish Passover,
and that succeeding generations might retain in
their annual commemoration of His Passion that


which we must believe to have been done for
some good reason, by Him who is before the
times, by whom also the times have been made,
and who came in the fulness of the times, and
who, when He said. Mine hour is not yet come,
had the power of laying down His life and tak-
ing it again, and was therefore waiting for an
hour not fixed by blind fate, but suitable to the
holy mystery which He had resolved to commend
to our observation.

17. That which we here hold in faith and
hope, and to which by love we labour to come,
is, as I have said above, a certain holy and per-
petual rest from the whole burden of every kind
of care ; and from this life unto that rest we
make a transition which our Lord Jesus Christ
condescended to exemplify and consecrate in
His Passion. This rest, however, is not a sloth-
ful inaction, but a certain ineffable tranquillity
caused by work in which there is no painful
effort. For the repose on which one enters at
the end of the toils of this life is of such a nature
as consists with lively joy in the active exercises
of the better life. Forasmuch, however, as this
activity is exercised in praising God without
bodily toil or mental anxiety, the transition to
that activity is not made through a repose which
is to be followed by labour, i.e. a repose which,
at the point where activity begins, ceases to be
repose : for in these exercises there is no return
to toil and care ; but that which constitutes rest
— namely, exemption from weariness in work
and from uncertainty in thought — is always
found in them. Now, since through rest we get
back to that original life which the soul lost by
sin, the emblem of this rest is the seventh day of
the week. But that original life itself which is
restored to those who return from their wander-
ings, and receive in token of welcome the robe
which they had at first,' is represented by the
first day of the week, which we call the Lord's
day. If, in reading Genesis, you search the
record of the seven days, you will find that there
was no evening of the seventh day, which sig-
nified that the rest of which it was a type was
eternal. The life originally bestowed was not
eternal, because man sinned ; but the final rest,
of which the seventh day was an emblem, is
eternal, and hence the eighth day also will have
eternal blessedness, because that rest, being eter-
nal, is taken up by the eighth day, not destoyed
by it ; for if it were thus destroyed, it would not
be eternal. Accordingly the eighth day, which
is the first day of the week, represents to us that
original life, not taken away, but made eternal.

Chap. x. — 18. Nevertheless the seventh day
was appointed to the Jewish nation as a day to
be observed by rest of the body, that it might

' Prima fit stolam.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


309


be a type of sanctification to which men attain
through rest in the Holy Spirit. We do not
read of sanctification in tlie history given in
Genesis of all the earlier days : of the Sabbath
alone it is said that " God blessed the seventh
day, and sanctified it." ' Now the souls of
men, whether good or bad, love rest, but how to
attain to that which they love is to the greater
part unknown : and that which bodies seek for
their weight, is precisely what souls seek for their
love, namely, a resting-place. For as, according
to its specific gravity, a body descends or rises
until it reaches a place where it can rest, — oil,
for example, falling if poured into the air, but
rising if poured into water, — so the soul of
man struggles towards the things which it loves,
in order that, by reaching them, it may rest.
There are indeed many things which please the
soul through the body, but its rest in these is
not eternal, nor even long continued ; and there-
fore they rather debase the soul and weigh it
down, so as to be a drag upon that pure impon-
derability by which it tends towards higher
things. When the soul finds pleasure from
itself, it is not yet seeking delight in that which
is unchangeable ; and therefore it is still proud,
because it is giving to itself the highest place,
whereas God is higher. In such sin the soul is
not left unpunished, for " God resisteth the proud,
but giveth grace to the humble." ^ When, how-
ever, the soul delights in God, there it finds the
true, sure, and eternal rest, which in all other
objects was sought in vain. Therefore the ad-
monition is given in the book of Psalms, " De-
light thyself in the Lord, and He shall give thee
the desires of thine heart." ^

19. Because, therefore, "the love of God'* is
shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit
which is given to us," s sanctification was asso-
ciated with the seventh day, the day in which
rest was enjoined. But inasmuch as we neither
are able to do any good work, except as helped
by the gift of God, as the apostle says, " For it
is God that worketh in you both to will and
to do of His good pleasure," ^ nor will be able to
rest, after all the good works which engage us
in this life, except as sanctified and perfected
by the same gift to eternity ; for this reason it
is said of God Himself, that when He had made
all things " very good," He rested " on the
seventh day from all His works which He had
made." ^ For He, in so doing, presented a type
of that future rest which He purposed to bestow
on us men after our good works are done. For

' Gen. ii. 3.
^ Jas. iv. 6.
^ Ps. xxxvii. 4.

* Augustin interprets the " love of God " here as meaning our love
to Him, and equivalent to delighting in Him.

5 Rom. V. 5.

6 Phil. ii. 13.

' Gen. i. 31, ii. 2.


as in our good works He is said to work in us,
by whose gift we are enabled to work what is
good, so in our rest He is said to rest by whose
gift we rest.

Chap. xi. — 20. This, moreover, is the reason
why the law of the Sabbath is placed third
among the three commandments of the Deca-
logue which declare our duty to God (for the
other seven relate to our neighbour, that is, to
man ; the whole law hanging on these two com-
mandments) .'^ The first commandment, in which
we are forbidden to worship any likeness of God
made by human contrivance, we are to under-
stand as referring to the Father : this prohibi-
tion being made, not because God has no image,
but because no image of Him but that One
which is the same with Himself, ought to be
worshipped ; and this One not in His stead,
but along with Him. Then, because a creature
is mutable, and therefore it is said, " The whole
creation is subject to vanity," ^ since the nature
of the whole is manifested also in any part of it,
lest any one should think that the Son of God,
the Word by whom all things were made, is a
creature, the second commandment is, " Thou
shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain." '° And because God sanctified the seventh
day, on which He rested, the Holy Spirit — in
whom is given to us that rest which we love
everywhere, but find only in loving God, when
" His love is shed abroad in us, by the Holy
Ghost given unto us"" — is presented to our
minds in the third commandment, which was
written concerning the observance of the Sab-
bath, not to make us suppose that we attain to
rest in this present life, but that all our labours
in what is good may point towards nothing else
than that eternal rest. For I would specially
charge you to remember the passage quoted
above : " We are saved by hope ; but hope that
is seen is not hope.'-

21. For the feeding and fanning of that ar-
dent love by which, under a law like that of
gravitation, we are borne upwards or inwards to
rest, the presentation of truth by emblems has a
great power : for, thus presented, things move
and kindle our affection much more than if they
were set forth in bald statements, not clothed
with sacramental symbols. Why this should be,
it is hard to say ; but it is the fact that anything
which we are taught by allegory or emblem
affects and pleases us more, and is more highly
esteemed by us, than it would be if most clearly
stated in plain terms. I believe that the emo-
tions are less easily kindled while the soul is
wholly involved in earthly things ; but if it be


8 Matt. xxii. lo.

9 Rom. viii. 20.

'° Ex. XX. 7; Deut. V. 11.
" Rom. V. 5.
t^ Rom. viii. 24.


TO


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


brought to those corporeal things which are
emblems of spiritual things, and then taken
from these to the sjiiritual realities which they |
represent, it gathers strength by the mere act of
passing from the one to the other, and, like the
tlame of a lighted torch, is made by the motion ,
to burn more brightly, and is carried away to
rest by a more intensely glowing love.

Chap. xii. — 22. It is also for this reason,
that of all the ten commandments, that wliich
related to the Sabbath was the only one in which
the thing commanded was typical ; ' the bodily
rest enjoined being a type which we ha\e re-
ceived as a means of our instruction, but not as
a duty binding also upon us. For while in the
Sabbath a figure is presented of the spiritual
rest, of which it is said in the Psalm, " Be still,
and know that I am God," ^ and unto which men
are invited by the Lord Himself in the words,
" Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My
yoke upon you, and learn of Me ; for I am
meek and lowly in heart : so shall ye find rest
unto your souls ; " ^ as to all the things enjoined
in the other commandments, we are to yield to
them an obedience in which there is nothing
typical. For we have been taught literally not
to worship idols ; and the precepts enjoining us
not to take God's name in vain, to honour our
father and mother, not to commit adultery, or
kill, or steal, or bear false witness, or covet our
neighbour's wife, or covet anything that is our
neighbour's,-* are all devoid of typical or mysti-
cal meaning, and are to be literally observed.
But we are not commanded to observe the day
of the Sabbath literally, in resting from bodily
labour, as it is observed by the Jews ; and even
their observance of the rest as prescribed is to
be deemed worthy of contempt, except as sig-
nifying another, namely, spiritual rest. From
this we may reasonably conclude, that all those
things which are figuratively set forth in Scrip-
ture, are powerful in stimulating that love by
which we tend towards rest • since the only fig-
urative or typical precept in the Decalogue is
the one in which that rest is commended to us,
which is desired everywhere, but is found sure
and sacred in God alone.

Chap. xiii. — 23. The Lord's day, however,
has been made known not to the Jews, but to
Christians, by the resurrection of the Lord, and
from Him it began to have the festive character
which is proper to it.s For the souls of the
pious dead are, indeed, in a state of repose be-
fore the resurrection of the body, but they are
not engaged in the same active exercises as shall

' Figurate observandtim pracipitur.

^ Ps. xlvi. II.

3 Matt xi. 28, 29.

■• Ex. XX. 1-17; Deut. V. 6-21.

5 Ex illo habere coepit festivitatent suam.


engage the strength of their bodies when restored.
Now, of this condition of active exercise the
eighth day (which is also the first of the week)
is a type, because it does not put an end to that
repose, but glorifies it. For with the reunion of
the body no hindrance of the soul's rest returns,
because in the restored body there is no corrup-
tion : for " this corruptible must put on incorrup-
tion, and this mortal must put on immortality." ^
\V'herefore, although the sacramental import of
the 8th number, as signifying the resurrection,
was by no means concealed from the holy men
of old who were filled with the spirit of prophecy
(for in the title of Psalms [vi. and xii.] we find
the words " for the eighth," and infants were
circumcised on the eighth day ; and in Ecclesi-
astes it is said, with allusion to the two cove-
nants, " Give a portion to seven, and also to
eight " 7) ; nevertheless, before the resurrection
of the Lord, it was reserved and hidden, and
the Sabbath alone was appointed to be observed,
because before that event there was indeed the
repose of the dead (of which the Sabbath rest
was a type), but there was not any instance of
the resurrection of one who, rising from the
dead, was no more to die, and over whom death
should no longer have dominion ; this being
done in order that, from the time when such a
resurrection did take place in the Lord's own
body (the Head of the Church being the first
to experience that which His body, the Church,
expects at the end of time), the day upon which
He rose, the eighth day namely (which is the
same with the first of the week), should begin
to be observed as the Lord's day. The same
reason enables us to understand why, in regard
to the day of keeping the passover, on which
the Jews were commanded to kill and eat a
lamb, which was most clearly a foreshadowing
of the Lord's Passion, there was no injunction
given to them that they should take the day of
the week into account, waiting until the Sabbath
was past, and making the beginning of the third
week of the moon coincide with the beginning
of the third week of the first month ; the reason
being, that the Lord might rather in His own
Passion declare the significance of that day, as
He had come also to declare the mystery of the
day now known as the Lord's day, the eighth
namely, which is also the first of the week.

Chap. xiv. — 24. Consider now with attention
these three most sacred days, the days signalized
by the Lord's crucifixion, rest in the grave, and
resurrection. Of these three, that of which the
cross is the symbol is the business of our present
life : tho.se things which are symbolized by His
rest in the grave and His resurrection we hold

^ I Cor. XV. 53.

7 Eccles. xi. 2, which Aug. translates, " Da illis septem, et illis
octo."


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


311


the command is
up thy cross, and


by faith and hope. For now
given to each man, " Take
follow me." ' But the flesh is crucified, when
our members which are upon the earth are mor-
tified, such as fornication, uncleanness, luxury,
avarice, etc., of which the apostle says in an-
other passage : " If ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die ; but if ye through the Spirit do mor-
tify the deeds of the body, ye shall live."^
Hence also he says of himself: "The world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world." ^ And
again : " Knowing this, that our old man is cru-
cified with Him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve
sin." •* The period during which our labours
tend to the weakening and destruction of the
body of sin, during which the outward man is
perishing, that the inward man may be renewed
day by day, — that is the period of the cross.

25. These are, it is true, good works, having
rest for their recompense, but they are mean-
while laborious and painful : therefore we are
told to be " rejoicing in hope," that while we
contemplate the future rest, we may labour with
cheerfulness in present toil. Of this cheerful-
ness the breadth of the cross in the transverse
beam to which the hands were nailed is an
emblem : for the hands we understand to be
symbolical of working, and the breadth to be
symbolical of cheerfulness in him who works, for
sadness straitens the spirit. In the height of
the cross, against which the head is placed, we
have an emblem of the expectation of recom-
pense from the sublime justice of God, " who
will render to every man according to his deeds ;
to them who, by patient continuance in well-
doing, seek for glory, and honour, and immor-
tality, eternal life." s Therefore the length of
the cross, along which the whole body is ex-
tended, is an emblem of that patient continuance
in the will of God, on account of which those
who are patient are said to be long-suffering.
The depth also, i.e. the part which is fixed in
the ground, represents the occult nature of the
holy mystery. For you remember, I suppose,
the words of the apostle, which in this descrip-
tion of the cross I aim at expounding : " That
ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be
able to comprehend with all saints what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height."^

Those things which we do not yet see or pos-
sess, but hold in faith and hope, are the things
represented in the events by which the second
and third of the three memorable days above
mentioned were signalized [viz. the Lord's rest


' Matt. xvi. 24.
^ Rom. viii. 13.
5 Gal. vi 14.
^ Rom. vi. 6.
5 Rom. ii. 6, 7.
^ Eph. iii. 17, 18.


in the grave, and His resurrection]. But the
things which keep us occupied in this present
hfe, while we are held fast in the fear of God by
the commandments, as by nails driven through
the flesh (as it is written, " Make my flesh fast
with nails by fear of Thee"''), are to be reck-
oned among things necessary, not among those
which are for their own sakes to be desired and
coveted. Hence Paul says that he desired, as
something far better, to depart and to be with
Christ : " nevertheless," he adds, " to remain in
the flesh is expedient for you " ** — necessary for
your welfare. This departing and being with
Christ is the beginning of the rest which is not
interrupted, but glorified by the resurrection ;
and this rest is now enjoyed by faith, " for the
just shall live by faith. "^ "Know ye not," saith
the same apostle, " that so many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into
His death? Therefore we are buried with Him
by baptism unto death." '° How? By faith.
For this is not actually completed in us so long
as we are still " groaning within ourselves, and
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption
of our body : for we are saved by hope ; but
hope that is seen is not hope : for what a man
seeth why doth he yet hope for ? But if we hope
for that we see not, then do we with patience
wait for it." "

26. Remember how often I repeat this to you,
that we are not to think that we ought to be
made happy and free from all difficulties in this
present life, and are therefore at liberty to mur-
mur profanely against God when we are strait-
ened in the things of this world, as if He were
not performing what He promised. He hath
indeed promised the things which are necessary
for this life, but the consolations which mitigate
the misery of our present lot are very different
from the joys of those who are perfect in blessed-
ness. " In the multitude of my thoughts within
me," saith the believer, "Thy comforts, O Lord,
delight my soul." '^ Let us not therefore mur-
mur because of difficulties ; let us not lose that
breadth of cheerfulness, of which it is written,
"Rejoicing in hope," because this follows, —
" patient in tribulation." '^ The new life, there-
fore, is meanwhile begun in faith, and maintained
by hope : for it shall only then be perfect when
this mortal shall be swallowed up in life, and
death swallowed up in victory ; when the last
enemy, death, shall be destroyed ; when we shaU
be changed, and made like the angels : for " we
shall all rise again, but we shall not all be-

' Ps. cxix. 120; Septuagint version, icaflfjAiocroi' €k toC <(>6^ovr
(Tov Ta? (TapKai; juiou.

8 Phil. i. 23, 24.

9 Hab. ii. 4.

'° Rom. vi. 3, 4.
" Rom. viii. 23, 25.
'^ Ps xciv. 19.
" Rom. xii. 12.


12


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


changed." • Again, the Lord saith, "They shall
be equal unto the angels." ^ We now are appre-
hended by Him in fear by faith : then we shall j
apprehend Him in love by sight. P'or " whilst i
we are at home in the body, we are absent from '
the Lord : for we walk by faith, not by sight." ^ '
Hence the apostle himself, who says, " I follow ,
after, if that I may apprehend that for which also
I am ap])rehended of Christ Jesus," confesses
frankly that he has not attained to it. " Breth-
ren," he says, " I count not myself to have ap-
prehended." "• Since, however, our hope is sure,
because of the truth of the promise, when he
said elsewhere, " Therefore we are buried with
Him by baptism into death," he adds these
words, " that like as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we ^
also should walk in newness of life." 5 We walk,
therefore, in actual labour, but in hope of rest,
in the flesh of the old life, but in faith of the i
new. For he says again : " The body is dead i
because of sin; but the spirit is life because of J
righteousness. But if the Spirit of Him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He
that raised up Christ from the dead shall also
quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit that
dwelleth in you."

27. Both the authority of the Divine Scriptures
and the consent of the whole Church spread
throughout the world have combined to ordain
the annual commemoration of these things at
Easter, by observances which are, as you now
see, full of spiritual significance. From the Old
Testament Scriptures we are not taught as to the
precise day of holding Easter, beyond the limita-
tion to the period between the 14th and 21st
days of the first month ; but because we know
from the Gospel beyond doubt which days of the
week were signalized in succession by the Lord's
crucifixion. His resting in the grave, and His
resurrection, the observance of these days has
been enjoined in addition by Councils of the
Fathers, and the whole Christian world has ar-
rived unanimously at the persuasion that this is
the proper mode of observing Easter.

Chap. xv. — 28.^ The Fast of Forty Days has
its warrant both in the Old Testament, from
the fasting of Moses ' and of Elijah,^^ and in the
Gospel from the fact that our Lord fasted the
same number of days ; ^ proving thereby that
the Gospel is not at variance with the Law and

■ 1 Cor. XV. 54, 26, 51 — the last of these verses being rendered
by Augustin here, not as in the English version, but as given above.
^ Luke XX. 36.

3 2 Cor. V. 6, 7.

4 Phil. iii. 12, 13.

5 Rom. vi 4.

' In translating, we have ventured to take this title of Chap. xv.
out of the place which the Benedictines have given to it, in the middle
of a sentence of the preceding paragraph. There it almost hopelessly
.bewildered the reader. Here it prepares him for a new topic.

' Ex. xxxiv. 28.

8 I Kings xix. 8

9 Matt, iv, 2.


the Prophets. For the Law and the Prophets
are represented in the persons of Moses and
Elijah respectively ; between whom also He ap-
peared in glory on the Mount, that what the
apostle says of Him, that He is " witnessed unto
both by the Law and the Prophets," '° might be
made more clearly manifest. Now, in what part
of the year could the observance of the Fast of
Forty Days be more appropriately placed, than
in that which immediately precedes and borders
on the time of the Lord's Passion ? For by it
is signified this life of toil, the chief work in
which is to e.xercise self-control, in abstaining
from the world's friendship, which never ceases
deceitfully caressing us, and scattering profusely
around us its bewitching allurements. As to the
reason why this life of toil and self-control is
symbolized by the number 40, it seems to me
that the number ten (in which is the perfection
of our blessedness, as in the number eight, be-
cause it returns to the unit) has a like place in
this number [as the unit has in giving its signifi-
cance to eight] ;" and therefore I regard the
number forty as a fit symbol for this life, because
in it the creature (of which the symbolical num-
ber is seven) cleaves to the Creator, in whom is
revealed that unity of the Trinity which is to be
published while time lasts throughout this whole
world, — a world swept by four winds, constituted
of four elements, and experiencing the changes
of four seasons in the year. Now four times ten
[seven added to three] are forty ; but the num-
ber forty reckoned in along with [one of] its
parts adds the number ten, [as seven reckoned
in along with one of its parts adds the unit,] and
the total is fifty, — the symbol, as it were, of the
reward of the toil and self-control.'^ For it is
not without reason that the Lord Himself con-
tinued for forty days on this earth and in this
life in fellowship with His disciples after His
resurrection, and, when He ascended into heaven,-
sent the promised Holy Spirit, after an interval
of ten days more, when the day of Pentecost was
fully come. This fiftieth day, moreover, has
wrapped up in it another holy mystery : '3 for 7
times 7 days are 49. And when we return to the
beginning of another seven, and add the eighth,
which is also the first day of the week, we have
the 50 days complete ; which period of fifty days
we celebrate after the Lord's resurrection, as

■° Rom. iii. 21.

" Compare "octavus qui et primus," and the remarks on the
meaning of the number 8 in § 23.

•2 We give the original of this very obscure paragraph: — " Numero
autem quadragenario vitam istam propter ea figurari arbitror, quia
denarius in quo est perfectio beatitudinis nostrae, sicut in octonario,
quia redit ad primum, ita in hoc mihi videtur exprimi: quia creatura,
quae septenario figuratur adha:ret Creator! in quo declaratur unitas
Trinitatis per universum mundum temporahter annuntianda; qui
mundus et a quatuor ventis delimatur et quatuor elemenlis erigitur,
et quatuor anni temporum vicibus variatur. Decem autem quater in
quadraginta consummantur, quadragenarius autem partibus suis cora-
putatus, addit ipsum denarium et fiunt quinquaginta tanquam merces
laboris et continentiae."

1^ Sa£ra?nentum.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


3^3


representing not toil, but rest and gladness. For
this reason we do not fast in them ; and in pray-
ing we stand upright, which is an emblem of
resurrection. Hence, also, every Lord's day dur-
ing the fifty days, this usage is observed at the
altar, and the Alleluia is sung, which signifies
that our future exercise shall consist wholly in
praising God, as it is written : " Blessed are they
who dwell in Thy house, O Lord : they will be
still (i.e. eternally) praising Thee." '

Chap. xvi. — 29. The fiftieth day is also com-
mended to us in Scripture ; and not only in the
Gospel, by the fact that on that day the Holy
Spirit descended, but also in the books of the
Old Testament. For in them we learn, that
after the Jews observed the first passover with
the slaying of the lamb as appointed, 50 days
intervened between that day and the day on
which upon Mount Sinai there was given to
Moses the Law written with the finger of God ; ^
and this " finger of God " is in the Gospels most
plainly declared to signify the Holy Spirit : for
where one evangelist quotes our Lord's words
thus, "I with the finger of God cast out devils," ^
another quotes them thus, " I cast out devils by
the Spirit of God." '^ Who would not prefer the
joy which these divine mysteries impart, when
the light of healing truth beams from them on
the soul to all the kingdoms of this world, even
though these were held in perfect prosperity and
peace ? May we not say, that as the two seraphim
answer each other in singing the praise of the
Most High, " Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God
of Hosts," 5 so the Old Testament and the New,
in perfect harmony, give forth their testimony to
sacred truth? The lamb is slain, the passover
is celebrated, and after 50 days the Law is given,
which inspires fear, written by the finger of God.
Christ is slain, being led as a Iamb to the slaugh-
ter, as Isaiah testifies ; ^ the true Passover is cele-
brated ; and after 50 days is given the Holy
Spirit, who is the finger of God, and whose fruit
is love, and who is therefore opposed to men
who seek their own, and consequently bear a
grievous yoke and heavy burden, and find no
rest for their souls ; for love " seeketh not her
own." 7 Therefore there is no rest in the unloving
spirit of heretics, whom the apostle declares
guilty of conduct like that of the magicians of
Pharaoh, saying, " Now as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these also resist the
truth : men of corrupt minds, reprobate con-
cerning the faith. But they shall proceed no
further : for their folly shall be manifest to all


' Ps. Ixxxiv. 5.

* Ex. xii. xix. XX. xxxi.
3 Luke xi. 20.

* Matt, xii 28.
' Isa vi. 3.

* Isa. liii. ;7.

' I Cor. xiii. 5.


men, as theirs also was." * For because through
this corruptness of mind they were utterly dis-
quieted, they failed at the third miracle, confess-
ing that the Spirit of God which was in Moses
was opposed to them : for in owning their failure,
they said, " This is the finger of God." 9 The
Holy Spirit, who shows Himself reconciled and
gracious to the meek and lowly in heart, and
gives them rest, shows Himself an inexorable
adversary to the proud and haughty, and vexes
them with disquiet. Of this disquiet those des-
picable insects were a figure, under which Pha-
raoh's magicians owned themselves foiled, saying,
"This is the finger of God."

30, Read the book of Exodus, and observe
the number of days between the first passover
and the giving of the Law. God speaks to
Moses in the desert of Sinai on the first day of
the third month. Mark, then, this as one day
of the month, and then observe what (among
other things) the Lord said on that day : " Go
unto the people, and sanctify them to-day and to-
morrow, and let them wash their clothes, and
be ready against the third day ; for the third day
the Lord will come down in the sight of all the
people upon Mount Sinai." '° The Law was
accordingly given on the third day of the month.
Now reckon the days between the 14th day of
the first month, the day of the passover, and the
3d day of the third month, and you have 17
days of the first month, 30 of the second, and
3 of the third — 50 in all. The Law in the Ark
of the Testimony represents holiness in the
Lord's body, by whose resurrection is promised
to us the future rest ; for our receiving of which,
love is breathed into us by the Holy Spirit. But
the Spirit had not then been given, for Jesus had
not yet been glorified." Hence that prophetic
song, " Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and
the ark of Thy strength" [holiness, LXX.].'^
Where there is rest, there is holiness. Where-
fore we have now received a pledge of it, that
we may love and desire it. For to the rest be-
longing to the other life, whereunto we are
brought by that transition from this life of which
the passover is a symbol, all are now invited in
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit.

Chap. xvii. — 31. Hence also, in the number
of the large fishes which our Lord after His
resurrection, showing this new life, commanded
to be taken on the right side of the ship, there
is found the number 50 three times multiplied,
with the addition of three more [the symbol of
the Trinity] to make the holy mystery more
apparent ; and the disciples' nets were not

8 2 Tim. iii. 8.

9 Ex. viii. 19.

'° Ex. xix. 10, II.
" John vii. 39.
»2 Ps. cxxxii. 8.


314


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


broken,' because in that new life there shall be
no schism caused by the disquiet of heretics.
Then [in this new life] man, made perfect and
at rest, purified in body and in soul by the pure
words of God, which are like silver purged from
its dross, seven times refined,- shall receive his
reward, the denarius ; ^ so that with that reward
the numbers lo and 7 meet in him. For in this
number [17] there is found, as in other numbers
representing a combination of symbols, a won-
derful mystery. Nor is it without good reason
that the seventeenth Psalm ■♦ is the only one
which is given complete in the book of Kings,^
because it signifies that kingdom in which we
shall have no enemy. For its title is, " A Psalm
of David, in the day that the Lord delivered
him from the hand of all his enemies, and from
the hand of Saul." For of whom is David the
type, but of Him who, according to the flesh,
was born of the seed of David ?^ He in His
Church, that is, in His body, still endures the
malice of enemies. Therefore the words which
from heaven fell upon the ear of that persecutor
whom Jesus slew by His voice, and whom He
transformed into a part of His body (as the food
which we use becomes a part of ourselves), were
these, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?" ?
And when shall this His body be finally delivered
from enemies? Is it not when the last enemy.
Death, shall be destroyed? It is to that time
that the number of the 153 fishes pertains. For
if the number 17 itself be the side of an arith-
metical triangle,^ formed by placing above each
other rows of units, increasing in number from
I to 17, the whole sum of these units is 153:
since i and 2 make 3 ; 3 and 3, 6 ; 6 and 4, 10 ;
10 and 5, 15 ; 15 and 6, 21 ; and so on : con-
tinue this up to 17, the total is 153.

32. The celebration of Easter and Pentecost
is therefore most firmly based on Scripture.
As to the observance of the forty days before
Easter, this has been confirmed by the practice
of the Church ; as also the separation of the
eight days of the neophytes, in such order that
the eighth of these coincides with the first.
The custom of singing the Alleluia on those 50

' John xxi. 6, II.

2 Ps. xii. 6.

3 Matt. XX. 9, 10.

* The eighteenth in the English Bible.

5 2 Sam. xxii. 2-51. The title of that book is in the LXX. the
2d book of Kings.

* Rom. i. 3.
7 Acts ix. 4.

* Such a triangle as this:


days only in the Church is not universal ; for in
other places it is sung also at various other times,
but on these days it is sung everywhere. Whether
the custom of standing at prayer on these days,
and on all the Lord's days, is everywhere ob-
served or not, I do not know ; nevertheless, I
have told you what guides the Church in this
usage, and it is in my opinion sufficiently ob-
vious.9

Chap, xviii. — 2>2>- As to the feet-washing,
since the Lord recommended this because of
its being an example of that humility which He
came to teach, as He Himself afterwards ex-
plained, the question has arisen at what time it
is best, by literal performance of this work, to
give public instruction in the important duty
which it illustrates, and this time [of Lent] was
suggested in order that the lesson taught by it
might make a deeper and more serious impres-
sion. Many, however, have not accepted this
as a custom, lest it should be thought to belong
to the ordinance of baptism ; and some have
not hesitated to deny it any place among our
ceremonies. Some, however, in order to con-
nect its observance with the more sacred asso-
ciations of this solemn season, and at the same
time to prevent its being confounded with bap-
tism in any way, have selected for this ceremony
either the eighth day itself, or that on which the
third eighth day occurs, because of the great
significance of the number three in many holy
mysteries.

34. I am surprised at your expressing a desire
that I should write anything in regard to those
ceremonies which are found different in different
countries, because there is no necessity for my
doing this ; and, moreover, one most excellent
rule must be observed in regard to these cus-
toms, when they do not in any way oppose
either true doctrine or sound morality, but con-
tain some incentives to the better life, viz., that
wherever we see them observed, or know them
to be established, we should not only refrain
from finding fault with them, but even recom-
mend them by our approval and imitation, un-
less restrained by fear of doing greater harm
than good by this course, through the infirmity
of others. We are not, however, to be re-
strained by this, if more good is to be expected
from our consenting with those who are zealous
for the ceremony, than loss to be feared from
our displeasing those who protest against it. In
such a case we ought by all means to adopt it,
especially if it be something in defence of which
Scripture can be alleged : as in the singing oi'
hymns and psalms, for which we have on recordi ■
both the example and the precepts of the Lordi
and of His apostles. In this rehgious exercise,]

9 He refers to the significance of the standing upright as an em-
blem of resurrection.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


15


so useful for inducing a devotional frame of
mind and inflaming the strength of love to God,
there is diversity of usage, and in Africa the
members of the Church are rather too indiffer-
ent in regard to it ; on which account the Dona-
tists reproach us with our grave chanting of the
divine songs of the prophets in our churches,
while they inflame their passions in their revels
by the singing of psalms of human composition,
which rouse them like the stirring notes of the
trumpet on the battle-field. But when brethren
are assembled in the church, why should not
the time be devoted to singing of sacred songs,
excepting of course while readmg or preach-
ing ' is going on, or while the presiding minis-
ter prays aloud, or the united prayer of the
congregation is led by the deacon's voice ? At
the other intervals not thus occupied, I do not
see what could be a more excellent, useful, and
holy exercise for a Christian congregation.

Chap, xix.^ — 35-1 cannot, however, sanc-
tion with my approbation those ceremonies
which are departures from the custom of the
Church, and are instituted on the pretext of
being symbolical of some holy mystery ; al-
though, for the sake of avoiding offence to the
piety of some and the pugnacity of others, I do
not venture to condemn severely many things
of this kind. But this I deplore, and have too
much occasion to do so, that comparatively
little attention is paid to many of the most
wholesome rites which Scripture has enjoined ;
and that so many false notions everywhere pre-
vail, that more severe rebuke would be adminis-
tered to a man who should touch the ground
with his feet bare during the octaves (before his
baptism), than to one who drowned his intellect
in drunkenness. My opinion therefore is, that
wherever it is possible, all those things should
be abolished without hesitation, which neither
have warrant in Holy Scripture, nor are found
to have been appointed by councils of bishops,
nor are confirmed by the practice of the uni-
versal Church, but are so infinitely various, ac-
cording to the different customs of different
places, that it is with difficulty, if at all, that the
reasons which guided men in appointing them
can be discovered. For even although nothing
be found, perhaps, in which they are against the
true faith ; yet the Christian religion, which God
in His mercy made free, appointing to her
sacraments very few in number, and very easily
observed, is by these burdensome ceremonies so
oppressed, that the condition of the Jewish
Church itself is preferable : for although they
have not known the time of their freedom, they


' Preaching. The word in the original is " disputatur," — some-
thing much more lively and entertaining.

^ I liave taken the liberty here of putting the beginning of the
chapter and paragraph a stnlence further on than in the Benedictine
edition, so as to finish in bee. 34 the remarks on psalm-singing.


are subjected to burdens imposed by the law of
God, not by the vain conceits of men. The
Church of God, however, being meanwhile so
constituted as to enclose much chaff and many
tares, bears with many things ; yet if anything
be contrary to faith or to holy life, she does not
approve of it either by silence or by practice.

Ch.a.p. XX. — 36. Accordingly, that which you
wrote as to certain brethren abstaining from the
use of animal food, on the ground of its being
ceremonially unclean, is most clearly contrary
to the faith and to sound doctrine. If I were to
enter on anything like a full discussion of this
matter, it might be thought by some that there
was some obscurity in the precepts of the apos-
tle in this matter ; whereas he, among many
other things which he said on this subject, ex-
pressed his abhorrence of this opinion of the
heretics in these words : " Now the Spirit speak-
eth expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits and doctrines of devils ; speaking lies in
hypocrisy ; having their conscience seared with
a hot iron ; forbidding to marry, and command-
ing to abstain from meats, which God hath cre-
ated to be received with thanksgiving of them
which believe and know the truth. For every
creature of God is good, and nothing to be re-
fused, if it be received with thanksgiving : for
it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer." ^
Again, in another place, he says, concerning
these things : " Unto the pure all things are
pure : but unto them that are defiled and unbe-
lieving is nothing pure ; but even their mind and
conscience is defiled." ■* Read the rest for your-
self, and read these passages to others — to as
many as you can — in order that, seeing that
they have been called to liberty, they may not
make void the grace of God toward them ; only
let them not use their liberty for an occasion to
serve the flesh : let them not refuse to practise
the purpose of curbing carnal appetite, absti-
nence from some kinds of food, on the pretext
that it is unlawful to do so under the promptings
of superstition or unbelief.

37. As to those who read futurity by taking
at random a text from the pages of the Gospels,
although it is better that they should do this
than go to consult spirits of divination, never-
theless it is, in my opinion, a censurable practice
to try to turn to secular affairs and the vanity of
this life those divine oracles which were intended
to teach us concerning the higher life.

Chap. xxi. — 38. If you do not consider that
I have now written enough in answer to your
questions, you must have little knowledge of my
capacities or of my engagements. For so far
am I from being, as you have thought, ac-


3 I Tim. iv. 1-5.
■• Tit. i. 15.


3i6


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


quainted with everything, that I read nothing in
your letter with more sadness than this state-
ment, both because it is most manifestly untrue,
and because I am surprised that you should not
be aware, that not only are many things unknown
to me in countless other departments, but that
even in the Scriptures themselves the things
which I do not know are many more than the
things which I know. But I cherish a hope in
the name of Christ, which is not without its
reward, because I have not only believed the
testimony of my God that "on these two com-
mandments hang all the Law and the Proph-
ets ; " ' but I have myself proved it, and daily
prove it, by experience. For there is no holy
mystery, and no difficult passage of the word of
God, in which, when it is opened up to me, I
do not find these same commandments : for
" the end of the commandment is charity, out
of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and
of faith unfeigned ; " ^ and " love is the fulfill-
ing of the law." ^

39. 1 beseech you therefore also, my dearly
beloved, whether studying these or other writ-
ings, so to read and so to learn as to bear in
mind what hath been most truly said, " Knowl-
edge puffeth up, but charity edifieth ; " * but
charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up.
Let knowledge therefore be used as a kind of
scaffolding by which may be erected the build-
ing of charity, which shall endure for ever when
knowledge faileth.s Knowledge, if applied as
a means to charity, is most useful ; but apart
from this high end, it has been proved not only
superfluous, but even pernicious. I know, how-
ever, how holy meditation keeps you safe under
the shadow of the wings of our God. These
things I have stated, though briefly, because I
know that this same charity of yours, which
" vaunteth not itself," will prompt you to lend
and read this letter to many.

LETTERS LVL AND LVII.

are addressed (a.d. 400) to Celer, exhorting him to for-
sake the Donatist schismatics. They may be omitted,
being brief, and containing no new argument.


LETTER LVIII.

(a.d. 401.)

to my noble and worthy lord pammachius,
my .son, dearly beloved l\ the bowels of
christ, augustin sends greeting in the lord.

I. The good works which spring from the
grace of Christ in you have given you a claim

■ Matt. xxii. 40.
^ I Tim. i. 5.
3 Rom. xili. 10.
* I Cor. viii. i.
^ I Cor. xiii. 4, 8.


to be esteemed by us His members, and have
made you as truly known and as much beloved
by us as you could be. For even were I daily
seeing your face, this could add nothing to the
completeness of the acquaintance with you which
I now have, when in the shining light of one of
your actions I have seen your inner being, fair
with the loveliness of peace, and beaming with
the brightness of truth. Seeing this has made
me know you, and knowing you has made me
love you ; and therefore, in addressing you, I
write to one who, notwithstanding our distance
from each other, has become known to me, and
is my beloved friend. The bontl which binds
us together is indeed of earlier date, and we
were living united under One Head : for had
you not been rooted in His love, the Catholic
unity would not have been so dear to you, and
you would not have dealt as you have done with
your African tenants^ settled in the midst of
the consular province of Numidia, the very
country in which the folly of the Donatists
began, addressing them in such terms, and en-
couraging them with such enthusiasm, as to
persuade them with unhesitating devotion to
choose that course which they believed that a
man of your character and position would not
adopt on other grounds than truth ascertained
and acknowledged, and to submit themselves,
though so remote from you, to the same Head ;
so that along with yourself they are reckoned
for ever as members of Him by whose command
they are for the time dependent upon you.

2. Embracing you, therefore, as known to me
by this transaction, I am moved by joyful feel-
ings to congratulate you in Christ Jesus our
Lord, and to send you this letter as a proof of
my heart's love towards you ; for I cannot do
more. I beseech you, however, not to measure
the amount of my love by this letter ; but by
means of this letter, when you have read it, pass
on by the unseen inner passage which thought
opens up into my heart, and see what is there
felt towards you. For to the eye of love that
sanctuary of love shall be unveiled which we 1
shut against the disquieting trifles of this world j
when there we worship God ; and there you will I
see the ecstasy of my joy in your good work, —
an ecstasy which I cannot describe with tongue
or pen, glowing and burning in the offering of
praise to Him by whose inspiration you were ;
made willing, and by whose help you were made
able to serve Him in this way. " Thanks be i;
unto God for His unspeakable gift ! " ^

3. Oh how we desire in Africa to see such
work as this by which you have gladdened us
done by many, who are, like yourself, senators
in the State, and sons of the holy Church ! It

6 Coloni.

7 I Cor. ix. 15, ''


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


317


is, however, hazardous to give them this exhor-
tation : they may refuse to follow it, and the
enemies of the Church will take advantage of
this to deceive the weak, as if they had gained
a victory over us in the minds of those who dis-
resjarded our counsel. But it is safe for me to
express gratitude to you ; for you have already
done that by which, in the emancipation of
those who were weak, the enemies of the Church
are confounded. I have therefore thought it
sufficient to ask you to read this letter with
friendly boldness to any to whom you can do
so on the ground of their Christian profes-
sion. For thus learning what you have achieved,
they will believe that that, about which as an
impossibility they are now indifferent, can be
done in Africa. As to the snares which these
heretics contrive in the perversity of their hearts,
I have resolved not to speak of them in this
letter, because I have been only amused at their
imagining that they could gain any advantage
over your mind, which Christ holds as His pos-
session. You will hear them, however, from my
brethren, whom I earnestly commend to your ^
Excellency : they fear lest you should disdain |
some things which to you might seem unneces-
sary in connection with the great and unlooked
for salvation of those men over whom, in con-
sequence of your work, their Catholic Mother
rejoices.

LETTER LIX.

(a.d. 401.)

to my most blessed lord and vener.4ble
father victorinus, my brother in the priest-
hood, augustin sends greeting in the lord, i

I. Your summons to the Council reached me
on the fifth day before the Ides of November,
in the evening, and found me very much indis-
posed, so that I could not possibly attend.
However, I submit to your pious and wise judg-
ment whether certain perplexities which the sum-
mons occasioned were due to my own ignorance
or to sufficient grounds. I read in that sum-
mons that it was written also to the districts of
Mauritania, which, as we know, have their own
primates. Now, if these provinces were to be
represented in a Council held in Numidia, it was
by all means proper that the names of some of
the more eminent bishops who are in Mauri-
tania should be attached to the circular letter ;
and not finding this, I have been greatly sur-
prised. Moreover, to the bishops of Numidia
it has been addressed in such a confused and
careless manner, that my own name I find in
the third place, although I know my proper
[order to be much*further down in the roll of
bishops. This wrongs others, and grieves me.
iMoreover, our venerable father and colleague,


Xantippus of Tagosa, says that the primacy
belongs to him, and by very many he is re-
garded as the primate, and he issues such letters
as you have sent. Even supposing that this be
a mistake, which your Holiness can easily dis-
cover and correct, certainly his name should not
have been omitted in the summons which you
have issued. If his name had been placed in
the middle of the list, and not in the first line,
I would have wondered much ; how much
greater, then, is my surprise, when I find in it
no mention whatever made of him who, above
all others, behoved to be present in the Council,
that by the bishops of all the Numidian churches
this question of the order of the primacy might
be debated before any other !

2. For these reasons, I might even hesitate to
come to the Council, lest the summons in which
so many flagrant mistakes are found should be a
forgery ; even were I not hindered both by the
shortness of the notice, and manifold other im-
portant engagements standing in the way. I
therefore beg you, most blessed prelate, to ex-
cuse me, and to be pleased to give attention, in
the first instance, to bring about between your
Holiness and the aged Xantippus a cordial mu-
tual understanding as to the question which of
you ought to summon the Council ; or at least,
as I think would be still better, let both of you,
without prejudging the claim of either, con-
jointly call together our colleagues, especially
those who have been nearly as long in the epis-
copate as yourselves, who may easily discover
and decide which of you has truth on his side,'
that this question may be settled first among a
few of you ; and then, when the mistake has
been rectified, let the younger bishops be gath-
ered together, who, having no others whom it
would be either possible or right for them to
accept as witnesses in this matter but yourselves,
are meanwhile at a loss to know to which of you
the preference is to be given.

I have sent this letter sealed with a ring which
represents a man's profile.

LETTER LX.

(a.d. 401.)

to father aurelius, my lord most blessed,
and revered with most justly merited
respect, my brother in the priesthood,
most sincerely beloved, augustin sends
greeting in the lord.

I. I have received no letter from your Holi-
ness since we parted ; but I have now read a
letter of your Grace concerning Donatus and
his brother, and I have long hesitated as to the

' The primacy in Numidia belonged not to the bishop of the most
important town, but to the oldest bishop.


3i8


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


reply which I ought to give. After frequently
reconsidering what is in such a case conducive
to the welfare of those whom we serve in Christ,
and seek to nourish in Him, nothing has oc-
curred to me which would alter my opinion that
it is not right to give occasion for God's ser-
vants to think that promotion to a better posi-
tion is more readily given to those who have
become worse. Such a rule would make monks
less careful of falling, and a most grievous wrong
would be done to the order of clergy, if those
who have deserted their duty as monks be
chosen to serve as clergy, seeing that our cus-
tom is to select for that office only the more
tried and superior men of those who continue
faithful to their calling as monks ; unless, per-
chance, the common people are to be taught to
joke at our expense, saying " a bad monk makes
a good clerk," as they are wont to say that " a
poor flute-player makes a good singer." It
would be an intolerable calamity if we were to
encourage the monks to such fatal pride, and
were to consent to brand with so grievous dis-
grace the clerical order to which we ourselves
belong : seeing that sometimes even a good
monk is scarcely qualified to be a good clerk ;
for though he be proficient in self-denial, he may
lack the necessary instruction, or be disqualified
by some personal defect.

2. I believe, however, that your Holiness un-
derstood these monks to have left the monastery
with my consent, in order that they might rather
be useful to the people of their own district ;
but this was not the case : of their own accord
they departed, of their own accord they de-
serted us, notwithstanding my resisting, from a
regard to their welfare, to the utmost of my
power. As to Donatus, seeing that he has ob-
tained ordination before we could arrive at any
decision in the Council ' as to his case, do as
your wisdom may guide you ; it may be that his
proud obstinacy has been subdued. But as to
his brother, who was the chief cause of Donatus
leaving the monastery, I know not what to write,
since you know what I think of him. I do not
presume to oppose what may seem best to one
of your wisdom, rank, and piety ; and I hope
with all my heart that you will do whatever you
judge most profitable for the members of the
Church.

LETTER LXL

(a.d. 401.)

to his well-beloved and honourable brother
theodorus, bishop augustin sends greeting
in the lord.

I. I have resolved to commit to writing in
this letter what I said when you and I were con-

■ The Council held at Carthage in September 401.


versmg


together as to the terms on which we


would welcome clergy of the party of Donatus
desiring to become Catholics, in order that, if
any one asked you what are our sentiments and
practice in regard to this, you might exhibit
these by producing what I have written with my
own hand. Be assured, therefore, that we de-
test nothing in the Donatist clergy but that
which renders them schismatics and heretics,
namely, their dissent from the unity and truth
of the Catholic Church, in their not remaining
in peace with the people of God, which is spread
abroad throughout the world, and in their refus-
ing to recognise the baptism of Christ in those
who have received it. This their grievous error,
therefore, we reject ; but the good name of
God which they bear, and His sacrament which
they have received, we acknowledge in them,
and embrace it with reverence and love. But
for this very reason we grieve over their wander-
ing, and long to gain them for God by the love
of Christ, that they may have within the peace
of the Church that holy sacrament for their sal-
vation, which they meanwhile have beyond the
pale of the Church for their destruction. If,
therefore, there be taken away from between us
the evil things which proceed from men, and if
the good which comes from God and belongs to
both parties in common be duly honoured, there
will ensue such brotherly concord, such amiable
peace, that the love of Christ shall gain the vic-
tory in men's hearts over tlie temptation of the
devil.

2. When, therefore, any come to us from the
party of Donatus, we do not welcome the evil
which belongs to them, viz. their error and
schism : these, the only obstacles to our concord,
are removed from between us, and we embrace
our brethren, standing with them, as the apostle
says, in " the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of
peace," ^ and acknowledging in them the good
things which are divine, as their holy baptism,!
the blessing conferred by ordination, their pro- i
fession of self-denial, their vow of celibacy, their \
faith in the Trinity, and such like ; all which (
things were indeed theirs before, but " profited )
them nothing, because they had not charity." ;
For what truth is there in the profession of *
Christian charity by him who does not embrace .
Christian unity ? When, therefore, they come to I
the Catholic Church, they gain thereby not what .
they already possessed, but something which .
they had not before, — namely, that those things \
which they possessed begin then to be profitable
to them. For in the Catholic Church they ob-
tain the root of charity in the bond of peace and
in the fellowship of unity : so that all the sacra-
ments of truth which they hold serve not to'
condemn, but to deliver them. The branches


led


Sea


hi

:e,


%(


^t:


Eph.


IV. 3.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


19


oueht not to boast that their wood is the wood
of the vine, not of the thorn ; for if they do not
hve by union to the root, they shall, notwith-
standing their outward appearance, be cast into
the fire. But of some branches which were
broken off the apostle says that " God is able to
graff them in again." ' Wherefore, beloved
brother, if you see any one of the Donatist party
in doubt as to the place into which they shall be
welcomed by us, show them this writing in my
own hand, which is familiar to you, and let
them have it to read if they desire it ; for " I
call God for a record upon my soul," that I will
welcome them on such terms as that they shall
retain not only the baptism of Christ which they
have received, but also the honour due to their
vow of holiness and to their self-denying virtue.


LETTER LXII.

(a.d. 401.)

alvpius, augustin, and samsucius, and the
brethren who are with them, send greeting
in the lord to severus,^ their lord most
blessed, and with all reverence most be-
loved, their brother in truth, and partner
in the priestly office, and to all the
brethren who are with him.

I. When we came to Subsana, and inquired
into the things which had been done there in
our absence and against our will, we found some
things exactly as we had heard reported, and
some things otherwise, but all things calling for
lamentation and forbearance ; and we endeav-
oured, in so far as the Lord gave His help, to put
them right by reproof, admonition, and prayer.
What distressed us most, since your departure
from the place, was that the brethren who went
thence to you were allowed to go without a
. guide, which we beg you to excuse, as having
taken place not from malice, but from an excess-


ive caution. For, believing as they did that
I these men were sent by our son Timotheus in
order to move you to be displeased with us, and
being anxious to reserve the whole matter un-
touched until we should come (when they hoped
to see you along with us), they thought that the
'departure of these men would be prevented if
they were not furnished with a guide. That they
did wrong in thus attempting to detain the
brethren we admit, — nay, who could doubt it ?
Hence also arose the story which was told to
Fossor,3 that Timotheus had already gone to you
■vith these same brethren. This was wholly

" ■ Rom. xi. 23.

I * Severus, bishop of Milevi in Numidia, had at one time been an
.nmate of the monastery of Augustin, and was held by him in the
,iighest esteem.

I 3 Tillemont suggests that this may be " the sexton," and not a
roper name.


false, but the statement was not made by the
presbyter ; and that Carcedonius our brother
was wholly unaware of all these things, was most
clearly proved to us by all the ways in which
such things are susceptible of proof.

2. But why spend more time on these circum-
stances ! Our son Timotheus, being greatly dis-
turbed because he found himself, altogether in
spite of his own wish, in such unlooked for per-
plexity, informed us that, when you were urging
him to serve God at Subsana, he broke forth
vehemently, and swore that he would never on
any account leave you. And when we questioned
him as to his present wish, he replied that by this
oath he was precluded from going to the place
which we had previously wished him to occupy,
even though his mind were set at rest by the evi-
dence given as to his freedom from restraint.
When we showed him that he would not be guilty
of violating his oath if a bar was put in the way
of his being with you, not by him, but by you,
in order to avoid a scandal ; seeing that he could
by his oath bind only his own will, not yours, and
he admitted that you had not bound yourself
reciprocally by your oath ; at last he said, as it
became a servant of God and a son of the Church
to say, that he would without hesitation agree to
whatever should seem good to us, along with
your Holiness, to appoint concerning him. We
therefore ask, and by the love of Christ implore
you, in the exercise of your sagacity, to remem-
ber all that we spoke to each other in this mat-
ter, and to make us glad by your reply to this
letter. For " we that are strong " (if, indeed,
amid so great and perilous temptations, we may
presume to claim this title) are bound, as the
apostle says, to " bear the infirmities of the
weak." ■* Our brother Timotheus has not written
to your Holiness, because your venerable brother
has reported all to you. May you be joyful in
the Lord, and remember us, our lord most
blessed, and with all reverence most beloved, our
brother in sincerity.


LETTER LXHL

(a.d. 401.)

to severus, my lord most blessed and ven-
er.able, a brother worthy of being em-
br.\ced with unfeigned love, and partner in
the priestly office, and to the brethren
that are with him, augustin and the
brethren with him send greeting in the

LORD.

I. If I frankly say all that this case compels
me to say, you may perhaps ask me where is my
concern for the preservation of charity ; but if

4 Rom. XV. I.


320


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


I may not thus say all that the case demands,
may I not ask you where is the liberty conceded
to friendship? Hesitating between these two
alternatives, I have chosen to write so much as
may justify me without accusing you. You wrote
that you were surprised that we, notwithstanding
our great grief at what was done, acquiesced in
it, when it might have been remedied by our cor-
rection ; as if when things wrongly done have
been afterwards, so far as possible, corrected,
they are no longer to be deplored ; and more
particularly, as if it were absurd for us to ac-
quiesce in that which, though wrongly done, it
is impossible for us to undo. Wherefore, my
brother, sincerely esteemed as such, your sur-
prise may cease. For Timotheus was ordained
a subdeacon at Subsana against my advice and
desire, at the time when the decision of his case
was still pending as the subject of deliberation
and conference between us. Behold me still
grieving over this, although he has now returned
to you ; and we do not regret that in our con-
senting to his return we obeyed your will.

2. May it please you to hear how, by rebuke,
admonition, and prayer, we had, even before he
went away from this place, corrected the wrong
which had been done, lest it should appear to
you that up to that time nothing had been cor-
rected by us because he had not returned to you.
By 7-ebitke, addressing ourselves first to Timo-
theus himself, because he did not obey you, but
went away to your Holiness without consulting
our brother Carcedonius, to which act of his the
origin of this affliction is to be traced ; and after-
wards censuring the presbyter (Carcedonius)
and Verinus, through whom we found that the
ordination of Timotheus had been managed.
When all of these admitted, under our rebuke,
that in all the things alleged they had done
wrong and begged forgiveness, we would have
acted with undue haughtiness if we had refused
to believe that they were sufficiently corrected.
For they could not make that to be not done
which had been done ; and we by our rebuke
were not expecting or desiring to do more than
bring them to acknowledge their faults, and grieve
over them. By admonition : first, in warning all
never to dare again to do such things, lest they
should incur God's wrath ; and then especially
charging Timotheus, who said that he was bound
only by his oath to go to your Grace, that if your
Holiness, considering all that we had spoken
together on the matter, should, as we hoped
might be the case, decide not to have him with
you, out of regard for the weak for whom Christ
died, who might be offended, and for the disci-
pline of the Church, which it is perilous to dis-
regard, seeing that he had begim to be a reader
in this diocese, — he should then, being free from
the bond of his oath, devote himself with undis-


turbed mind to the service of God, to whom we
are to give an account of all our actions. By
such admonitions as we were able to give, we had
also persuaded our brother Carcedonius to sub-
mit with perfect resignation to whatever might
be seen to be necessary in regard to him for the
preservation of the discipline of the Church.
By prayer, moreover, we had laboured to correct
ourselves, commending both the guidance and
the issues of our counsels to the mercy of God,
and seeking that if any sinful anger had wounded
us, we might be cured by taking refuge under
His healing right hand. Behold how much we
had corrected by rebuke, admonition, and
prayer !

3. And now, considering the bond of charity,
that we may not be possessed by Satan, — for
we are not ignorant of his devices, — what else
ought we to have done than obey your wish,
seeing that you thought that what had been done
could be remedied in no other way than by our
giving back to your authority him in whose per-
son you complained that wrong had been done
to you. Even our brother Carcedonius hmiself
consented to this, not indeed without much dis-
tress of spirit, on account of which I entreat
you to pray for him, but eventually without
opposition, believing that he submitted to Christ
in submitting to you. Nay, even when I still
thought it might be our duty to consider whether
I should not write a second letter to you, my
brother, while Timotheus still remained here, he
himself, with filial reverence, feared to displease
you, and cut my deliberations short by not only
consenting, but even urging, that Timotheus
should be restored to you.

4. I therefore, brother Severus, leave my case
to be decided by you. For I am sure that Christ
dwells in your heart, and by Him I beseech yoaj
to ask counsel from Him, submitting your mind
to His direction regarding the question whether,
when a man had begun to be a Reader in thej
Church confided to my care, having read, not
once only, but a second and a third time, at
Subsana, and in company with the presbyter of
the Church of Subsana had done the same also
at Turres and Ciza and Verbalis, it is either pos-
sible or right that he be pronounced to have
never been a Reader. And as we have, in obe-
dience to God, corrected that which was after-
wards done contrary to our will, do you also, in
obedience to Him, correct in like manner that '
which was formerly, through your not knowing
the facts of the case, wrongly done. For 1 have
no fear of your failing to perceive what a door
is opened for breaking down the discipline of
the Church, if, when a clergyman of any church
has sworn to one of another church that he will ,
not leave him, that other encourage him to re-;
main with him, alleging that he does so that he


I.


.1


i


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


321


may not be the occasion of the breaking of an
oath ; seeing that he who forbids this, and de-
cUnes to allow the other to remain with him
(because that other could by his vow bind only
his own conscience), unquestionably preserves
the order which is necessary to peace in a way
which none can justly censure.

LETTER LXIV.

(a.d. 401.)

to my lord quintianus, mv most beloved
brother and fellow-presbyter, augustin
sends greeting in the lord.

1, We do not disdain to look upon bodies
which are defective in beauty, especially seeing
that our souls themselves are not yet so beauti-
ful as we hope that they shall be when He who
is of ineffable beauty shall have appeared, in
whom, though now we see Him not, we believe ;
for then " we shall be like Him," when " we
shall see Him as He is." ' If you receive my
counsel in a kindly and brotherly spirit, I exhort
you to think thus of your soul, as we do of our
own, and not presumptuously imagine that it is
already perfect in beauty ; but, as the apostle
enjoins, " rejoice in hope," and obey the precept
which he annexes to this, when he says, " Re-
joicing in hope, patient in tribulation:"^ "for
we are saved by hope," as he says again ; " but
hope that is seen is not hope : for what a man

!| seeth, why doth he yet hope for ? But if we
hope for that we see not, then do we with pa-
tience wait for it." 3 Let not this patience be
wanting in thee, but with a good conscience
I" wait on the Lord ; be of good courage, and
He shall strengthen thine heart : wait, I say, on
the Lord." ^

2. It is, of course, obvious that if you come
ilo us while debarred from communion with the
Venerable bishop Aurelius, you cannot be ad-
mitted to communion with us ; but we would
act towards you with that same charity which we
ire assured shall guide his conduct. Your com-
ng to us, however, should not on this account be
mljarrassing to us, because the duty of submis-
,ion to this, out of regard to the discipline of the
'hurch, ought to be felt by yourself, especially

you have the approval of your own conscience,
;hich is known to yourself and to God. For if
iurelius has deferred the examination of your

se, he has done this not from dislike to you,
lut from the pressure of other engagements ;
hd if you knew his circumstances as well as
|)u know your own, the delay would cause you
feither surprise nor sorrow. That it is the same


("■1 —


■ ' I John iii. 2.
P Rom. xii 12.
P Rom. viii. 24, 25.
1* Ps. xxvii. 14.


with myself, I entreat you to believe on my word,
as you are eciually unable to know how I am
occupied. But there are other bishops older
than I am, and both in authority more worthy
and in place more convenient, l3y whose help
you may more easily expedite the affairs now
pending in the Church committed to your charge.
I have not, however, failed to make mention of
your distress, and of the complaint in your letter
to my venerable brother and colleague the aged
Aurelius, whom I esteem with the respect due
to his worth ; I took care to acquaint him with
your innocence of the things laid to your charge,
by sending him a copy of your letter. It was
not until a day, or at the most two, before Christ-
mas,5 that I received the letter in which you in-
formed me of his intention to visit the Church
at Badesile, by which you fear lest the people
be disturbed and influenced against you. I do
not therefore presume to address by letter your
people ; for I could write a reply to any who
had written to me, but how could I put myself
forward unasked to write to a people not com-
mitted to my care ?

3. Nevertheless, what I now say to you, who
alone have written to me, may, through you,
reach others who should hear it. I charge you
then, in the first place, not to bring the Church
into reproach by reading in the public assemblies
those writings which the Canon of the Church
has not acknowledged ; for by these, heretics,
and especially the Manichseans (of whom I hear
that some are lurking, not without encourage-
ment, in your district), are accustomed to subvert
the minds of the inexperienced. I am amazed
that a man of your wisdom should admonish me
to forbid the reception into the monastery of
those who have come from you to us, in order
that a decree of the Council may be obeyed,
and at the same time should forget another
decree^ of the same Council, declaring what
are the canonical Scriptures which ought to be
read to the people. Read again the proceed-
ings of the Council, and conunit them to mem-
ory : you will there find that the Canon which
you refer to ^ as prohibiting the indiscriminate
reception of applicants for admission to a mon-
astery, was not framed in regard to laymen, but


IS


applies to the clergy alone. It is true there
no mention of*monasteries in the canon ; but it
is laid down in general, that no one may receive
a clergyman belonging to another diocese [ex-
cept in such a way as upholds the discipline of
the Church]. Moreover, it has been enacted in
a recent Council,^ that any who desert a monas-
tery, or are expelled from one, shall not be else-

s Pridie Natalis Domini.

6 See Council of Hippo, a d. 393, Can. 38, and the third Council
of Carthage, a.d. 397, Can. 47.
^ Ibid. Can. 21.
* Council of Carthage, 13th Sept. 401.


;22


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


where admitted either to clerical ofifice or to the
charge of a monastery. If, therefore, you are
in any measure cHsturbed regarding Privatio, let
me inform you that he has not yet been received
by us into the monastery ; but that I have sub-
mitted his case to the aged Aurelius, and will
act according to his decision. For it seems
strange to me, if a man can be reckoned a
Reader who has read only once in public, and
on that occasion read writings which are not
canonical. If for this reason he is regarded as
an ecclesiastical reader, it follows that the writ-
ing which he read must be esteemed as sanc-
tioned by the Church. But if the writing be
not sanctioned by the Church as canonical, it
follows that, although a man may have read it to
a congregation, he is not thereby made an eccle-
siastical reader, [but is, as before, a layman].
Nevertheless I must, in regard to the young
man in question, abide by the decision of the
arbiter whom I have named.

4. As to the people of Vigesile, who are to us
as well as to you beloved in the bowels of Christ,
if they have refused to accept a bishop who has
been deposed by a plenary Council in Africa,'
they act wisely, and cannot be compelled to yield,
nor ought to be. And whoever shall attempt to
compel them by violence to receive him, will
show plainly what is his character, and will make
men well understand what his real character was
at an earlier time, when he would have had them
believe no evil of him. For no one more effec-
tually discovers the worthlessness of his cause,
than the man who, employing the secular power,
or any other kind of violent means, endeavours
by agitating and complaining to recover the eccle-
siastical rank which he has forfeited. For his
desire is not to yield to Christ service which He
claims, but to usurp over Christians an authority
which they disown. Brethren, be cautious ; great
is the craft of the devil, but Christ is the wisdom
of God.

LETTER LXV.

(a.d. 402.)

to the aged ^ x.'vntippus, mv lord most blessed
and worthy of veneration, and my father
and colleague in the priestly office,
augustin sends greeting in tre lord.

I. Saluting your Excellency with the respect
due to your worth, and earnestly seeking an in-
terest in your prayers, I beg to submit to the con-
sideration of your wisdom the case of a certain
Abundantius, ordained a presbyter in the domain
of Strabonia, belonging to my diocese. He had
begun to be unfavourably reported of, through

' Council of Carthage, 13th Sept. 401.

^ This title in the African Church seems equivalent to Primate
when applied to a bishop. See Letter LIX.


his not walking in the way which becomes the
servants of God ; and I being on this account
alarmed, though not believing the rumours with-
out examination, was made more watchful of
his conduct, and devoted some pains to obtain,
if possible, indisputable evidences of the evil
courses with which he was charged. The first
thing which I ascertained was, that he had em-
bezzled the money of a countryman, entrusted
to him for religious purposes, and could give no
satisfactory account of his stewardship. The
next thing proved against him, and admitted by
his own confession, was, that on Christmas day,
on which the fast was observed by the Church
of Gippe as by all the other Churches, after tak-
ing leave of his colleague the presbyter of Gippe,
as if going to his own church about 1 1 a.m., he
remained, without having any ecclesiastic in his
company, in the same parish, and dined, supped,
and spent the night in the house of a woman of
ill fame. It happened that lodging in the same
place was one of our clergy of Hippo, who had
gone thither ; and as the facts were known be-
yond dispute to this witness, Abundantius could
not deny the charge. As to the things which he
did deny, I left them to the divine tribunal, pass-
ing sentence upon him only in regard to those
things which he had not been permitted to con-
ceal. I was afraid to leave him in charge of a:
Church, especially of one placed as his was, in
the very midst of rabid and barking heretics.
And when he begged me to give him a letter
with a statement of his case to the presbyter of
the parish of Armema, in the district of Bulla,
from which he had come to us, so as to prevent
any exaggerated suspicion there of his character,
and in order that he might there live, if possible,
a more consistent life, having no duties as a pres-


1.1
fcrol


byter, I was moved by compassion to do as he
desired. At the same time, it was very specially i^^^
incumbent on me to submit to your wisdom these
facts, lest any deception should be practised upon ,
you.

2. I pronounced sentence in his case one hun-
dred days before Easter Sunday, which falls this
year on the 7th of April. I have taken care to 1
acquaint you with the date, because of the decree • ^f^j
of Council, 3 which I also did not conceal from
him, but explained to him the law of the Church,
that if he thought anything could be done to re- 1
verse my decision, unless he began proceedings i^],
with this view within a year, no one would, after ;|j.'
the lapse of that time, listen to his pleading.,"
For my own part, my lord most blessed, and
father worthy of all veneration, I assure you that
if I did not think that these instances of vicious
conversation in an ecclesiastic, especially when s^
accompanied with an evil reputation, deserved ■%.,,

3 Held at Carthage, 13th Sept. 401.


Ijo;
iai:


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


323


to be visited with the punishment appointed by
the Council, I would be compelled now to at-
tempt to sift things which cannot be known, and
either to condemn the accused upon doubtful
evidence, or acquit him for want of proof, ^^llen
a presbyter, upon a day of fasting which was
observed as such also in the place in which he
was, having taken leave of his colleague in the
ministry in that place, and being unattended by
any ecclesiastic, ventured to tarry in the house
of a woman of ill fame, and to dine and sup and
spend the night there, it seemed to me, whatever
others might think, that he behoved to be de-
posed from his office, as I durst not commit to
his charge a Church of God. If it should so
happen that a different opinion be held by the
ecclesiastical judges to whom he may appeal,
seeing that it has been decreed by the Council '
that the decision of six bishops be final in the
case of a presbyter, let who will commit to him
a Church within his jurisdiction, I confess, for
my own part, that I fear to entrust any congre-
gation whatever to persons like him, especially
when nothing in the way of general good character
can be alleged as a reason for excusing these
delinquencies ; lest, if he were to break forth
into some more ruinous wickedness, I should be
compelled with sorrow to blame myself for the
harm done by his crime.

LETTER LXVL

(a.d. 402.)

addressed, without salutation, to crispinus,
the donatist bishop of calama.

I. You ought to have been influenced by the |

fear of God ; but since, in your work of rebap-

i tizing the Mappalians,^ you have chosen to take |

I advantage of the fear with which as man you \

could inspire them, let me ask you what hinders

the order of the sovereign from being carried j

put in the province, when the order of the gov- 1

lernor of the province has been so fully enforced ;

lin a village ? If you compare the persons con- :

[earned, you are but a vassal in possession ; he is j

the Emperor. If you compare the positions of

|both, you are in a property, he is on a throne ;

Jf you compare the causes maintained by both,

lis aim is to heal division, and yours is to rend

inity in twain. But we do not bid you stand in

iwe of man : though we might take steps to

compel you to pay, according to the imperial

llecree, ten pounds of gold as the penalty of your

l)utrage. Perhaps you might be unable to pay

Ihe fine imposed upon those who rebaptize mem-


bers of the Church, having been involved in so
much expense in buying people whom you might
compel to submit to the rite. But, as I have
said, we do not bid you be afraid of man : rather
let Christ fill you with fear. I should like to
know what answer you could give Him, if He
said to you : " Crispinus, was it a great price
which you paid in order to buy the fear of the
Mappalian peasantry ; and does My death, the
price paid by Me to purchase the love of all
nations, seem little in your eyes ? Was the money
which was counted out from your purse in ac-
quiring these serfs in order to their being rebap-
tized, a more costly sacrifice than the blood which
flowed from My side in redeeming the nations
in order to their being baptized ? " I know that,
if you would listen to Christ, you might hear
many more such appeals, and might, even by the
possession which you have obtained, be warned
how impious are the things which you have
spoken against Christ. For if you think that
your title to hold what you have bought with
money is sure by human law, how much more
sure, by divine law, is Christ's title to that which
He hath bought with His own blood ! And it is
true that He of whom it is written, " He shall
have dominion from sea to sea, and from the
river unto the ends of the earth," shall hold with
invincible might all which He has purchased ;
but how can you expect with any assurance to
retain that which you think you have made your
own by purchase in Africa, when you affirm that
Christ has lost the whole world, and been left
with Africa alone as His portion?

2. But why multiply words? If these Map-
palians have passed of their own free will into
your communion, let them hear both you and
me on the question which divides us, — the
words of each of us being written down, and
translated into the Punic tongue after having
been attested by our signatures ; and then, all
pressure through fear of their superior being
removed, let these vassals choose what they
please. For by the things which we shall say
it will be made manifest whether they remain in
error under coercion, or hold what they believe
to be truth with their own consent. They either
understand these matters, or they do not : \if
they do not, how could you dare to transfer
them in their ignorance to your communion?
and if they do, let them, as I have said, hear
both sides, and act freely for themselves. If
there be any communities that have passed
over from you to us, which you believe to have
yielded to the pressure of their superiors, let
the same be done in their case ; let tliem hear
both sides, and choose for themselves. Now,
if you reject this proposal, who can fail to be
convinced that your reliance is not upon the
force of truth ? But you ought to beware of the


324


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


wrath of God both here and hereafter. I ad-
jure you by Christ to give a reply to what I have
written.

LETTER LXVII.
(a.d. 402.)

TO MY LORD MOST BELOVED AND LONGED FOR, MV
HONOURED BROTHER IN CHRIST, AND FELLOW-
PRESBYTER, JEROME, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING
IN THE LORD.


Chap. i. — i. I have heard that my letter has
come to your hand. I have not yet received ;
a reply, but I do not on this account question
your affection ; doubtless something has hitherto
prevented you. Wherefore I know and avow
that my prayer should be, that God would put
it in your power to forward your reply, for He
has already given you power to prepare it, see-
ing .that you can do so with the utmost ease if
you feel disposed. i

Chap. ii. — 2. I have hesitated whether to
give credence or not to a certain report which
has reached me ; but I felt that I ought not to
hesitate as to writing a few lines to you regard- I
ing the matter. To be brief, I have heard that j
some brethren have told your Charity that I
have written a book against you and have sent
it to Rome. Be assured that this is false : I call
God to witness that I have not done this. But
if perchance there be some things in some of
my writings in which I am found to have been
of a different opinion from you, I think you
ought to know, or if it cannot be certainly
known, at least to believe, that such things have
been written not with a view of contradicting
you, but only of stating my own views. In say-
ing this, however, let me assure you that not
only am I most ready to hear in a brotherly
spirit the objections which you may entertain to
anything in my writings which has displeased
you, but I entreat, nay implore you, to acquaint
me with them ; and thus I shall be made glad
either by the correction of my mistake, or at
least by the expression of your goodwill.

3. Oh that It were in my power, by our living
near each other, if not under the same roof, to
enjoy frequent and sweet conference with you in
the Lord ! Since, however, this is not granted,
I beg you to take pains that this one way in
which we can be together in the Lord be kept
up ; nay more, improved and perfected. Do
not refuse to write me in return, however sel-
dom.

Greet with my respects our holy brother Pau-
linianus, and all the brethren who with you, and
because of you, rejoice in the Lord. May you,
remembering us, be heard by the Lord in regard
to all your holy desires, my lord most beloved
and longed for, my honoured brother in Christ.


LETTER LXVIIL
(a.d. 402.)

TO AUGUSTIN, MY LORD, TRULY HOLY AND MOST
BLESSED FATHER,' JEROME SENDS GREETING IN
CHRIST.

I. When my kinsman, our holy son Asterius,
subdeacon, w^as just on the point of beginning
his journey, the letter of your Grace arrived, in
which you clear yourself of the charge of having
sent to Rome a book written against your hum-
ble servant.^ I had not heard that charge ; but
by our brother Sysinnius, deacon, copies of a
letter addressed by some one apparently to me
have come hither. In the said letter I am ex-
horted to sing the 7raAu'w8ta, confessing mistake
in regard to a paragraph of the apostle's writing,
and to imitate Stesichorus, who, vacillating be-
tween disparagement and praises of Helen, re-
covered, by praising her, the eyesight which he
! had forfeited by speaking against her.^ Although
the style and the method of argument appeared
to be yours, I must frankly confess to your Ex-
cellency that I did not think it right to assume
without examination the authenticity of a letter
j of which I had only seen copies, lest perchance,
if offended by my reply, you should with justice
complain that it was my duty first to have made
sure that you were the author, and only after
' that was ascertained, to address you in reply.
! Another reason for my delay was the protracted
illness of the pious and venerable Paula. For,
while occupied long in attending upon her in
i severe illness, I had almost forgotten your letter,
or more correcdy, the letter written in your
name, remembering the verse, '' Like music m
the day of mourning


IS an


e, ijlKC UlUSil^ 111

unseasonable dis-


course." ■♦ Therefore, if it is your letter, write
me frankly that it is so, or send me a more ac-
curate copy, in order that without any passion-
ate rancour we may devote ourselves to discuss
scriptural truth ; and I may either correct my
own mistake, or show that another has without
! good reason found fault with me.

2. Far be it from me to presume to attack
anything which your Grace has written. For it
is enough for me to prove my own views with-
out controverting what others hold. But it is
' well known to one of your wisdom, that every
' one is satisfied with his own opinion, and that it
I is puerile self-sufficiency to seek, as young men
have of old been wont to do, to gain glory to
, one's own name by assailing men who have be-
i come renowmed. I am not so foolish as to think
myself insulted by the fact that you give an ex-
planation different from mine ; since you, on the


2 Pam'itns jnea.

3 See Letter XL. sec. 7, p. 274

4 Ecclus. xxii. 6.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


325


other hand, are not wronged by my views being
contrary to those which you maintain. But that
is the kind of reproof by which friends may
truly benefit each other, wlien each, not seeing :
his own bag of faults, observes, as Persius has it,
the wallet borne by the other.' Let me say fur-
ther, love one who loves you, and do not because !
you are young challenge a veteran in the fiekl of I
Scripture. I have had my time, and have run I
my course to the utmost of my strength. It is I
but fair that I should rest, while you in your turn \
run and accomplish great distances ; at the same ;
time (with your leave, and without intending any
disrespect), lest it should seem that to quote from
the poets is a thing which you alone can do, let '<
me remind you of the encounter between Dares
and Entellus,^ and of the proverb, " The tired
ox treads with a firmer step." With sorrow I
have dictated these words. Would that I could
receive your embrace, and that by converse we
might aid each other in learning !

3. With his usual effrontery, Calphurnius, sur-
named Lanarius,^ has sent me his execrable
writings, which I understand that he has been at
pains to disseminate in Africa also. To these I
have replied in part, and shortly ; and I have
sent you a copy of my treatise, intending by the
first opportunity to send you a larger work, when
I have leisure to prepare it. In this treatise I
have been careful not to offend Christian feeling
in any, but only to confute the lies and hallucina-
tions arising from his ignorance and madness.

Remember me, holy and venerable father.
See how sincerely I love thee, in that I am
unwilling, even when challenged, to reply, and
refuse to believe you to be the author of that
which in another I would sharply rebuke. Our
brother Communis sends his respectful saluta-
tion.

LETTER LXIX.

(a.d. 402.)

to their justly beloved lord castorius, their
truly welcomed and worthily honoured
son, alypius and augustin send greeting in

THE LORD.

I. An attempt was made by the enemy of
Christians to cause, by occasion of our very dear
and sweet son your brother, the agitation of a
most dangerous scandal within the Catholic
Church, which as a mother welcomed you to her
affectionate embrace when you fled from a disin-
[herited and separated fragment into the heritage
of Christ ; the desire of that enemy being evi-


I ' " Ut nemo in sese tentat descendere, nemo;
I Sed prEEcedenii spectatur mantica tergo."

Jalso Phadrus, iv. 10.

* Virgil, /Eneid, v. 369 seq.

^ Rufinus.


■ Sat. iv. 29. See


dently to becloud with unseemly melancholy the
calm beauty of joy which was imparted to us by
the blessing of your conversion. But the Lord
our God, who is compassionate and merciful,
who comforteth them that are cast down, nour-
ishing the infants, and cherishing the infirm,
permitted him to gain in some measure success
in this design, only to make us rejoice more
over the prevention of the calamity than we
grieved over the danger. For it is a far more
magnanimous thing to have resigned the onerous
responsibilities of the bishop's dignity in order
to save the Church from danger, than to have
accepted these in order to have a share in her
government. He truly proves that he was worthy
of holding that office, had the interests of peace
permitted him to do so, who does not insist upon
retaining it when he cannot do so without en-
dangering the peace of the Church. It has
accordingly pleased God to show, by means of
your brother, our beloved son Maximianus, unto
the enemies of His Church, that there are within
her those who seek not their own things, but the
things of Jesus Christ. For in laying down that
ministry of stewardship of the mysteries of God,
he was not deserting his duty under the pressure
of some worldly desire, but acting under the
impulse of a pious love of peace, lest, on account
of the honour conferred upon him, there should
arise among the members of Christ an unseemly
and dangerous, perhaps even fatal, dissension.
For could anything have been more infatuated
and worthy of utter reprobation, than to forsake
schismatics because of the peace of the Catholic
Church, and then to trouble that same Catholic
peace by the question of one's own rank and
preferment ? On the other hand, could anything
be more praiseworthy, and more in accordance
with Christian charity, than that, after having
forsaken the frenzied pride of the Donatists, he
should, in the manner of his cleaving to the
heritage of Christ, give such a signal proof of
humility under the power of love for the unity
of the Church? As for him, therefore, we rejoice
indeed that he has been proved of such stability
that the storm of this temptation has not cast
down what divine truth had built in his heart ;
and therefore we desire and pray the Lord to
grant that, by his life and conversation in the
future, he may make it more and more manifest
how well he would have discharged the re-
sponsibilities of that office which he would have
accepted if that had been his duty. May that
eternal peace which is promised to the Church
be given in recompense to him, who discerned
that the things which were not compatible with
the peace of the Church were not expedient for
him !

2. As for you, our dear son, in whom we have
great joy, since you are not restrained from ac-


#


326


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


cepting the office of bishop by any such consid-
erations as have guided your brother in declining
it, it becomes one of your disposition to devote
to Christ that which is in you by His own gift.
Your talents, prudence, eloquence, gravity, self-
control, and everything else which adorns your
conversation, are the gifts of God. To what ser-
vice can they be more fittingly devoted than to
His by whom they were bestowed, in order that
they may be preserved, increased, perfected, and
rewarded by Him? Let them not be devoted
to the service of this world, lest with it they pass
away and perish. We know that, in dealing with
you, it is not necessary to insist much on your re-
flecting, as you may so easily do, upon the hopes
of vain men, their insatiable desires, and the un-
certainty of life. Away, therefore, with every ex-
pectation of deceptive and earthly felicity which
your mind had grasped : labour in the vineyard
of God, where the fruit is sure, where so many
promises have already received so large measure
of fulfilment, that it would be the height of mad-
ness to despair as to those which remain. We
beseech you by the divinity and humanity of
Christ, and by the peace of that heavenly city
where we receive eternal rest after labouring for
the time of our pilgrimage, to take the place as
the bishop of the Church of Vagina which your
brother has resigned, not under ignominious dep-
osition, but by magnanimous concession. Let
that people for whom we expect the richest in-
crease of blessings through your mind and tongue,
endowed and adorned by the gifts of God, — let
that people, we say, perceive through you, that
in what your brother has done, he was consulting
not his own indolence, but their peace.

We have given orders that this letter be not
read to you until those to whom you are neces-
sary hold you in actual possession.' For we hold
you in the bond of spiritual love, because to us
also you are very necessary as a colleague. Our
reason for not coming in person to you, you shall
afterwards learn.

LETTER LXX.
(a.d. 402.)

This letter is addressed by Alypius and Augustin to
Naucelio, a person through whom they had discussed
the question of the Donatist schism with Clarentius, an
aged Donatist bishop (probably the same with the Nu-
midian bishop of Tabraca, who took part in the Confer-
ence at Carthage in 411 A.D.). The ground traversed in
the letter is the same as in pages 296 and 297, in Letter
LI., regarding the inconsistencies of the Donatists in the
case of Felicianus of Musti. We therefore leave it un-
translated.


' It would seem that tliere was some reason to fear lest Castorius
should elsewhere devote his talents to some other calling, and that a
deputation from V.-»gina had been sent to seek him and bring him to
that place. Alypius and Augustin for some reason, did not accom-
pany the deputation, but sent this letter with them.


LETTER LXXL

(a.d. 403.)

to my venerable lord jerome, rfv esteemed
and holy brother and fellow-presbyter,
augustin sends greeting in the lord.

Chap. i. — i. Never since I began to write to
you, and to long for your writing in return, have I
met with a better opportunity for our exchanging
communications than now, when my letter is to
be carried to you by a most faithful servant and
minister of God, who is also a very dear friend
of mine, namely, our son Cyprian, deacon.
Through him I expect to receive a letter from
you with all the certainty which is in a matter of
this kind possible. For the son whom I have
named will not be found wanting in respect of
zeal in asking, or persuasive influence in obtain-
ing a reply from you ; nor will he fail in dili-
gently keeping, prompdy bearing, and faithfully
delivering the same. I only pray that if I be in
any way worthy of this, the Lord may give His
help and favour to your heart and to my desire,
so that no higher will may hinder that which
your brotherly goodwill inclines you to do.

2. As I have sent you two letters already to
which I have received no reply, I have resolved
to send you at this time copies of both of them,
for I suppose that they never reached you. If '
they did reach you, and your replies have failed,
as may be the case, to reach me, send me a I
second time the same as you sent before, if you I
have copies of them preserved : if you have I
not, dictate again what I may read, and do notl
refuse to send to these former letters the answer ll
for which I have been waiting so long. My first
letter to you, which I had prepared while I was
a presbyter, was to be delivered to you by aj
brother of ours, Profuturus, who afterwards be-
came my colleague in the episcopate, and has'
since then departed from this life ; but he could,
not then bear it to you in person, because at|
the very time when he intended to begin hisj
journey, he was prevented by his ordination to,']
the weighty office of bishop, and shordy after-
wards he died. This letter I have resolved also|
to send at this time, that you may know how-
long I have cherished a burning desire for con-
versation with you, and with what reluctance I-
submit to the remote separation which prevents!
my mind from having access to yours through,
our bodily senses, my brother, most amiable and'
honoured among the members of the Lord.

Chap. ii. — 3. In this letter I have further to''
say, that I have since heard that you have trans-
lated Job out of the original Hebrew, although;
in your own translation of the same prophet
from the Greek tongue we had already a versior
of that book. In that -earlier version you markec


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


327


with asterisks the words found in the Hebrew
but wanting in the Greek, and with obeHsks
the words found in the Greek but wanting in the
Hebrew ; and this was done with such astonish-
ing exactness, that in some places we have every
word distinguished by a separate asterisk, as a
sign that these words are in the Hebrew, but not
in the Greek. Now, however, in this more re-
cent version from the Hebrew, there is not the
same scrupulous fidelity as to the words ; and it
perplexes any thoughtful reader to understand
either what was the reason for marking the aster-
isks in the former version with so much care
that they indicate the absence from the Greek
version of even the smallest grammatical par-
ticles which have not been rendered from the
Hebrew, or what is the reason for so much less
care having been taken in this recent version
from the Hebrew to secure that these same par-
ticles be found in their own places. I would
have put down here an extract or two in illus-
tration of this criticism ; but at present I have
not access to the ms. of the translation from the
Hebrew. Since, however, your quick discern-
ment anticipates and goes beyond not only what
I have said, but also what I meant to say, you
already understand, I think, enough to be able,
by giving the reason for the plan which you have
adopted, to explain what perplexes me.

4. For my part, I would much rather that you
would furnish us with a translation of the Greek
version of the canonical Scriptures known as the
work of the Seventy translators. For if your
translation begins to be more generally read in
many churches, it will be a grievous thing that,
I in the reading of Scripture, differences must
\arise between the Latin Churches and the Greek
I Churches, especially seeing that the discrepancy
(is easily condemned in a Latin version by the
production of the original in Greek, which is a
language very widely known ; whereas, if any
one has been disturbed by the occurrence of
something to which he was not accustomed in
the translation taken from the Hebrew, and al-
leges that the new translation is wrong, it will be
found difficult, if not impossible, to get at the
Hebrew documents by which the version to
which exception is taken may be defended.
And when they are obtained, who will submit
to have so many Latin and Greek authorities
pronounced to be in the wrong? Besides all
this, Jews, if consulted as to the meaning of
the Hebrew text, may give a different opinion
from yours : in which case it will seem as if
your presence were indispensable, as being the
only one who could refute their view ; and it
would be a miracle if one could be found capa-
ble of acting as arbiter between you and them.

Chap. hi. — 5. A certain bishop, one of our
brethren, having introduced in the church over


which he presides the reading of your version,
came upon a word in the book of the prophet
Jonah, of which you have given a very different
rendering from that which had been of old
familiar to the senses and memory of all the
worshippers, and had been chanted for so many
generations in the church.' Thereupon arose
such a tumult in the congregation, especially
among the Greeks, correcting what had been
read, and denouncing the translation as false,
that the bishop was compelled to ask the testi-
mony of the Jewish residents (it was in the town
of Oea) . These, whether from ignorance or from
spite, answered that the words in the Hebrew
Mss. were correctly rendered in the Greek ver-
sion, and in the Latin one taken from it. What
further need I say? The man was compelled to
correct your version in that passage as if it had
been falsely translated, as he desired not to be
left without a congregation, — a calamity which
he narrowly escaped. From this case we also
are led to think that you may be occasionally
mistaken. \'ou will also observe how great must
have been the difficulty if this had occurred in
those writings which cannot be explained by com-
paring the testimony of languages now in use.

Chap. iv. — 6. At the same time, we are in
no small measure thankful to God for the work
in which you have translated the Gospels from
the original Greek, because in almost every pas-
sage we have found nothing to object to, when
we compared it with the Greek Scriptures. By
this work, any disputant who supports an old
false translation is either convinced or confuted
with the utmost ease by the production and col-
lation of MSS. And if, as indeed very rarely
happens, something be found to which excep-
tion may be taken, who would be so unreasona-
ble as not to excuse it readily in a work so
useful that it cannot be too highly praised? I
wish you would have the kindness to open up to
me what you think to be the reason of the fre-
quent discrepancies between the text supported
by the Hebrew codices and the Greek Septua-
gint version. For the latter has no mean author-
ity, seeing that it has obtained so wide circulation,
and was the one which the apostles used, as is
not only proved by looking to the text itself, but
has also been, as I remember, affirmed by your-
self. You would therefore confer upon us a
much greater boon if you gave an exact Latin
translation of the Greek Septuagint version : for
the variations found in the different codices of
the Latin text are intolerably numerous ; and it
is so justly open to suspicion as possibly differ-
ent from what is to be found in the Greek, that
one has no confidence in either quoting it or
proving anything by its help,

2 Jonah iv. 6.


328


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


I thought that this letter was to be a short
one, but it has somehow been as pleasant to me
to go on with it as if I were talking with you. I
conclude with entreating you by the Lord kind-
ly-to send me a full reply, and thus give me, so
far as is in your power, the pleasure of your
presence.

LETTER LXXIL

(a.d. 404.)

to augustin, my lord truly holy, and most
blessed father, jerome sends greeting in

THE LORD.

Chap. i. — i. You are sending me letter upon
letter, and often urging me to answer a certain
letter of yours, a copy of which, without your
signature, had reached me through our brother
Sysinnius, deacon, as I have already written,
which letter you tell me that you entrusted first
to our brother Profuturus, and afterwards to
some one else ; but that Profuturus was pre-
vented from finishing his intended journey, and
having been ordained a bishop, was removed by
sudden death ; and the second messenger, whose
name you do not give, was afraid of the perils
of the sea, and gave up the voyage which he
had intended. These things being so, I am at
a loss to express my surprise that the same letter
is reported to be in the possession of most of
the Christians in Rome, and throughout Italy,
and has come to every one but myself, to whom
alone it was ostensibly sent. I wonder at this
all the more, because the brother Sysinnius afore-
said tells me that he found it among the rest of
your published works, not in Africa, not in your
possession, but in an island of the Adriatic some
five years ago.

2. True friendship can harbour no suspicion ;
a friend must speak to his friend as freely as to
his second self. Some of my acquaintances,
vessels of Christ, of whom there is a very large
number in Jerusalem and m the holy places, sug-
gested to me that this had not been done by you
in a guileless spirit, but through desire for praise
and celebrity, and eclat in the eyes of the peo-
ple, intending to become famous at my expense ;
that many might know that you challenged me,
and I feared to meet you ; that you had written
as a man of learning, and I had by silence con-
fessed my ignorance, and had at last found one
who knew how to stop my garrulous tongue. I,
however, let me say it frankly, refused at first to
answer your Excellency, because I did not believe
that the letter, or as I may call it (using a pro-
verbial expression), the honeyed sword, was sent
from you. Moreover, I was cautious lest I should
seem to answer uncourteously a bishop of my
own communion, and to censure anything in the
letter of one who censured me, especially as I


judged some of its statements to be tainted
with heresy.' Lastly, I was afraid lest you
should have reason to remonstrate with me, say-
ing, " What ! had you seen the letter to be mine,
— had you discovered in the signature attached
to it the autograph of a hand well known to
you, when you so carelessly wounded the feel-
ings of your friend, and reproached me with that
which the malice of another had conceived? "

Chap. ii. — 3. Wherefore, as I have already
written, either send me the identical letter in
question subscribed with your own hand, or
desist from annoying an old man, who seeks
retirement in his monastic cell. If you wish to
exercise or display your learning, choose as your
antagonists, young, eloquent, and illustrious men,
of whom it is said that many are found in Rome,
who may be neither unable nor afraid to meet you,
and to enter the lists with a bishop in debates
concerning the Sacred Scriptures. As for me, a
soldier once, but a retired veteran now, it be-
comes me rather to applaud the victories won
by you and others, than with my worn-out body
to take part in the conflict ; beware lest, if you
persist in demanding a reply, I call to mind the
history of the way in which Quintus Maxuiius
by his patience defeated Hannibal, who was, in
the pride of youth, confident of success.^

"Omnia fert setas, animum qiioque. Ssepe ego longos
Cantando pueriim memim me condere soles •
Nunc oblita mihi tot carmina : vox quoque Moerin
Jam fugit ipsa." ^

Or rather, to quote an instance from Scripture :
Barzillai of Gilead, when he declined in favour
of his youthful son the kindnesses of Kmg David
and all the charms of his court, taught us that
old age ought neither to desire these things, nor
to accept them when offered.

4. As to your calling God to witness that you
had not written a book against me, and of course
had not sent to Rome what you had never written,
adding that, if perchance some things were found
in your works in which a different opinion from
mine was advanced, no wrong had thereby been
done to me, because you had, without any inten-
tion of offending me, written only what you
believed to be right ; I beg }'OU to hear me with
patience. You never wrote a book against me :
how then has there been brought to me a copy,
written by another hand, of a treatise containing
a rebuke administered to me by you? How
comes Italy to possess a treatise of yours which
you did not write ? Nay, how can you reasonably
ask me to reply to that which you solemnly assure
me was never written by you? Nor am I so
foolish as to think that I am insulted by you, if

' I have taken the liberty of making chap. ii. begin at the end
instead of the beginning of this sentence, where its interruption of
the paragraph bewilders the reader.

- Livy, book xxii

3 Virgil, Eclogue ix.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


329


in anything your opinion differs from mine. But
if, challenging me as it were to single combat,
you take exception to my views, and demand a
reason for what I have written, and insist upon
my correcting what you judge to be an error, and
call upon me to recant it in a humble TroAivwSta,
and speak of your curing me of blindness ; in
this I maintain that friendship is wounded, and
the laws of brotherly union are set at nought.
Let not the world see us quarrelling like children,
and giving material for angry contention between
those who may become our respective supporters
or adversaries. I write what I have now written,
because I desire to cherish towards you pure and
Christian love, and not to hide in my heart any-
thing which does not agree with the utterance
of my lips. For it does not become me, who
have spent my life from youth until now, sharing
the arduous labours of pious brethren in an
obscure monastery, to presume to write anything
against a bishop of my own communion, especially
against one whom I had begun to love before I
knew him, who also sought my friendship before
I sought his, and whom I rejoiced to see rising
as a successor to myself in the careful study of
the Scriptures. Wherefore either disown that
book, if you are not its author, and give over
urging me to reply to that which you never wrote ;
or if the book is yours, admit it frankly ; so that
if I write anything in self-defence, the responsi-
bility may lie on you who gave, not on me who
am forced to accept, the challenge.

Chap. hi. — 5. You say also, that if there be
anything in your writings which has displeased
me, and which I would wish to correct, you are
ready to receive my criticism as a brother ; and
you not only assure me that you would rejoice
in such proof of my goodwill toward you, but
you earnestly ask me to do this. I tell you
again, without reserve, what I feel : you are
challenging an old man, disturbing the peace of
one who asks only to be allowed to be silent,
and you seem to desire to display your learning.
It is not for one of my years to give the impres-
sion of enviously disparaging one whom I ought
rather to encourage by approbation. And if the
ingenuity of perverse men finds something which
they may plausibly censure in the writings even
of evangelists and prophets, are you amazed if,
in your books, especially in your exposition of
passages in Scripture which are exceedingly
difficult of interpretation, some things be found
which are not perfectly correct? This I say,
however, not because I can at this time pronounce
anything in your works to merit censure. For,
in the first place, I have never read them with
attention ; and in the second place, we have not
' beside us a supply of copies of what you have
I written, excepting the books of Soliloquies and
Commentaries on some of the Psalms ; which.


if I were disposed to criticise them, I could
prove to be at variance, I shall not say with my
own opinion, for I am nobody, but with the
interpretations of the older Greek commentators.
Farewell, my very dear friend, my son in years,
my father in ecclesiastical dignity ; and to this
I most particularly request your attention, that
henceforth you make sure that I be the first to
receive whatever you may write to me.

LETTER LXXIIL

(a.d. 404.)

to jerome, my venerable and most esteemed
brother and fellow-presbvter, augustin
sends greeting in the lord.

Chap. i. — i. Although I suppose that, before
this reaches you, you have received through our
son the deacon Cyprian, a servant of God, the
letter which I sent by him, from which you would
be apprised with certainty that I wrote the letter
of which you mentioned that a copy had been
brought to you ; in consequence of which I sup-
pose that I have begun already, like the rash Dares,
to be beaten and belaboured by the missiles
and the merciless fists of a second Entellus '
in the reply which you have written ; neverthe-
less I answer in the meantime the letter which
you have deigned to send me by our holy son
Asterius, in which I have found many proofs of
your most kind goodwill to me, and at the same
time some signs of your having in some measure
felt agrieved by me. In reading it, therefore, I
was no sooner soothed by one sentence than
I was buffeted in another ; my wonder being
especially called forth by this, that after alleging,
as your reason for not rashly accepting as authentic
the letter froni me of which you had a copy, the
fact that, offended by your reply, I might justly
remonstrate with you, because you ought first to
have ascertained that it was mine before answer-
ing it, you go on to command me to acknowl-
edge the letter frankly if it is mine, or send a
more reliable copy of it, in order that we may,
without any bitterness of feeling, address our-
selves to the discussion of scriptural doctrine.
For how can we engage in such discussion with-
out bitterness of feeling, if you have made up
your mind to offend me ? or, if your mind is not
made up to this, what reason could I have had,
when you did not offend me, for justly complain-
ing as having been offended by you, that you
ought first to have made sure that the letter was
mine, and only then to have replied, that is to
say, only then to have offended me? For if
there had been nothing to offend me in your
reply, I could have had no just ground of com-

' See Jerome's Letter, LXVIIL, sec. 2, p. 325.


330


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


plaint. Accordingly, when you write such a
reply to that letter as must offend me, what hope
is left of our engaging without any bitterness in
the discussion of scriptural doctrine ? Far be it
from me to take offence if you are willing and
able to prove, by incontrovertible argument, tliat
you have apprehended more correctly than I
have the meaning of that passage in Paul's Epis-
tle [to the Galatians], or of any other text in
Holy Scripture : nay, more, far be it from me to
count it aught else than gain to myself, and
cause of thankfulness to you, if in anything I
am either informed by your teaching or set right
by your correction.

2. But, my very dear brother, you could not
think that I could be offended by your reply,
had you not thought that you were offended by
what I had written. For I could never have
entertained concerning you the idea that you
had not felt yourself offended by me if you so
framed your reply as to offend me in return. If,
on the other hand, I have been supposed by you
to be capable of such preposterous folly as to
take offence when you had not written ni such a
way as to give me occasion, you have in this
already wronged me, that you have entertained
such an opinion of me. But surely you who are
so cautious, that although you recognised my
style in the letter of which you had a copy,
you refused to believe its authenticity, would
not without consideration believe me to be so
different from what your experience has proved
me to be. For if you had good reason for see-
ing that I might justly complam had you hastily
concluded that a letter not written by me was
mine, how much more reasonably may I com-
plain if you form, without consideration, such an
estimate of myself as is contradicted by your
own experience ! You would not therefore go
30 far astray in your judgment as to believe,
when you had written nothing by which I could
be offended, that 1 would nevertheless be so
foolish as to be capable of being offended by
such a reply.

Chap. ii. — 3. There can therefore be no doubt
that you were prepared to reply in such a way
as would offend me, if you had only indisputable
evidence that the letter was mine. Accordingly,
since I do not believe that you would think it
right to offend me unless you had just cause,
it remains for me to confess, as I now do, my
fault as having been the first to offend by writ-
ing that letter which I cannot deny to be mine.
Why should I strive to swim against the cur-
rent, and not rather ask pardon? I therefore
entreat you by the mercy of Christ to forgive
me wherein I have injured you, and not to ren-
der evil for evil by injuring me in return. For
it will be an injury to me if you pass over in
silence anything which you find wrong in either


word or action of mine. If, indeed, you rebuke
in me that which merits no rebuke, you do
wrong to yourself, not to me ; for far be it from
one of your life and holy vows to rebuke merely
from a desire to give offence, using the tongue
of malice to condemn in me that which by the
truth-revealing light of reason you know to de-
serve no blame. Therefore either rebuke kindly
him whom, though he is free from fault, you
think to merit rebuke ; or with a father's kind-
ness soothe him whom you cannot bring to agree
with you. For it is possible that your opinion
may be at variance with the truth, while notwith-
standing your actions are in harmony with Chris-
tian charity : for I also shall most thankfully
receive your rebuke as a most friendly action,
even though the thing censured be capable of
defence, and therefore ought not to have been
censured ; or else I shall acknowledge both your
kindness and my fault, and shall be found, so far
as the Lord enables me, grateful for the one, and
corrected in regard to the other.

4. Why, then, shall I fear your words, hard,
perhaps, like the boxing-gloves of F>ntellus, but
certainly fitted to do me good ? The blows of
Entellus were intended not to heal, but to harm,
and therefore his antagonist was conquered, not
cured. But I, if I receive your correction calmly
as a necessary medicine, shall not be pained by
it. If, however, through weakness, either com-
mon to human nature or peculiar to myself, I
cannot help feeling some pain from rebuke, even
when I am justly reproved, it is far better to
have a tumour in one's head cured, though the
lance cause pain, than to escape the pain by
letting the disease go on. This was clearly seen
by him who saitl that, for the most part, our
enemies who expose our faults are more useful
than friends who are afraid to reprove us. For
the former, in their angry recriminations, some-
times charge us with what we indeed require to
correct ; but the latter, through fear of destroy-
ing the sweetness of friendship, show less bold-
ness on behalf of right than they ought. Since,
therefore, you are, to quote your own compari-
son, an ox ' worn out, perhaps, as to your bodily
strength by reason of years, but unimpaired in i
mental vigour, and toiling still assiduously and
with profit in the Lord's threshing-floor ; here •
am I, and in whatever I have spoken amiss, |
tread firmly on me : the weight of your vener- ;
able age should not be grievous to me, if the .
chaff of my fault be so bruised under foot as to i
be separated from me.

5. Let me further say, that it is with the ut-:
most affectionate yearning that I read or recol-
lect the words at the end of your letter, " Would ,
that I could receive your embrace, and that by

* See p. 325.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


331


converse we


might


aid each other in learning."
For my part, I say, — Would that we were even
dwelling in parts of the earth less widely sepa-
rated ; so that if we could not meet for con-
verse, we might at least have a more frequent
exchange of letters. For as it is, so great is the
distance by which we are prevented from any
kind of access to each other through the eye and
ear, that I remember writing to your Holiness
regarding these words in the Epistle to the Gala-
tians when I was young ; and behold I am now
advanced in age, and have not yet received a
reply, and a copy of my letter has reached you
by some strange accident earlier than the letter
itself, about the transmission of which I took no
small pains. For the man to whom I entrusted
it neither delivered it to you nor returned it to
me. So great in my esteem is the value of those
of your writings which we have been able to pro-
cure, that I should prefer to all other studies the
privilege, if it were attainable by me, of sitting
by your side and learning from you. Since I
cannot do this myself, I propose to send to you
one of my sons in the Lord, that he may for my
benefit be instructed by you, in the event of
my receiving from you a favourable reply in regard
to the matter. For I have not now, and I can
never hope to have, such knowledge of the Di-
vine Scriptures as I see you possess. Whatever
abilities I may have for such study, I devote en-
tirely to the instruction of the people whom God
has entrusted to me ; and I am wholly precluded
by my ecclesiastical occupations from having
leisure for any further prosecution of my studies
than is necessary for my duty in public teaching.
Chap. hi. — 6. I am not acquainted with the
writings speaking injuriously of you, which you
tell me have come into Africa. I have, however,
received the reply to these which you have been
pleased to send. After reading it, let me say
frankly, I have been exceedingly grieved that
the mischief of such painful discord has arisen
between persons once so loving and intimate, and
formerly united by the bond of a friendship which
was well known in almost all the Churches. In
that treatise of yours, any one may see how you
are keeping yourself under restraint, and holding
back the stinging keenness of your indignation,
lest you should render railing for railing. If,
however, even in reading this reply of yours, I
fainted with grief and shuddered with fear, what
would be the effect produced in me by the things
which he has written against you, if they should
come into my possession ! " Woe unto the
world because of offences ! " '_ Behold the com-
plete fulfilment of which He who is Truth fore-
told : " Because iniquity shall abound, the love
of many shall wax cold. " ^ For what trusting

' Matt, xviii. 7.
* Matt. xxiv. 12.


hearts can now pour themselves forth with any
assurance of their confidence being reciprocated?
Into whose breast may confiding love now throw
itself without reserve? In short, where is the
friend who may not be feared as possibly a future
enemy, if the breach that we deplore could arise
between Jerome and Rufinus? Oh, sad and pit-
iable is our portion ! Who can rely upon the
affection of his friends because of what he knows
them to be now, when he has no foreknowledge
of what they shall afterwards become ? But why
should I reckon it cause for sorrow, that one man
is thus ignorant of what another may become,
when no man knows even what he himself is
afterwards to be? The utmost that he knows,
and that he knows but imperfectly, is his present
condition ; of what he shall hereafter become
he has no knowledge.

7. Do the holy and blessed angels possess not
only this knowledge of their actual character,
but also a foreknowledge of what they shall af-
terward become? If they do, I cannot see how
it was possible for Satan ever to have been happy,
even while he was still a good angel, knowing,
as in this case he must have known, his future
transgression and eternal punishment. I would
wish to hear what you think as to this question,
if indeed it be one which it would be profitable
for us to be able to answer. But mark here what
I suffer from the lands and seas which keep us,
so far as the body is concerned, distant from each
other. If I were myself the letter which you
are now reading, you might have told me already
what I have just asked ; but now, when will you
write me a reply? when will you get it sent away?
when will it come here ? when shall I receive it ?
And yet, would that I were sure that it would
come at last, though meanwhile I must summon
all the patience which I can command to endure
the unwelcome but unavoidable delay ! Where-
fore I come back to those most delightful words
of your letter, filled with your holy longing, and
I in turn appropriate them as my own : " Would
that I might receive your embrace, and that by
converse we might aid each other in learning,"
— if indeed there be any sense in which I could
possibly impart instruction to you.

8. When by these words, now mine not less
than yours, I am gladdened and refreshed, and
when I am comforted not a little by the fact
that in both of us a desire for mutual fellowship
exists, though meanwhile unsatisfied, it is not
long before I am pierced through by darts of
keenest sorrow when I consider Rufinus and
you, to whom God had granted in fullest meas-
ure and for a length of time that which both of
us have longed for, so that in most close and
endearing fellowship you feasted together on the
honey of the Holy Scriptures, and think how
between you the blight of such exceeding bitter-


;32


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


ness has found its way, constraining us to ask
when, where, and in whom the same calamity
may not be reasonably feared ; seeing that it has
befallen you at the very time when, unencum-
bered, having cast away secular burdens, you
were following the Lord and were living together
in that very land which was trodden by the feet
of our Lord, when He said, " Peace I leave with
you, My peace I give unto you ; " ' being, more-
over, men of mature age, whose life was devoted
to the study of the word of God. Truly " man's
life on earth is a period of trial." ^ If I could
anywhere meet you both together — which, alas,
I cannot hope to do — so strong are my agita-
tion, grief, and fear, that I think I would cast
myself at your feet, and there weeping till I
could weep no more, would, with all the elo-
quence of love, appeal first to each of you for
his own sake, then to both for each other's sake,
and for the sake of those, especially the weak,
" for whom Christ died," ^ whose salvation is in
peril, as they look on you who occupy a place so
conspicuous on the stage of time ; imploring
you not to write and scatter abroad these hard
words against each other, which, if at any time
you who are now at variance were reconciled,
you could not destroy, and which you could not
then venture to read lest strife should be kindled
anew.

9. But 1 say to your Charity, that nothing has
made me tremble more than your estrangement
from R.ufinus, when I read in your letter some
of the indications of your being displeased with
me. I refer not so much to what you say of
Entellus and of the wearied ox, in which you
appear to me to use genial pleasantry rather
than angry threat, but to that which you have
evidently written in earnest, of which I have
already spoken perhaps more than was fitting,
but not more than my fears compelled me to
do, — namely, the words, "lest perchance, being
offended, you should have reason to remonstrate
with me." If it be possible for us to examine
and discuss anything by which our hearts may
be nourished, without any bitterness of discord,
I entreat you let us address ourselves to this.
But if it is not possible for either of us to point
out what he may judge to demand correction in
the other's writings, without being suspected of
envy and regarded as wounding friendship, let
us, having regard to our spiritual life and health,
leave such conference alone. Let us content our-
selves with smaller attainments in that [knowl-
edge] which puffeth up, if we can thereby pre-
serve unharmed that [charity] which edifieth.-*
I feel that I come far short of that perfection of

' John xiv. 27.

2 Job vii. I, according to the LXX., and more correctly than in
E. V

3 I Cor. viii. 11.
^ I Cor. viii. i.


which it is written, " If any man offend not in
word, the same is a perfect man ; " 5 but through
God's mercy I truly believe myself able to ask
your forgiveness for that in which I have offended
you : and this you ought to make plain to me,
that through my hearing you, you may gain your
brother.'' Nor should you make it a reason for
leaving me in error, that the distance between
us on the earth's surface makes it impossible for
us to meet face to face. As concerns the sub-
jects into which we inquire, if I know, or believe,
or think that I have got hold of the truth in a
matter in which your opinion is different from
mine, I shall by all means endeavour, as the Lord
may enable me, to maintain my view without in-
juring you. And as to any offence which I may
give to you, so soon as I perceive your displeas-
ure, I shall unreservedly beg your forgiveness.

lo. I think, moreover, that your reason for
being displeased with me can only be, that I have
either said wliat I ought not, or have not ex-
pressed myself in the manner in which I ought :
for I do not wonder that we are less thoroughly
known to each other than we are to our most
close and intimate friends. Upon the love of
such friends I readily cast myself without reserva-
tion, especially when chafed and wearied by the
scandals of this world ; and in their love I rest
without any disturbing care : for I perceive that
God is there, on whom I confidingly cast myself,
and in whom I confidingly rest. Nor in this con-
fidence am I disturbed by any fear of that un-
certainty as to the morrow which must be present
when we lean upon human weakness, and which
I have in a former paragraph bewailed. For
when I perceive that a man is burning with Chris-
tian love, and feel that thereby he has been made
a faithful friend to me, whatever plans or thoughts
of mine I entrust to him I regard as entrusted
not to the man, but to Him in whom his charac-
ter makes it evident that he dwells : for " Ciod is
love, and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in
God, and God in him ; " ? and if he cease to
dwell in love, his forsaking it cannot but cause
as much pain as his abiding in it caused joy.
Nevertheless, in such a case, when one who was
an intimate friend has become an enemy, it is
better that he should search out what ingenuity
may help him to fabricate to our prejudice, than
that he should find what anger may pro\oke him
to reveal. This every one most easily secures,
not by concealing what he does, but by doing
nothing which he would wish to conceal. And ;
this the mercy of God grants to good and pious
men : they go out and in among their friends in
liberty and without fear, whatever these friends
may afterwards become : the sins which may


5 Jas iii. 2.

'' Slatt. xviii. i8

'' I John iv. i6.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


333


have been committed by others within their
knowledge they do not reveal, and they them-
selves a\oid doing what they would fear to see
revealed. For when any false charge is fabri-
cated by a slanderer, either it is disbelieved, or,
if it is believed, our reputation alone is injured,
our spiritual wellbeing is not affected. But when
any sinful action is committed, that action be-
comes a secret enemy, even though it be not
revealed by the thoughtless or malicious talk of
one acquainted with our secrets. Wherefore any
person of discernment may see in your own
example how, by the comfort of a good con-
science, you bear what would otherwise be insup-
portable — the incredible enmity of one who was
formerly your most intimate and beloved friend ;
and how even what he utters against you, even
what may to your disadvantage be believed by
some, vou turn to good account as the armour
of righteousness on the left hand, which is not
less useful than armour on the right hand ' in
our warfare with the devil. But truly I would
rather see him less bitter in his accusations, than
see you thus more fully armed by them. This
is a great and a lamentable wonder, that you
should have passed from such amity to such
enmity : it would be a joyful and a much greater
event, should you come back from such enmity
to the friendship of former days.


LETTER LXXIV.

(a.d. 404.)

to mv lord pr.bsidius, isiost blessed, my brother
and partner ln the priestly office, truly
esteemed, augustin sends greeting in the

LORD.

I. I write to remind you of the request which
I made to you as a sincere friend when you were
here, that you would not refuse to send a letter
of mine to our holy brother and fellow- presbyter
Jerome ; in order, moreover, to let your Charity
know in what terms you ought to write to him
on my behalf. I have sent a copy of my letter
to him. and of his to me, by reading which your
pious wisdom may easily see both .the moderation
of tone which I have been careful to preserve,
and the vehemence on his part by which I have
been not unreasonably filled with fear. If, how-
ever, I have written anything which I ought not
to have written, or have expressed myself in an
unbecoming way, let it not be to him, but to my-
self, in brotherly love, that you send your opinion
of what I have done, in order that, if I am con-
vinced of my fault by your rebuke, I may ask
his forgiveness.


2 Cor


VI. 7.


LETTER LXXV.

(a.d. 404.)

Jerome's answer to Letters XXVIII., XL., and LXXL

TO AUGUSTIN, MY LORD TRULY HOLY, AND MOST
BLESSED FATHER, JEROME SENDS GREETING IN
CHRIST.

Chap. i. — i. I have received by Cyprian,
deacon, three letters, or rather three little books,
at the same time, from your Excellency, contain-
ing what you call sundry questions, but what
I feel to be animadversions on opinions which I
have published, to answer which, if I were dis-
posed to do it, would require a pretty large
volume. Nevertheless I shall attempt to reply
without exceeding the limits of a moderately
long letter, and without causing delay to our
brother, now in haste to depart, who only three
days before the time fixed for his journey asked
earnestly for a letter to take with him, in conse-
quence of which I am compelled to pour out
these sentences, such as they are, almost without
premeditation, answering you in a rambling effu-
sion, prepared not in the leisure of deliberate
composition, but in the hurry of extemporaneous
dictation, which usually produces a discourse
that is more the offspring of chance than the
parent of instruction ; just as unexpected attacks
throw into confusion even the bravest soldiers,
and they are compelled to take to flight before
they can gird on their armour.

2. But our armour is Christ ; it is that which
the Apostle Paul prescribes when, writing to the
Ephesians, he says, " Take unto you the whole
armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand
in the evil day ; " and again, " Stand, therefore,
having your loins girt about with truth, and hav-
ing on the breastplate of righteousness ; and
your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel
of peace ; above all, taking the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked : and take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is
the word of God." ^ Armed with these weapons.
King David went forth in his day to battle ; and
taking from the torrent's bed five smooth rounded
stones, he proved that, even amidst all the eddy-
ing currents of the world, his feelings were free
both from roughness and from defilement ; drink-
ing of the brook by the way, and therefore lifted
up in spirit, he cut off the head of Goliath, using
the proud enemy's own sword as the fittest in-
strument of death,' smiting the profane boaster
on the forehead and wounding him in the same
place in which Uzziah was smitten with leprosy
when he presumed to usurp the priestly office ; ■♦

2 Eph. vi. 13-17

3 1 Sam. xvjl. 40-51.
* 2 Chron. xvi. 19.


oj4


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


the same also in which shines the glory that makes
the saints rejoice in the Lord, saying, " The light
of Thy countenance is sealed upon us, O Lord." '
Let us therefore also say, " My heart is fixed, O
God, my heart is fixed : I will sing and give
praise : awake up, my glory ; awake, psaltery
and harp ; I myself will awake early ; " ^ that in
us may be fulfilled that word, " Open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it ; " 3 and, " The Lord shall
.rrive the word with great power to them that pub-
lish it." •♦ I am well assured that your prayer as
well as mine is, that in our contendings the vic-
tory may remain with the truth. For you seek
Christ's glory, not your own : if you are victo-
rious, I also gain a victory if I discover my error.
On the other hand, if I win the day, the gain is
yours ; for " the children ought not to lay up for
the parents, but the parents for the children." 5
We read, moreover, in Chronicles, that the chil-
dren of Israel went to battle with their minds
set upon peace,^ seeking even amid swords and
bloodshed and the prostrate slain a victory not
for themselves, but for peace. Let me therefore,
if it be the will of Christ, give an answer to all
that you have written, and attempt in a short
dissertation to solve your numerous questions.
I pass by the conciliatory phrases in your cour-
teous salutation : I say nothing of the compli-
ments by which you attempt to take the edge
off your censure : let me come at once to the
matters in debate.

Chap. ii. — 3. You say that you received from
some brother a book of mine, in which I have
given a list of ecclesiastical writers, both Greek
and Latin, but which had no title ; and that
when you asked the brother aforesaid (I quote
your own statement) why the title-page had no
inscription, or what was the name by which the
book was known, he answered that it was called
" Epitaphium," i.e. " Obituary Notices : " upon
which you display your reasoning powers, by
remarking that the name Epitaphium would
have been properly given to the book if the
reader had found in it an account of the lives
and writings of deceased authors, but that inas-
much as mention is made of the works of many
who were living when the book was written, and
are at this day still living, you wonder why I
should have given the book a title so inappro-
priate. I think that it must be obvious to your
own common sense, that you might have dis-
covered the title of that book from its contents,
without any other help. For you have read
both Greek and Latin biographies of eminent
men, and you know that they do not give to


- Ps. iv. 7, according to the LXX.

2 Ps. Ivii 7, 8.

3 Ps Ixxxi. 10

^ Ps. Ixviii II, in LXX. version.

- 2 Cor xn. 14

*> 1 Chron. xii. 17, 18.


works of this kind the title Epitaphium, but
simply " Illustrious Men," e.g. " Illustrious Gen-
erals," or " philosophers, orators, historians,
poets," etc., as the case may be. An Epitaph-
ium is a work written concerning the dead ;
such as I remember having composed long ago
after the decease of the presbyter Nepotianus,
of blessed memory. The book, therefore, of
which you speak ought to be entitled, " Con-
cerning Illustrious Men," or properly, " Concern-
ing Ecclesiastical Writers," although it is said
that by many who were not qualified to make
any correction of the title, it has been called
" Concerning Authors."

Chap. hi. — 4. You ask, in the second place,
my reason for saying, in my commentary on the
Epistle to the Galatians, that Paul could not
have rebuked Peter for that which he himself
had done, 7 and could not have censured in an-
other the dissimulation of which he was himself
confessedly guilty ; and you aftirm that that re-
buke of the apostle was not a manoeuvre of pious
policy,^ but real ; and you say that I ought not
to teach falsehood, but that all things in Scripture
are to be received literally as they stand.

To this I answer, in the first place, that your
wisdom ought to have suggested the remem-
brance of the short preface to my commentaries,
saying of my own person, "What then? Am I
so foolish and bold as to promise that which he
could not accomplish ? By no means ; but I
have rather, as it seems to me, with more reserve
and hesitation, because feeling the deficiency of
my strength, followed the commentaries of Ori-
gen in this matter. For that illustrious man
wrote five volumes on the Epistle of Paul to the
Galatians, and has occupied the tenth volume
of his Stromata with a short treatise upon his
explanation of the epistle. He also composed
several treatises and fragmentary pieces upon it,
which, if they even had stood alone, would have
sufficed. I pass over my revered instructor
Didymus'' (blind, it is true, but quick-sighted
in the discernment of spiritual things), and the
bishop of Laodicea,'° who has recently left the
Church, and the early heretic Alexander, as well
as Eusebius of Emesa and Theodorus of Hera-
clea, who have .also left some brief disquisitions
upon this subject. From these works if I were
to extract even a few passages, a work which
could not be altogether despised would be pro-
duced. Let me therefore frankly say that I have

7 Gal. ii. 14.

^ Dispcnsntoria.

9 " Videntem meum Didymum," — Didymus of Alexandria, who,
at the time when Jerome wrote his book on ecclesiastical writers
(a.d. 392), was above ninety-three years of age. He became blind
when he was five years old, but by perseverance attained extraordi-
nary learning, and was much esteemed.

■° The younger Apollinarius, who in 380 was excommunicated for
error regarding the Incarnation. His works were valuable, but have
been almost all lost, being not transcribed because of his lapsing into
heresy.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


335


read all these ; and storing up in my mind very
many things which they contain, I have dictated
to my amanuensis sometimes what was borrowed
from other writers, sometimes what was my own,
without distincdy remembering the method, or
the words, or the opinions which belonged to
each. I look now to the Lord in His mercy
to grant that my want of skill and experience may
not cause the things whicli others have well
spoken to be lost, or to fail of finding among
foreign readers the acceptance with which they
have met in the language in which tliey were
first written. If, therefore, anything in my ex-
planation has seemed to you to demand correc-
tion, it would have been seemly for one of your
learning to inquire first whether what I had writ-
ten was found in the Greek writers to whom I
have referred ; and if they had not advanced
the opinion which you censured, you could then
with propriety condemn me for wliat I gave as
my own view, especially seeing that I have in
the preface openly acknowledged that I had
followed the commentaries of Origen, and had
dictated sometimes the view of others, some-
times my own, and have written at the end of
the chapter with which you find fault : " If any
one be dissatisfied with the interpretation here
given, by which it is shown that neither did
Peter sin, nor did Paul rebuke presumptuously
a greater than himself, he is bound to show
how Paul could consistently blame in another
what he himself did." By which I have made
it manifest that I did not adopt finally and
irrevocably that which I had read in these
Greek authors, but had propounded what I
had read, leaving to the reader's own judgment
whether it should be rejected or approved.

5. You, however, in order to avoid doing what
I had asked, have devised a new argument
against the view proposed ; maintaining that
the Gentiles who had believed in Christ were
free from the burden of the ceremonial law,
but that the Jewish converts were under the law,
and that Paul, as the teacher of the Gentiles,
rightly rebuked those who kept the law ; where-
as Peter, who was the chief of the " circum-
cision," ' was justly rebuked for commanding
the Gentile converts to do that which the con-
verts from among the Jews were alone under
obligation to observe. If this is your opinion,
or rather since it is your opinion, that all from
among the Jews who believe are debtors to do
the whole law, you ought, as being a bishop of
great fame in the whole world, to publish your
doctrine, and labour to persuade all other bishops
to agree with you. As for me in my humble
cell,^ along with the monks my fellow-sinners, I
do not presume to dogmatize in regard to things

' Gal ii. 8.

* Parvo tuguriuttculo.


of great moment ; I only confess frankly that I
read the writings of the Fathers,^ and, complying
with universal usage, put down in my commen-
taries a variety of explanations, that each may
adopt from the number given the one which
pleases him. This method, I think, you have
found in your reading, and have approved in
connection with both secular literature and the
Divine Scriptures.

6. Moreover, as to this explanation which
Origen first advanced,-* and which all the other
commentators after him have adopted, they bring
forward, chiefly for the purpose of answering,
the blasphemies of Porphyry, who accuses Paul
of presumption because he dared to reprove
Peter and rebuke him to his face, and by rea-
soning convict him of having done wrong ; that
is to say, of being in the very fault which he
himself, who blamed another for transgressing,
had committed. What shall I say also of John,
who has long governed the Church of Constan-
tinople, and holding pontifical rank,5 who has
composed a very large book upon this paragraph,
and has followed the opinion of Origen and of
the old expositors? If, therefore, you censure
me as in the wrong, suffer me, I pray you, to be
mistaken in company with such men ; and when
you perceive that I have so many companions
in my error, you will require to produce at least
one partisan in defence of your truth. So much
on the interpretation of one paragraph of the
Epistle to the Galatians.

7. Lest, however, I should seem to rest my
answer to your reasoning wholly on the number
of witnesses who are on my side, and to use the
names of illustrious men as a means of escaping
from the truth, not daring to meet you in argu-
ment, I shall briefly bring forward some examples
from the Scriptures.

In the Acts of the Apostles, a voice was heard
by Peter, saying unto him, " Rise, Peter, slay and
eat," when all manner of four-footed beasts, and
creeping things, and birds of the air, were pre-
sented before him ; by which saying it is proved
that no man is by nature [ceremonially] unclean,
but that all men are equally welcome to the gos-
pel of Christ. To which Peter answered, '' Not
so. Lord ; for I have never eaten anything that
is common or unclean." And the voice spake
unto him again the second time, "What God
hath cleansed, that call not thou common."
Therefore he went to Cssarea, and having en-
tered the house of Cornelius, " he opened his
mouth and said. Of a truth I perceive that God
is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he
that feareth Him and worketh righteousness is

3 Majorunt.

4 In the tenth book of his Stromata, where he expounds the
Epistle to the Galatians.

5 This year (404) was the year of John Chrysostom's banishment
from Constantinople, after being pontiff there for ten years.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


accepted with Him." Thereafter " the -Holy
Ghost fell on all them which heard the word ;
and they of the circumcision which believed were
astonished, as many as came with Peter, because \
that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift
of the Holy Ghost. Then answered Peter, Can
any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost
as well as we ? And he commanded them to be
baptized in the name of the Lord." ' "And the !
apostles and brethren that were in Judea heard ,
that the Gentiles had also received the word of
God. And when Peter was come up to Jerusa-
lem, they that were of the circumcision con-
tended with him, saying. Thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them." To
whom he gave a full explanation of the reasons i
of his conduct, and concluded with these words : j
" Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift !
as He did unto us who believed on the Lord
Jesus Christ, what was I, that I could withstand
God ? When they heard these things, they held
their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath
God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto '
life. "2 Again, when, long after this, Paul and;
Barnabas had come to Antioch, and " having '
gathered the Church together, rehearsed all that
God had done with them, and how He had j
opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles, cer- 1
tain men which came down from Judea taught ,
the brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised i
after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved, j
When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small
dissension and disputation with them, they de- i
termined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain
other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto ,
the apostles and elders about this question. And j
when they were come to Jerusalem, there rose
up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which be- ;
lieved, saying that it was needful to circumcise
them, and to command them to keep the law of
Moses." And when there had been much dis- j
puting, Peter rose up, with his wonted readiness,
" and said, Men and brethren, ye know how that
a good while ago God made choice among us,
that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the
word of the gospel, and believe. And God,
which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness,
giving them the Holy Ghost, even as He did unto
us ; and put no difference between us and them,
purifying their hearts by faith. Now therefore
why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck
of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we
were able to bear? But we believe that, through
the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be
saved, even as they. Then all the multitude
kept silence ; " and to his opinion the Apostle


James, and all the elders together, gave con-
sent.3

8. These quotations should not be tedious to
the reader, but useful both to him and to me, as
proving that, even before the Apostle Paul, Peter
had come to know that the law was not to be in
force after the gospel was given ; nay more, that
Peter was the prime mover in issuing the decree
by which this was affirmed. Moreover, Peter
was of so great authority, that Paul has recorded
in his epistle : " Then, after three years, I went
up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with
him fifteen days."^ In the following context,
again, he adds : " Then, fourteen years after, I
went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and
took Titus with me also. And I went up by
revelation, and communicated unto them that
gospel which I preach among the Gentiles;"
proving that he had not had confidence in his
preaching of the gospel if he had not been con-
firmed by the consent of Peter and those who were
with him. The next words are, "but privately to
them that were of reputation, lest by any means
I should run, or had run, in vain." Why did he
this privately rather than in public ? Lest offence
should be given to the faith of those who from
among the Jews had believed, since they thought
that the law was still in force, and that they ought
to join observance of the law with faith in the
Lord as their Saviour. Therefore also, when a*t
that time Peter had come to Antioch (although
the Acts of the Apostles do not mention this, but
we must believe Paul's statement), Paul affirms
that he " withstood him to the face, because he
was to be blamed. For, before that certain
came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles :
but when they were come, he withdrew, and sep-
arated himself, fearing them which were of the
circumcision. And the other Jews dissembled
likewise with him ; insomuch that Barnabas also
was carried away with their dissimulation. But
when I saw," he says, "that they walked not up-
rightly, according to the truth of the gospel, I
said unto Peter before them all. If thou, being a
Jew, livest after the manner of Gentiles, and not
as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gen-
tiles to live as do the Jews? " s etc. No one can
doubt, therefore, that the Apostle Peter was him-
self the author of that rule with deviation from
which he is charged. The cause of that devia-
tion, moreover, is seen to be fear of the Jews.
For the Scripture says, that " at first he did eat
with the Gentiles, but that when certain had
come from James he withdrew, and separated
himself, fearing them which were of the circum-
cision." Now he feared the Jews, to whom he
had been appointed apostle, lest by occasion of


' Acts X. 13-48.
' Acts xi. :-i8.


3 Acts xiv. 27, and xv. 1-12.

1 Gal. i. 18.

^ Gal. ii. I, 2, 14,


4

i


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


337


the Gentiles they should go back from the faith
in Christ ; imitating the Good Shepherd in his
concern lest he should lose the flock committed
to him.

9. As I have shown, therefore, that Peter was
thoroughly aware of the abrogation of the law
of Moses, but was compelled by fear to pretend
to observe it, let us novv see whether Paul, who
accuses another, ever did anything of the same
kind himself. We read in the same book :
" Paul passed through Syria and Cilicia, confirm-
ing the churches. Then came he to Derbe and
Lystra : and, behold, a certain disciple was there,
named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman
which was a Jewess, and believed ; but his father
was a Greek : which was vvell reported of by
the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium.
Him would Paul have to go forth with him ; and
he took and circumcised him, because of the
Jews which were in those quarters : for they

■knew all that his father was a Greek."' O
blessed Apostle Paul, who hadst rebuked Peter
for dissimulation, because he withdrew himself
from the Gentiles through fear of the Jews who
came from James, why art thou, notwithstand-
ing thine own doctrine, compelled to circumcise
Timothy, the son of a Gentile, nay more, a Gen-
tile himself (for he was not a Jew, having not
been circumcised) ? Thou wilt answer, " Be-
cause of the Jews which are in these quarters?"
If, then, thou forgiveth thyself the circumcision
of a disciple coming from the Gentiles, forgive
Peter also, who has precedence above thee, his
doing some things of the same kind through
fear of the believing Jews. Again, it is written :
" Paul after this tarried there yet a good while,
and then took his leave of the brethren, and
sailed thence into Syria, and with him Priscilla
and Aquila ; having shorn his head in Cenchrea,
[for he had a vow."^ Be it granted that he was
compelled through fear of the Jews in the other
case to do what he was unwilling to do ; where-
Ifore did he let his hair grow in accordance with
la vow of his own making, and afterwards, when
[in Cenchrea, shave his head according to the
llaw, as the Nazarites, who had given themselves
jby vow to God, were wont to do, according to
Ithe law of Moses?

10. But these things are small when compared
i^ith what follows. The sacred historian Luke

further relates : " And when we were come to
jjerusalem, the brethren received us gladly ; "
ind the day following, James, and all the elders
i'ho were with him, having expressed their ap-
irobation of his gospel, said to Paul : " Thou
|ieest, brother, how many thousands of Jews
lere are which believe ; and they are all zealous


' Acts XV. ^i, xvi. 1-3.
* Acts xviii. 18.


of the law : and they are informed of thee, that
thou teachest all the Jews which are among the
Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying that they ought
not to circumcise their children, neither to walk
after the customs. What is it therefore ? The
multitude must needs come together : for they
will hear that thou art come. Do therefore this
that we say to thee : We have four men which
have a vow on them ; them take, and purify thy-
self with them, and be at charges with them,
that they may shave their heads : and all may
know that those things, whereof they were in-
formed concerning thee, are nothing ; but that
thou thyself also walkest orderly, and keepest the
law. Then Paul took the men, and the next day
purifying himself with them, entered into the tem-
ple, to signify the accomplishment of the days
of purification, until an offering should be offered
for every one of them." ^ O Paul, here again let
me question thee : Why didst thou shave thy
head, why didst thou walk barefoot according to
Jewish ceremonial law, why didst thou offer sacri-
fices, why were victims slain for thee according
to the law? Thou wilt answer, doubtless, "To
avoid giving offence to those of the Jews who
had believed." To gain the Jews, thou didst
pretend to be a Jew ; and James and all the
other elders taught thee this dissimulation. But
thou didst not succeed in escaping, after all..
For when thou wast on the point of being killed!
in a tumult which had arisen, thou wast rescued
by the chief captain of the band, and was sent b5r
him to Ci^sarea, guarded by a careful escort of
soldiers, lest the Jews should kill thee as a dis-
sembler, and a destroyer of the law ; and fromi
Caesarea coming to Rome, thou didst, in thine-
own hired house, preach Christ to both Jews and.
Gentiles, and thy testimony was sealed under
Nero's sword.-*

II. We have learned, therefore, that through
fear of the Jews both Peter and Paul alike pre-
tended that they observed the precepts of the
law. How could Paul have the assurance and
effrontery to reprove in another what he had
done himself? I at least, or, I should rather say,
others before me, have given such explanatioa
of the matter as they deemed best, not defend-
ing the use of falsehood in the interest of re-
ligion,5 as you charge them with doing, but
teaching the honourable exercise of a wise dis-
cretion ; ^ seeking both to show the \visdom of
the apostles, and to restrain the shameless blas-
phemies of Porphyry, who says that Peter and
Paul quarrelled with each other in childish ri-
valry, and affirms that Paul had been inflamed
with envy on account of the excellences of Peter,


3 Acts xxi. 17-26.

* Acts xxiii. 23, xxviii. 14, 30.

5 PJficiosuin iiieiuiaciuiii.

6 Honesiam Jispensatiorietn.


V


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


and had written boastfully of things which he
either had not done, or, if he did them, had
done with inexcusable presumption, reproving
in another that which he himself had done. |
They, in answering him, gave the best interpre- '
tation of the passage which they could find ;
what interpretation have you to propound ? j
Surely you must intend to say something better
than they have said, since you have rejected
the opinion of the ancient commentators.

Chap. iv. — 12. You say in your letter : ' "You
do not recjuire me to teach you in what sense
the apostle says, ' To the Jews I became as a
Jew, that I might gain the Jews ; ' ^ and other
such things in the same passage, which are to
be ascribed to the compassion of pitying love,
not to the artifices of intentional deceit. For he
that ministers to the sick becomes as if he were
sick himself, not indeed falsely pretending to be
under the fever, but considering with the mind
of one truly sympathizing what he would wish
done for himself if he were in the sick man's
place. Paul was indeed a Jew ; and when he
had become a Christian, he had not abandoned
those Jewish sacraments which that people had
received in the right way, and for a certain
appointed time. Therefore, even when he was
an apostle of Christ, he took part in observing
these, but with this view, that he might show
that they were in no wise hurtful to those who,
even after they had believed in Christ, desired
to retain the ceremonies which by the law they
had learned from their fathers ; provided only
that they did not build on these their hope of
salvation, since the salvation which was fore-
shadowed in these has now been brought in by
the Lord Jesus." The sum of your whole argu-
ment, which you have expanded into a most
prolix dissertation, is this, that Peter did not
err in supposing that the law was binding on
those who from among the Jews had believed,
but departed from the right course in this, that
he compelled the Gentile converts to conform
to Jewish observances. Now, if he compelled
them, it was not by use of authority as a teacher,
but by the example of his own practice. And
Paul, according to your view, did not protest
against what Peter had done personally, but
asked wherefore Peter would compel those who
were from among the Gentiles to conform to
Jewish observances.

13. The matter in debate, therefore, or I
should rather say your opinion regarding it, is
summed up in this : that since the preaching of
the gospel of Christ, the believing Jews do well
in observing the precepts of the law, i.e. in offer-
ing sacrifices as Paul did, in circumcising their
children, as Paul did in the case of Timothy, and

' Letter XL. 4, p. 273.
* I Cor. ix. 20,


keeping the Jewish Sabbath, as all the Jews have
been accustomed to do. If this be true, we fall
into the heresy of Cerinthus and Ebion, who,
though believing in Christ, were anathematized
by the fathers for this one error, that they mixed
up the ceremonies of the law with the gospel of
Christ, and professed their faith in that which
was new, without letting go what was old. Why
do I speak of the Ebionites, who make preten-
sions to the name of Christian? Li our own
day there exists a sect among the Jews through-
out all the synagogues of the East, which is
called the sect of the Minei, and is even now
condemned by the Pharisees. The adherents to
this sect are known commonly as Nazarenes ;
they believe in Christ the Son of God, bora of
the Virgin Mary ; and they say that He who suf-
fered under Pontius Pilate and rose again, is the
same as the one in whom we believe. But while
they desire to be both Jews and Christians, they
are neither the one nor the other. I therefore
beseech you, who think that you are called upon
to Ileal my slight wound, which is no more, so to
speak, than a prick or scratch from a needle,
to devote your skill in the healing art to this
grievous wound, which has been opened by a
spear driven home with the impetus of a javelin.
For there is surely no proportion between the
culpability of him who exhibits the various opin-
ions held by the fathers in a commentary on
Scripture, and the guilt of him who reintroduces
within the Church a most pestilential heresy.
If, however, there is for us no alternative but to
receive the Jews into the Church, along with the
usages prescribed by their law ; if, in short, it
shall be declared lawful for them to continue in
the Churches of Christ what they have been
accustomed to practise in the synagogues of
Satan, I will tell you my opinion of the matter :
they will not become Christians, but they will
make us Jews.

14. For what Christian will submit to hear
what is said in your letter? " Paul was indeed
a Jew ; and when he had become a Christian,
he had not abandoned those Jewish sacraments
which that people had received in the right way,
and for a certain appointed time. Therefore, |
even when he was an apostle of Christ, he took \
part in observing these ; but with this view, that
he might show that they were in no wise hurtful
to those who, even after they had believed in
Christ, desired to retain the ceremonies which
by the law they had learned from their fathers."
Now I implore you to hear patiently my com-
plaint. Paul, even when he was an apostle of
Christ, observed Jewish ceremonies ; and you
affirm that they are in no wise hurtful to those
who wish to retain them as they had received ,
them from their fathers by the law. I, on the
contrary, shall maintain, and, though the world


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


339


were to protest against my view, I may boldly
declare that the Jewish ceremonies are to Chris-
tians both hurtful and fatal ; and that whoever
obser\'es them, whether he be Jew or Gentile
originally, is cast into the pit of perdition.
" For Christ is the end of the law for righteous-
ness to every one that believeth," ' that is, to
both Jew and Gentile ; for if the Jew be ex-
cepted, He is not the end of the law for right-
eousness to every one that believeth. More-
over, we read in the Gospel, " The law and the
prophets were until John the Baptist."^ Also, in
another place : " Therefore the Jews sought the
more to kill Him, because He had not only
broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was
His Father, making Himself equal with God." ^
Again : " Of His fulness have all we received,
and grace for grace ; for the law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ." •♦ Instead of the grace of the law which
has passed away, we have received the grace of
the gospel which is abiding ; and instead of the
shadows and types of the old dispensation, the
truth has come by Jesus Christ. Jeremiah also
prophesied thus in God's name : " Behold, the
days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a
new covenant with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Judah ; not according to the cove-
nant which I made with their fathers, in the day
that I took them by the hand, to bring them
out of the land of Egypt." s Observe what the
prophet says, not to Gentiles, who had not been
partakers in any former covenant, but to the
Jewish nation. He who has given them the law
by Moses, promises in place of it the new cove-
nant of the gospel, that they might no longer
live in the oldness of the letter, but in the new-
ness of the spirit. Paul himself, moreover, in
connection with whom the discussion of this
question has arisen, delivers such sentiments as
these frequently, of which I subjoin only a few,
as I desire to be brief : " Behold, I Paul say
unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing." Again : " Christ is become
of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are jus-
tified by the law ; ye are fallen from grace."
Again : " If ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not
under the law." ^ From which it is evident that
he has not the Holy Spirit who submits to the
ilaw, not, as our fathers affirmed the apostles to
I have done, feignedly, under the promptings of
a wise discretion,^ but, as you suppose to have
been the case, sincerely. As to the quality of
these legal precepts, let us learn from God's own
teaching : " I gave them," He says, " statutes

\ ' Rom. X. 4.

° Matt. xi. 13 and Luke xvi. 16.
, 3 John V. 18.

* John i. 16, 17.

' Jer. xxxi. 31, 32.
. <" Gal. V. 2, 4, 18.

' Dispensathie ,


that were not good, and judgments whereby they
should not live."* I say these things, not that
I may, like Manichseus and Marcion, destroy the
law, which I know on the testimony of the apos-
tle to be both holy and spiritual ; but because
when " faith came," and the fulness of times,
" God sent forth His Son, made of a woman,
made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law, that we might receive the adop-
tion of sons," 9 and might hve no longer under
the law as our schoolmaster, but under the Heir,
who has now attained to full age, and is Lord.

15. It is further said in your letter: "The
thing, therefore, which he rebuked in Peter was
not his observing the customs handed down
from his fathers, which Peter, if he wished, might
do without being chargeable with deceit or in-
consistency." '° Again I say : Since you are a
bishop, a teacher in the Churches of Christ, if
you would prove what you assert, receive any
Jew who, after having become a Christian, cir-
cumcises any son that may be born to him, ob-
serves the Jewish Sabbath, abstains from meats
which God has created to be used with thanks-
giving, and on the evening of the fourteenth
day of the first month slays a paschal lamb ;
and when you have done this, or rather, have
refused to do it (for I know that you are a Chris-
tian, and will not be guilty of a profane action),
you will be constrained, whether willingly or un-
willingly, to renounce your opinion ; and then
you will know that it is a more difficult work to
reject the opinion of others than to establish
your own. Moreover, lest perhaps we should
not believe your statement, or, I should rather
say, understand it (for it is often the case that a
discourse unduly extended is not intelligible, and
is less censured by the unskilled in discussion
because its weakness is not so easily perceived),
you inculcate your opinion by reiterating the
statement in these words : " Paul had forsaken
everything peculiar to the Jews that was evil,
especially this, that ' being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and going about to establish their
own righteousness, they had not submitted them-
selves to the righteousness of God.' " In this,
moreover, he differed from them, that after the
passion and resurrection of Christ, in whom had
been given and made manifest the mystery of
grace, according to the order of Melchizedek,
they still considered it binding on them to cele-
brate, not out of mere reverence for old customs,
but as necessary to salvation, the sacraments of
the old dispensation ; which were indeed at one
time necessary, else had it been unprofitable and
vain for the Maccabees to suffer martyrdom as


8 Ezek. XX. 25.

9 Gal. iv. 4.

'° Letter XL. sec. 5, p. 273.
" Rom. X. 3.


340


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


they did for their adherence to them.' Lastly,
in this also Paul tliffered from the Jews, that they
persecuted the Christian preachers of grace as
enemies of the law. These, and all similar
errors and sins, he declares that he counted but
loss and dung, that he might win Christ." ^

1 6. We have learned from you what evil
things peculiar to the Jews Paul had abandoned ;
let us now learn from your teaching what good
things which were Jewish he retained. You will
reply : " The ceremonial observances in which
they continued to follow the practice of their
fathers, in the way in which these were complied
with by Paul himself, without believing them to
be at all necessary to salvation." I do not fully
understand what you mean by the words, " with-
out believing them to be at all necessary to salva-
tion." For if they do not contribute to salvation,
why are they observed? And if they must be
observed, they by all means contribute to salva-
tion ; especially seeing that, because of observ-
ing them, some have been made martyrs : for
they would not be observed unless they con-
tributed to salvation. For they are not things
indifferent — neither good nor bad, as philoso-
phers say. Self-control is good, self-indulgence
is bad : between these, and indifferent, as hav-
ing no moral quality, are such things as walking,
blowing one's nose, expectorating phlegm, etc.
Such an action is neither good nor bad ; for
whether you do it or leave it undone, it does not
affect your standing as righteous or unrighteous.
But the observance of legal ceremonies is not a
thing indifferent ; it is either good or bad. You
say it is good. I affirm it to be bad, and bad
not only when done by Gentile converts, but
also when done by Jews who have believed. In
this passage you fall, if I am not mistaken, into
one error while avoiding another. For while
you guard yourself against the blasphemies of
Porphyry, you become entangled in the snares
of Ebion ; pronouncing that the law is binding
on those who from among the Jews have believed.
Perceiving, again, that what you have said is a
dangerous doctrine, you attempt to qualify it by
words which are only superfluous : viz., " The
law must be observed not from any belief, such
as prompted the Jews to keep it, that this is
necessary to salvation, and not in any misleading
dissimulation such as Paul reproved in Peter."

17. Peter therefore pretended to keep the
law ; but this censor of Peter boldly observed
the things prescribed by the law. The next
words of your letter are these : " For if Paul
observed these sacraments in order, by pretend-
ing to be a Jew, to gain the Jews, why did he
not also take part with the Gentiles in heathen
sacrifices, when to them that were without law

' 2 Mace. vii. i.

2 Phil. iii. 8. Letter XL. sec. 6, p. 274.


he became as without law, that he might gain
them also? The explanation is found in this,
that he took part in the Jewish rites as being
himself a Jew ; and that when he said all this
which I have quoted, he meant not that he pre-
tended to be what he was not, but that he felt
with true compassion that he must bring such
help t6 them as would be needful for himself if
he were involved in their error.^ Herein he ex-
ercised not the subtlety of a deceiver, but the
sympathy of a compassionate deliverer." A
triumphant vindication of Paul ! You prove
that he did not pretend to share the error of the
Jews, but was actually involved in it ; and that
he refused to imitate Peter in a course of de-
ception, dissembling through fear of the Jews
what he really was, but without reserve freely
avowed himself to be a Jew. Oh, unheard-of
compassion of the aposde ! In seeking to make
the Jews Christians, he himself became a Jew !
For he could not have persuaded the luxurious j
to become temperate if he had not himself be-
come luxurious like them ; and could not have
brought help, in his compassion, as you say, to
the wretched, otherwise than by experiencing in
his own person their wretchedness ! Truly
wretched, and worthy of most compassionate
lamentation, are those who, carried away by
vehemence of disputadon, and by love for the
law which has been abolished, have made Christ's
apostle to be a Jew. Nor is there, after all, a
great difference between my opinion and yours :
for I say that both Peter and Paul, through fear
of the believing Jews, practised, or rather pre-
tended to practise, the precepts of the Jewish
law ; whereas you maintain that they did this
out of pity, "not with the subtlety of a de-
ceiver, but with the sympathy of a compassion-
ate deliverer." But by both this is equally
admitted, that (whether from fear or from pity)
they pretended to be what they were not. As
to, your argument against our view, that he oughl
to have become to the Gentiles a Gentile, if t\
the Jews he became a Jew, this favours ou'
opinion rather than yours : for as he did not
actually become a Jew, so he did not actually
become a heathen ; and as he did not actuallyjj,
become a heathen, so he did not actually be-:W
come a Jew. His conformity to the Gentiles
consisted in this, that he received as Christians
the uncircumcised who believed in Christ, and
left them free to use without scruple meats whic
the Jewish law prohibited ; but not, as you sup
pose, in taking part in their worship of idols|j
For " in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avaik
eth anything, nor uncircumcision, but the keep|
ing of the commandments of God." •*

18. I ask you, therefore, and with all urgenc;

3 Letter XL. 6, p. 274.
* Gal. V. 6 and vi. 15.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


341


press the request, that you forgive me this humble
attempt at a discussion of the matter ; and
wherein I have transgressed, lay the blame upon
yourself who compelled me to write in rej^ly, j
and who made me out to be as blind as Ste- 1
sichorus. And do not bring the reproach of
teaching the practice of lying upon me who am
a follower of Christ, who said, " I am the Way,
the Truth, and the Life." ' It is impossible for
me, who am a worshipper of the Truth, to bow
under the yoke of falsehood. Moreover, refrain
from stirring up against me the unlearned crowd
who esteem you as their bishop, and regard with
the respect due the priestly office the orations
which you deliver in the church, but who esteem
lightly an old decrepit man like me, courting
the retirement of a monastery far from the busy
haunts of men ; and seek others who may be
more fitly instructed or corrected by you. For
the sound of your voice can scarcely reach me,
who am so far separated from you by sea and
land. And if you happen to write me a letter,
Italy and Rome are sure to be acquainted with
its contents long before it is brought to me, to
whom alone it ought to be sent.

Chap. v. — 19. In another letter you ask why
a former translation which I made of some of
the canonical books was carefully marked with
asterisks and obelisks, whereas I afterwards pub-
lished a translation without these. You must
pardon my saying that you seem to me not to
understand the matter : for the former translation
is from the Septuagint ; and wherever obelisks
are placed, they are designed to indicate that
the Seventy have said more than is found in the
Hebrew. But the asterisks indicate what has
been added by Origen from the version of Theo-
dotion. In that version I was translating from
the Greek : but in the later version, translating
from the Hebrew itself, I have expressed what I
understood it to mean, being careful to preserve
rather the exact sense than the order of the
words. I am surprised that you do not read
the books of the Seventy translators in the genuine
form in which they were originally given to the
Grid, but as they have been corrected, or rather
orrupted, by Origen, with his obelisks and as-
erisks ; and that you refuse to follow the trans-
tion, however feeble, which has been given by
Christian man, especially seeing that Origen
orrowed the things which he has added from
he edition of a man who, after the passion of
"hrist, was a Jew and a blasphemer. Do you
ish to be a true admirer and partisan of the
Seventy translators? Then do not read what
'ou find under the asterisks ; rather erase them
om the volumes, that you may approve yourself
ndeed a follower of the ancients. If, however.


' John xiv. 6.


you do this, you will be compelled to find fault
with all the libraries of the Churches ; for you
will scarcely find more than one MS. here and
there which has not these interpolations.

Chap. vi. — 20. A few words now as to your
remark that I ought not to have given a transla-
tion, after this had been already done by the
ancients ; and the novel syllogism which you
use : " The passages of which the Seventy have
given an interpretation were either obscure or
plain. If they were obscure, it is believed that
you are as likely to have been mistaken as the
others ; if they were plain, it is not believed
that the Seventy could have been mistaken."^

All the commentators who have been our
predecessors in the Lord in the work of ex-
pounding the Scriptures, have expounded either
what was obscure or what was plain. If some
passages were obscure, how could you, after
them, presume to discuss that which they were
not able to explain ? If the passages were plain,
it was a waste of time for you to have undertaken
to treat of that which could not possibly have
escaped them. This syllogism applies with pe-
culiar force to the book of Psalms, in the inter-
pretation of which Greek commentators have
written many volumes : viz. 1st, Origen : 2d,
Eusebius of Caesarea ; 3^, Theodorus of Hera-
clea ; 4//;, Asterius of Scythopolis ; 5//^, Apollinaris
of Laodicea ; and, 6th, Didymus of Alexandria.
There are said to be minor works on selections
from the Psalms, but I speak at present of the
whole book. Moreover, among Latin writers
the bishops Hilary of Poitiers, and Eusebius of
Verceil, have translated Origen and Eusebius
of Caesarea, the former of whom has in some
things been followed by our own Ambrose. Now,
I put it to your wisdom to answer why you, after
all the labours of so many and so competent
interpreters, differ from them in your exposition
of some passages ? If the Psalms are obscure,
it must be believed that you are as likely to be
mistaken as others ; if they are plain, it is in-
credible that these others could have fallen into
mistake. In either case, your exposition has
been, by your own showing, an unnecessary
labour ; and on the same principle, no one would
ever venture to speak on any subject after others
have pronounced their opinion, and no one would
be at liberty to write anything regarding that
which another has once handled, however im-
portant the matter might be.

It is, however, more in keeping with your
enlightened judgment, to grant to all others the
liberty which you tolerate in yourself; for in my
attempt to translate into Latin, for the benefit of
those who speak the same language with myself,
the corrected Greek version of the Scriptures, I

» Letter XXVIU. ch. ii. p. 251.


342


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


have laboured not to supersede what has been
long esteemed, but only to bring prominently
forward those things which have been either
omitted or tampered with by the Jews, in order
that Latin readers might know what is found in
the original Hebrew. If any one is averse to
reading it, none compels him against his will.
Let him drink with satisfaction the old wine,
and despise my new wine, i.e. the sentences
which I have published in explanation of former
writers, with the design of making more obvious
by my remarks what in them seemed to me to
be obscure.

As to the principles which ought to be followed
in the interpretation of the Sacred Scriptures,
they are stated in the book which I have written,"
and in all the introductions to the divine books
which I have in my edition prefixed to each ;
and to these I think it sufficient to refer the
prudent reader. And since you approve of my
labours in revising the translation of the New
Testament, as you say, — giving me at the same
time this as your reason, that very many are
acquainted with the Greek language, and are
therefore competent judges of my work, — it
would have been but fair to have given me credit
for the same fidelity in the Old Testament ; for
I have not followed my own imagination, but
have rendered the divine words as I found them
understood by those who speak the Hebrew
language. If you have any doubt of this in any
passage, ask the Jews what is the meaning of the
original.

2 1 . Perhaps you will say, " What if the Jews
decline to answer, or choose to impose upon
us? " Is it conceivable that the whole multitude
of Jews will agree together to be silent if asked
about my translation, and that none shall be
found that has any knowledge of the Hebrew
language? Or will they all imitate those Jews
whom you mention as having, in some little
town, conspired to injure my reputation? For
in your letter you put together the following
story : — "A certain bishop, one of our brethren,
having introduced in the Church over which he
presides the reading of your version, came upon
a word in the book of the prophet Jonah, of
which you have given a very different rendering
from that which had been of old familiar to the
senses and memory of all the worshippers, and
had been chanted for so many generations in
the Church. Thereupon arose such a tumult in
the congregation, especially among the Greeks,
correcting what had been read, and denouncing
the translation as false, that the bishop was com-
pelled to ask the testimony of the Jewish resi-
dents (it was in the town of Oea). These,
whether from ignorance or from spite, answered

' De Optimo genere interpretandi.


that the words in the Hebrew mss. were correctly
rendered in the Greek version, and in the Latin
one taken from it. What further need I say?
The man was compelled to correct your version
in that passage as if it had been falsely translated,
as he desired not to be left without a congrega-
tion, — a calamity which he narrowly escaped.
From this case we also are led to think that you
may be occasionally mistaken." ^

Chap. vii. — 22. You tell me that I have given
a wrong translation of some word in Jonah, and
that a worthy bishop narrowly escaped losing his
charge through the clamorous tumult of his peo-
ple, which was caused by the different rendering
of this one word. At the same time, you with-
hold from me what the word was which I have
mistranslated ; thus taking away the possibility of
my saying anything in my own vindication, lest
my reply should be fatal to your objection. Per-
haps it is the old dispute about the gourd which
has been revived, after slumbering for many
long years since the illustrious man, who in that
day combined in his own person the ancestral
honours of the Cornelii and of Asinius Pollio,^
brought against me the charge of giving in my
translation the word " ivy " instead of " gourd."
I have already given a sufficient answer to thisj
in my commentary on Jonah. At present, I deem
it enough to say that in that passage, where the
Septuagint has "gourd," and Aquila and the|
others have rendered the word "ivy" (/cto-n-o?),!


the Hebrew ms.
Syriac


has "ciceion," which is in thell
tongue, as now spoken, " ciceia." It is
a kind of shrub having large leaves like a vine,!
and when planted it quickly springs up to the'
size of a small tree, standing upright by its own
stem, without requiring any support of canes or
poles, as both gourds and ivy do. If, therefore,
in translating word for word, I had put the word
" ciceia," no one would know what it meant ; if
I had used the word " gourd," I would have said
what is not found in the Hebrew. I therefore
put down " ivy," that I might not differ from a!
other translators. But if your Jews said, eithei
through malice or ignorance, as you yourself sug
gest, that the word is in the Hebrew text whicl
is found in the Greek and Latin versions, it i^
evident that they were either unacquainted witr
Hebrew, or have been pleased to say what wa
not true, in order to make sport of the gourd|
planters.

In closing this letter, I beseech you to hav<*
some consideration for a soldier who is now olc
and has long retired from active service, and nc


to force him to take the field and


agam


expoS'l


2 Letter LXXl., sec. 5, p. 327.

3 The critic here referred to was Canthelius, whom Jerotrjl
abuses in his commentary on the passage, insinuating that the reasOif
why the gourds found in this scion of a noble house a champion si
devoted, was that they had often rendered him a service which iv
could not have done, screening his secret potations from public ni!
tice.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


343


his life to the chances of war. Do you, who are
young, and who have been appointed to the con-
spicuous seat of pontifical dignity, give yourself
to teaching the people, and enrich Rome with
new stores from fertile Africa.' I am contented
to make but little noise in an obscure corner of
a monastery, with one to hear me or read to me.

LETTER LXXVI.

(a.d. 402.)

I. Hear, O Donatists, what the Catholic
Church says to you : " O ye sons of men, how
long will ye be slow of heart? why will ye love
vanity, and follow after lies? " ^ Why have you
severed yourselves, by the heinous impiety of
schism, from the unity of the whole world ? You
give heed to the falsehoods concerning the sur-
rendering of the divine books to persecutors,
which men who are either deceiving you, or are
themselves deceived, utter in order that you may
die in a state of heretical separation : and you
do not give heed to what these divine books
themselves proclaim, in order that you may live
in the peace of the Catholic Church. Where-
fore do you lend an open ear to the words of
men who tell you things which they have never
been able to prove, and are deaf to the voice of
God speaking thus : " The Lord hath said unto
me. Thou art My Son ; this day have I begotten
Thee. Ask of jMe, and I shall give Thee the
heathen for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for Thy possession "? 3 "To
Abraham and his seed were the promises made.
He saith not, ' And to seeds,' as of many, but as
of one, 'And to thy seed,' which is Christ."''
And the promise to which the apostle refers is
this : " In thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed." s Therefore hft up the eyes
of your souls, and see how in the whole world
all nations are blessed in Abraham's seed. Abra-
ham, in his day, believed what was not yet seen ;
but you who see it refuse to believe what has
been fulfilled.^ The Lord's death was the ran-
som of the world ; He paid the price for the
whole world ; and you do not dwell in concord
with the whole world, as would be for your ad-
vantage, but stand apart and strive contentiously
to destroy the whole world, to your own loss.
Hear now what is said in the Psalm concerning
this ransom : " They pierced my hands and my
feet. I may tell all my bones ; they look and
stare upon me. They part my garments among

' Alluding to the extent to which Rome was indebted to Africa
for com.

2 Ps iv. 2.

3 Ps. ii. 7, 8.

* Gal. iii. 16

S Gen. xxii. i8.

* The original here is antithetical: "jam vos videtis, et adhuc in-
videtis."


them, and cast lots upon my vesture." ^ Where-
fore will you be guilty of dividing the garments
of the Lord, and not hold in common with the
whole world that coat of charity, woven from
above throughout, which even His executioners
did not rend ? In the same Psalm we read that
the whole world holds this, for he says : " All
the ends of the world shall remember and turn
unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of the na-
tions shall worship before Thee ; for the king-
dom is the Lord's, and He is the Governor among
the nations." ^ Open the ears of your soul, and
hear : " The mighty God, even the Lord, hath
spoken, and called the earth, from the rising
of the sun unto the going down thereof; out of
Zion, the perfection of beauty." 9 If you do not
wish to understand this, hear the gospel from the
Lord's own lips, how He said : " All things must
be fulfilled which were written in the Law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms,
concerning Him ; and that repentance and re-
mission of sins should be preached in His name
among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." ■"
The words in the Psalm, " the earth from the
rising of the sun unto the going down thereof,"
correspond to these in the Gospel, " among all
nations;" and as He said in the Psalm, "from
Zion, the perfection of beauty," He has said in
the Gospel, " beginning at Jerusalem."

2. Your imagination that you are separating
yourselves, before the time of the harvest, from
the tares which are mixed with the wheat, proves
that you are only tares. For if you were wheat,
you would bear with the tares, and not separate
yourselves from that which is growing in Christ's
field. Of the tares, indeed, it has been said,
" Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many
shall wax cold ; " but of the wheat it is saicl,
"He that shall endure unto the end, the same
shall be saved." " What grounds have you for
believing that the tares have increased and filled
the world, and that the wheat has decreased,
and is found now in Africa alone ? You claim
to be Christians, and you disclaim the authority
of Christ. He said, " Let both grow together
till the harvest ; " He said not, " Let the wheat
decrease, and let the tares multiply." He said,
" The field is the world ; " He said not, " The
field is Africa." He said, " The harvest is the
end of the world ; " He said not, " The harvest
is the time of Donatus." He said, " The reapers
are the angels ; " He said not, " The reapers
are the captains of the Circumcelliones." '^ But
you, by charging the good wheat with being
tares, have proved yourselves to be tares ; and


7 Ps. xxii. t6, t7, 18.

8 P.S. xxii. 27, 28.

9 Ps. 1. I, 2.

'o Luke xxiv. 44, 47.

" Matt, xxiv 12, 13.

'^ Watt, xiii. 30-39.


344


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


what is worse, you have prematurely separated
yourselves from the wheat. For some of your
predecessors, in whose impious schism you ob-
stinately remain, delivered up to persecutors
the sacred mss. and the vessels of the Church
(as may be seen in municipal records ') ; others
of them passed over the fault which these men
confessed, and remained in communion with
them ; and both parties having come together
to Carthage as an infatuated faction, condemned
others without a hearing, on the charge of that
fault which they had agreed, so far as they
themselves were concerned, to forgive, and then
set up a bishop against the ordained bishop,
and erected an altar against the altar already
recognised. Afterwards they sent to the Em-
peror Constantine a letter begging that bishops
of churches beyond the sea should be appointed
to arbitrate between the bishops of Africa. When
the judges whom they sought were granted, and
at Rome had given their decision, they refused
to submit to it, and complained to the Emperor
or against the bishops as having judged unright-
eously. From the sentence of another bench of
bishops sent to Aries to try the case, they ap-
pealed to the Emperor himself. When he had
heard them, and they had been proved guilty of
calumny, they still persisted in their wickedness.
Awake to the interest of your salvation ! love
peace, and return to unity ! Whensoever you
desire it, we are ready to recite in detail the
events to which we have referred.

3. He is the associate of wicked men who
consents to the deeds of wicked men ; not he
who suffers the tares to grow in the Lord's field
unto the harvest, or the chaff to remain until
the final winnowing time. If you hate those
who do evil, shake yourselves free from the crime
of schism. If you really feared to associate
with the wicked, you would not for so many
years have permitted Optatus ^ to remain among
you when he was living in the most flagrant sin.
And as you now give him the name of martyr,
you must, if you are consistent, give him for
whom he died the name of Christ. Finally,
wherein has the Christian world offended you,
from which you have insanely and wickedly cut
yourselves off? and what claim upon your es-
teem have those followers of Maximianus, whom
you have received back with honour after they
had been condemned by you, and violently cast
forth by warrant of the civil authorities from
their churches? Wherein has the peace of
Christ offended you, that you resist it by separat-
ing yourselves from those whom you calumniate ?
and wherein has the peace of Donatus earned

^ Proceedings before Munatius Felix, Letter LIII. sec. 4, p. 299.

^ Optatus, Donatist bishop of Thamugada, was cast into prison
A.D. 397, and died there. He was a partisan of Gildo in his rebelhon
.apainst Honorius, and shared the misfortunes, as he had participated
:in the crimes, of his chief.


your favour, that to promote it you receive back
those whom you condemned? Felicianus of
Musti is now one of you. We have read con-
cerning him, that he was formerly condemned
by your council, and afterwards accused by you
at the bar of the proconsul, and in the town of
Musti was attacked as is stated in the municipal
records.

4. If the surrendering of the sacred books to
destruction is a crime which, in the case of the
king who burned the book of Jeremiah, God
punished with death as a prisoner of war,^ how
much greater is the guilt of schism ! For those
authors of schism to whom you have compared
the followers of Maximianus, the earth opening,
swallowed up alive.'* Why, then, do you object
against us the charge of surrendering the sacred
books which you do not prove, and at the same
time both condemn and welcome back those
among yourselves who are schismatics? If you
are proved to be in the right by the fact that
you have suffered persecution from the Emperor,
a still stronger claim than yours must be that of
the followers of Maximianus, whom you have
yourselves persecuted by the help of judges sent
to you by Catholic emperors. If you alone have
baptism, what weight do you attach to the bap-
tism administered by followers of Maximianus
in the case of those whom Felicianus baptized
while he was under your sentence of condemna-
tion, who came along with him when he was
afterwards restored by you ? Let your bishops
answer these questions to your laity at least, if
they will not debate with us ; and do you, as
you value your salvation, consider what kind of
doctrine that must be about which they refuse
to enter into discussion with us. If the wolves
have prudence enough to keep out of the way
of the shepherds, why have the flock so lost
their prudence, that they go into the dens of
the wolves?

LETTER LXXVII.


(a.d. 404.)

i

TO FELIX AND HILARINUS, MY LORDS MOST BE-
LOVED, AND BRETHREN WORTHY OF ALL HON-
OUR, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING IN THE LORD.

I. I do not wonder to see the minds of be-
lievers disturbed by Satan, whom resist, continu-
ing in the hope which rests on the promises of
God, who cannot lie, who has not only conde-
scended to promise in eternity rewards to us
who believe and hope in Him, and who perse-
vere in love unto the end, but has also foretold
that in time offences by which our faith must be
tried and proved shall not be wanting ; for He
said, " Because iniquity shall abound, the love

3 Jer. xxxvi. 23, 30.
* Num. XVI. 31-33.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


345


of many shall wax cold ; " but He added im-
mediately, "and he that shall endure to the end,
the same shall be saved.'" Why, therefore,
should it seem strange that men bring calumnies
against the servants of God, and being unable
to turn them aside from an upright life, endeav-
our to blacken their reputation, seeing that they
do not cease uttering blasphemies daily against
God, the Lord of these servants, if they are dis-
pleased by anything in which the execution of
His righteous and secret counsel is contrary to
their desire ? Wherefore I appeal to yolir wis-
dom, my lords most beloved, and brethren wor-
thy of all honour, and exhort you to exercise
your minds in the way which best becomes


Christians, setting over


against


the empty cal-


umnies and groundless suspicions of men the
written word of God, which has foretold that
these things should come, and has warned us to
meet them with fortitude.

2. Let me therefore say in a few words to


your Charity, that the
not been discovered by
crime, and that I have


presbyter Boniface has
me to be guilty of any
never believed, and do


not yet believe, any charge brought against him.
How, then, could I order his name to be deleted
from the roll of presbyters, when filled with
alarm by that word of our Lord in the gospel :
"With what judgment ye judge ye shall be
judged " ? ^ For, seeing that the dispute which
has arisen between him and Spes has by their
consent been submitted to divine arbitration in
a way which, if you desire it, can be made
known to you,3 who am I, that I should pre-
sume to anticipate the divine award by deleting
or passing over his name ? As a bishop, I ought
not rashly to suspect him ; and as being only a
man, I cannot decide infallibly concerning things
which are hidden from me. Even in secular
matters, when an appeal has been made to a
higher authority, all procedure is sisted while
the case awaits the decision from which there is
no appeal; because if anything were changed
while the matter is depending on his arbitration,
this would be an insult to the higher tribunal.
And how great the distance between even the
highest human authority and the divine !

May the mercy of the Lord our God never
forsake you, my lords most beloved, and breth-
' ren worthy of all honour.

* LETTER LXXVHL

(a.d. 404.)

to my most beloved brethren, the clergy,
. elders, and people of the church of hip-


PO, WHOM I SERVE IN THE LOVE OF CHRIST, I,
AUGUSTIN, SEND GREETING IN THE LORD.

I. Would that you, giving earnest heed to the
word of God, did not require counsel of mine
to support you under whatsoever offences may
arise ! Would that your comfort rather came
from Him by whom we also are comforted ; who
has foretold not only the good things which He
designs to give to those who are holy and faith-
ful, but also the evil things in which this world
is to abound ; and has caused these to be writ-
ten, in order that we may expect the blessings
which are to follow the end of this world with a
certainty not less complete than that which at-
tends our present experience of the evils which
had been predicted as coming before the end
of the world ! Wherefore also the apostle says,
" Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were
written for our learning, that we through pa-
tience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope."'^ And wherefore did our Lord Himself
judge it necessary not only to say, " Then shall
the righteous shine forth as the sun in the king-
dom of their Father " s which shall come to
pass after the end of the world, but also to
exclaim, "Woe unto the world because of of-
fences ! " ^ if not to prevent us from flattering
ourselves with the idea that we can reach the
mansions of eternal feUcity, unless we have over-
come the temptation to yield when exercised by
the afflictions of time ? Why was it necessary
for Him to say, " Because iniquity shall abound,
the love of many shall wax cold," if not in
order that those of whom He spoke in the next
sentence, " but he that shall endure to the end
shall be saved," ' might, when they saw love
waxing cold through abounding iniquity, be
saved from being put to confusion, or filled with
fear, or crushed with grief about such things, as
if they were strange and unlocked for, and might
rather, through witnessing the events which had
been predicted as appointed to occur before
the end, be assisted in patiently enduring unto the
end, so as to obtain after the end the reward of
reigning in peace in that life which has no end?
2. Wherefore, beloved, in regard to that scan-
dal by which some are troubled concerning the
presbyter Boniface, I do not say to you that you
are not to be grieved for it ; for in men who do
not grieve for such things the love of Christ is
not, whereas those who take pleasure in such
things are filled with the malice of the devil.
Not, however, that anything has come to our
knowledge which deserves censure in the pres-
byter aforesaid, but that two in our house are so
situated that one of them must be regarded as


■ Matt. xxiv. 12, 13.

2 Matt. vii. 2.

3 He refers to their visiting the tomb of Felix of Nola, in the
hope that by some miracle there the innocent and the guilty would be
distinguished. See Letter LXXVIII. sec. 3, p. 346.


* Rom. XV. 4.
5 Matt. xiii. 43.
*> Matt, xviii. 7.


346


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


;


i/j


beyond all doubt wicked ; and though the con-
science of the other be not defiled, his good
name is forfeited in the eyes of some, and sus-
pected by others. Grieve for these things, for
they are to be lamented ; but do not so grieve
as to let your love grow cold, and yourselves be
indifferent to holy living. Let it rather burn the
more vehemently in the exercise of prayer to
God, that if your presbyter is guiltless (which I
am the more inclined to believe, because, when
he had disco\'ered the immoral and vile pro-
posal of the other, he would neither consent to
it nor conceal it), a divine decision may speedily
restore him to the exercise of his official duties
with his innocence vindicated ; and that if, on
the other hand, knowing himself to be guilty,
which I dare not suspect, he has deliberately
tried to destroy the good name of another when
he could not corrupt his morals, as he charges
his accuser with having done, God may not per-
mit him to hide his wickedness, so that the
thing which men cannot discover may be re-
vealed by the judgment of God, to the convic-
tion of the one or of the other.

3. For when this case had long disquieted
me, and I could find no way of convicting either
of the two as guilty, although I rather inclined
to believe the presbyter innocent, I had at first
resolved to leave both in the hand of God, with-
out deciding the case, until something should be
done by the one of whom I had suspicion, giving
just and unquestionable reasons for his expulsion
from our house. But when he was labouring
most earnestly to obtain promotion to the rank
of the clergy, either on the spot from myself,
or elsewhere through letter of recommendation
from me, and I could on no account be induced
either to lay hands in the act of ordination upon
one of whom I thought so ill, or to consent to
introduce him through commendation of mine
to any brother for the same purpose, he began
to act more violently, demanding that if he was
not to be promoted to clerical orders, Boniface
should not be permitted to retain his status as
a presbyter. This demand having been made,
when I perceived that Boniface was unwilling
that, through doubts as to his holiness of life,
offence should be given to any who were weak
and inclined to suspect him, and that he was
ready to suffer the loss of his honour among men
rather than vainly persist even to the disquieting
of the Church in a contention the very nature of
which made it impossible for him to prove his
innocence (of which he was conscious) to the
satisfaction of those who did not know him, or
were in doubt or prone to suspicion in regard
to him, I fixed upon the following as a means
of discovering the truth. Both pledged them-
selves in a solemn compact to go to a holy place,
where the more awe-inspiring works of God


might much more readily make manifest the
evil of which either of them was conscious, and
compel the guilty to confess, either by judgment
or through fear of judgment. God is every-
where, it is true, and He that made all things is
not contained or confined to dwell in any place ;
and He is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth
by His true worshippers,' in order that, as He
heareth in secret. He may also in secret justify
and reward. But in regard to the answers to
prayer which are visible to men, who can search
out His reasons for appointing some places rather
than others to be the scene of miraculous inter-
positions? To many the holiness of the place
in which the body of the blessed Felix is buried
is well known, and to this place I desired them
to repair ; because from it we may receive more
easily and more reliably a written account of
whatever may be discovered in either of them by
divine interposition. For I myself knew how, at
Milan, at the tomb of the saints, where demons are
brought in a most marvellous and awful manner
to confess their deeds, a thief who had come
thither intending to deceive by perjuring him-
self, was compelled to own his theft, and to
restore what he had taken away ; and is not
Africa also full of the bodies of holy martyrs?
Yet we do not know of such things being done
in any place here. Even as the gift of heahng
and the gift of discerning of spirits are not given
to all saints,^ as the apostle declares ; so it is
not at all the tombs of the saints that it has
pleased Him who divideth to each severally as
He will, to cause such miracles to be wrought.

4. Wherefore, although I had purposed not to
let this most heavy burden on my heart come
to your knowledge, lest I should disquiet you by a
painful but useless vexation, it has pleased God
to make it known to you, perhaps for this reason,
that you may along with me devote yourselves to
prayer, beseeching Him to condescend to reveal
that which He knoweth, but which we cannot
know in this matter. For I did not presume to
suppress or erase from the roll of his colleagues
the name of this presbyter, lest I should seem
to insult the Divine Majesty, upon whose arbi-
tration the case now depends, if I were to fore-
stall His decision by any premature decision of
mine : for even in secular affairs, when a perplex-
ing case is referred to a higher authority, the in-
ferior judges do not presume to make any change
while the reference is pending. Moreover, it was
decreed in a Council of bishops ^ that no clergy-
man who has not yet been proved guilty be sus-
pended from communion, unless he fail to present
himself for the examination of the charges against
him. Boniface, however, humbly agreed to fore-


' John iv. 24.

2 I Cor. xii. 9, TO, 30.

3 Third Council of Carthage, A.D. 397, Can. 7, 8.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


347


go his claim to a letter of commendation, by the
use of which on his journey he might have se-
cured the recognition of his rank, preferring that
both should stand on a footing of equality in a
place where both were alike unknown. And now,
if you i)refer that his name should not be read,
that we " may cut off occasion," as the apostle
says, from those that desire occasion ' to justify
their unwillingness to come to the Church, this
omission of his name shall be not our deed, but
theirs on whose account it may be done. For
what does it harm any man, that men through
ignorance refuse to have his name read from
that tablet, so long as a guilty conscience does
not blot his name out of the Book of Life ?

5. Wherefore, my brethren who fear God,
remember what the Apostle Peter says : Your
adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh
about, seeking whom he may devour." ^ When
he cannot devour a man through seducing him
into iniquity, he attempts to injure his good
name, that if it be possible, he may give way
under the reproaches of men and the calumnies
of slandering tongues, and may thus fall into his
jaws. If, however, he be unable even to sully
the good name of one who is innocent, he tries
to persuade him to cherish unkindly suspicions
of his brother, and judge him harshly, and so
become entangled, and be an easy prey. And
who is able to know or to tell all his snares and
wiles ? Nevertheless, in reference to those three,
which belong more especially to the case before
us ; in the first place, lest you should be turned
aside to wickedness through following bad ex-
amples, God gives you by the aposde these warn-
ings : " Be ye not unequally yoked together with
unbelievers ; for what fellowship hath righteous-
ness with unrighteousness, and what communion
hath light with darkness ? " ^ and in another place :
" Be not deceived ; evil communications corrupt
good manners : awake to righteousness,'* and sin
not." 5 Secondly, that ye may not give way
under the tongues of slanderers, He saith by the
prophet, " Hearken unto Me, ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is My
law : fear ye not the reproach of men, neither
be ye afraid of their revilings.^ For the moth
shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm
shall eat them like wool ; but My righteous-
ness shall be for ever." 7 And thirdly, lest you
should be undone through groundless and malev-
olent suspicions concerning any ser\'ants of God,
remember that word of the apostle, "Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come,


' 2 Cor. xi. 12.

2 I Pet. V. 8.

^ 2 Cor. vi. 14

* Aug. translates, " be sober and righteous."

i I x,*"'- "^^ 33- 34-

Nor count it a great thing that they despise you." — Aug.
' Isa. li. 7, 8.


who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels
of the hearts, and then shall every man have
praise of God ; " ^ and this also, "The things
which are revealed belong to you, but the secret
things belong unto the Lord your God." 9

6. It is indeed manifest that such things do
not take place in the Church without great sorrow
on the part of saints and believers ; but let Him
be our Comforter who hath foretold all these
events, and has warned us not to become cold
in love through abounding iniquity, to endure to
the end that we may be saved. For, as far as I
am concerned, if there be in me a spark of the
love of Christ, who among you is weak, and I
am not weak? who among you is offended, and
I burn not? '° Do not therefore add to my dis-
tresses, by your yielding either by groundless
suspicions or by occasion of other men's sins.
Do not, I beseech you, lest I say of you, "They
have added to the pain of my wounds." " For
it is much more easy to bear the reproach of
those who take open pleasure in these our pains,
of whom it was foretold in regard to Christ Him-
self, "They that sit in the gate speak against Me,
and I was the song of the drunkards," '^ for whom
also we have been taught to pray, and to seek
their welfare. For why do they sit at the gate,
and what do they watch for, if it be not for this,
that so soon as any bishop or clergyman or monk
or nun has fallen, they may have ground for be-
lieving, and boasting, and maintaining that all
are the same as the one that has fallen, but that
all cannot be convicted and unmasked? Yet
these very men do not straightway cast forth
their wives, or bring accusation against their
mothers, if some married woman has been dis-
covered to be an adulteress. But the moment
that any crime is either falsely alleged or actu-
ally proved agamst any one who makes a pro-
fession of piety, these men are incessant and
unwearied in their efforts to make this charge be
believed against all religious men. Those men,
therefore, who eagerly find what is sweet to their
malicious tongues in the things which grieve us,
we may compare to those dogs (if, indeed, they
are to be understood as increasing his misery)
which licked the sores of the beggar who lay
before the rich man's gate, and endured with
patience every hardship and indignity until he
should come to rest in Abraham's bosom. '3

7. Do not add to my sorrows, O ye who have
some hope toward God. Let not the wounds
which these lick be multiplied by you, for whom

^ I Cor. iv. 5.

9 Deut. x,\ix. 29. This verse is the nearest I can find to the words
here quoted by the apostle. The reference in the Bened. edition to
I Cor. V. 12 must be a mistake.
1° 2 Cor. xi 29.

" Ps, Ixix. 26, as translated by Aug.
'- Ps Ixix. 12.
'.* Luke xvi. 21-23,


348


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


we are in jeopardy every hour, having fightings
without and fears within, and perils in the city,
perils in the wilderness, perils by the heathen,
and perils by false brethren.' I know that you
are grieved, but is your grief more poignant than
mine? I know that you are disquieted, and I
fear lest by the tongues of slanderers some weak
one for whom Christ died should perish. Let
not my grief be increased by you, for it is not
through my fault that this grief was made yours.
For I used the utmost precautions to secure, if
it were possible, both that the steps necessary
for the prevention of this evil should not be neg-
lected, and that it should not be brought to your
knowledge, since this could only cause unavail-
ing vexation to the strong, and dangerous dis-
quietude to the weak, among you. But may He
who hath permitted you to be tempted by know-
ing this, give you strength to bear the trial, and
" teach you out of His law, and give you rest
from the days of adversity, until the pit be digged
for the wicked." ^

8. I hear that some of you are more cast down
with sorrow by this event, than by the fall of the
two deacons who had joined us from the Donatist
party, as if they had brought reproach upon the
discipline of Proculeianus ;^ whereas this checks
your boasting about me, that under my discipline
no such inconsistency among the clergy had taken
place. Let me frankly say to you, whoever you
are that have done this, you have not done well.
Behold, God hath taught you, " He that glorieth,
let him glory in the Lord ; " ■♦ and ye ought to
bring no reproach against heretics but this, that
they are not Catholics. Be not like these here-
tics, who, because they have nothing to plead in
defence of their schism, attempt nothing beyond
heaping up charges against the men from whom
they are separated, and most falsely boast that
in these we have an unenviable pre-eminence, in
order that since they can neither impugn nor
darken the truth of the Divine Scripture, from
which the Church of Christ spread abroad every-
where receives its testimony, they may bring into
disfavour the men by whom it is preached, against
whom they are capable of affirming anything —
whatever comes into their mind. " But ye have
not so learned Christ, if so be that ye have heard
Him, and have been taught by Him." s For He
Himself has guarded His believing people from
undue disquietude concerning wickedness, even
in stewards of the divine mysteries, as doing evil
which was their own, but speaking good which
was His. "All therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do ; but do not


' 2 Cor. vii. 5 and xi. 26.

2 Ps. xciv. 12, 13.

3 Donatist bishop of Hippo.
* I Cor. i. 31.

5 Eph. iv. 20, 21.


ye after their works : for they say, and do not."^
Pray by all means for me, lest perchance " when
I have preached to others, I myself should be a
castaway ; " ? but when you glory, glory not in
me, but in the Lord. For however watchful the
discipline of my house may be, I am but a man,
and I live among men ; and I do not presume
to pretend that my house is better than the ark
of Noah, in which among eight persons one was
found a castaway ; ^ or better than the house of
Abraham, regarding which it was said, " Cast out
the bondwoman and her son ; " 9 or better than
the house of Isaac, regarding whose twin sons it
was said, " I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau ;" '°
or better than the house of Jacob himself, in
which Reuben defiled his father's bed ;" or bet-
ter than the house of David, in which one son
wrought folly with his sister,'^ and another re-
belled against a father of such holy clemency ;
or better than the band of companions of Paul
the apostle, who nevertheless would not have
said, as above quoted, "Without are fightings,
and within are fears," if he had dwelt with none
but good men ; nor would have said, in speaking
of the holiness and fidelity of Timothy, " I have
no man like-minded who will naturally care for
your state ; for all seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's ; " '^ or better than the
band of the disciples of the Lord Christ Himself,
in which eleven good men bore with Judas, who
was a thief and a traitor ; or, finally, better than
heaven itself, from which the angels fell.

9. I frankly avow to your Charity, before the
Lord our God, whom I have taken, since the
time when I began to serve Him, as a witness
upon my soul, that as I have hardly found any
men better than those who have done well in
monasteries, so I have not found any men worse
than monks who have fallen ; whence I suppose
that to them applies the word written in the
Apocalypse, " He that is righteous, let him be
still more righteous ; and he that is filthy, let
him be still more filthy." '■♦ Wherefore, if we be
grieved by some foul blemishes, we are com-
forted by a much larger proportion of examples
of an opposite kind. Let not, therefore, the
dregs which offend your eyes cause you to hate
the oil-presses whence the Lord's storehouses
are supplied to their profit with a more brightly
illuminating oil.

May the mercy of our Lord keep you in His
peace, safe from all the snares of the enemy, my
dearly beloved brethren.


6 Matt, xxiii. 3.

' I Cor. ix. 27.

' Gen. ix. 27.

9 Gen. xxi. 10.
"o Mai. i. 2.
" Gen. xlix. 4.
'2 2 Sam. xiii. 14.
'3 Phil. ii. 20, 21.
'•» Rev. xxii. 11.


f.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


349


LETTER LXXIX.
(a.d. 404.)

A short and stern challenge to some Manichasan
teacher who had succeeded Fortunatus (supposed to be
Felix).

Your attempts at evasion are to no purpose :
your real character is patent even a long way
off. My brethren have reported to me their con-
versation with you. You say that you do not
fear death ; it is well : but you ought to fear that
death which you are bringing upon yourself by
your blasphemous assertions concerning God.
As to your understanding that the visible death
which all men know is a separation between
soul and body, this is a truth which demands no
great grasp of mtellect. But as to the state-
ment which you annex to this, that death is a
separation between good and evil, do you not
see that, if the soul be good and the body be
evil, he who joined them together ' is not good ?
But you affirm that the good God has joined them
together ; from which it follows that He is either
evil, or swayed by fear of one who is evil. Yet
you boast of your having no fear of man, when
at the same time you conceive God to be such
that, through fear of Darkness, He would join
together good and evil. Be not uplifted, as your
writing shows you to be, by supposing that I
magnify you, by my resolving to check the out-
flowing of your poison, lest its insidious and
pestilential power should do harm : for the apos-
tle does not magnify those whom he calls "dogs,"
saying to the Philippians, " Beware of dogs ; " ^
nor does he magnify those of whom he says that
their word doth eat as a canker.^ Therefore, in
the name of Christ, I demand of you to answer,
if you are able, the question which baffled your
predecessor Fortunatus.* For he went from the
scene of our discussion declaring that he would
not return, unless, after conferring with his party,
he found something by which he could answer
the arguments used by our brethren. And if
you are not prepared to do this, begone from
this place, and do not pervert the right ways of
the Lord, ensnaring and infecting with your poi-
son the minds of the weak, lest, by the Lord's
right hand helping me, you be put to confusion
in a way which you did not expect.

LETTER LXXX.

(a.d. 404.)

A letter to Paulinus, asking him to explain more fully
how we may know what is the will of God and rule of
our duty in the ordinary course of providence. This
letter may be omitted as merely propounding a question,
and containing nothing specially noticeable.

' Cominiscnit.
2 Phil. iii. 2.
^ 2 Tim. ii. 17.

* In his Retractations, i. 16, Augustin mentions Tiis having de-
feated Fortunatus in discussion before he was made bishop of Hippo.


LETTER LXXXI.

(a.d. 405.)

to augustin, my lord truly holy, and most
blessed father, jerome sends greeting in

THE LORD.

Having anxiously inquired of our holy brother
Firmus regarding your state, I was glad to hear
that you are well. I expected him to bring, or,
I should rather say, I insisted upon his giving
me, a letter from you ; upon which he told me
that he had set out from Africa without commu-
nicating to you his intention. I therefore send
to you my respectful salutations through this
brother, who clings to you with a singular warmth
of affection ; and at the same time, in regard to
my last letter, I beg you to forgive the modesty
which made it impossible for me to refuse you,
when you had so long required me to write
you in reply. That letter, moreover, was not an
answer from me to you, but a confronting of my
arguments with yours. And if it was a fault in
me to send a reply ( I beseech you hear me pa-
tiently), the fault of him who insisted upon it
was still greater. But let us be done with such
quarrelling; let there be sincere brotherliness
between us ; and henceforth let us exchange
letters, not of controversy, but of mutual charity.
The holy brethren who with me serve the Lord
send you cordial salutations. Salute from us the
holy brethren who with you bear Christ's easy
yoke ; especially I beseech you to convey my
respectful salutation to the holy father Alypius,
worthy of all esteem. May Christ, our almighty
God, preserve you safe, and not unmindful of
me, my lord truly holy, and most blessed father.
If you have read my commentary on Jonah, I
think you will not recur to the ridiculous gourd-
debate. If, moreover, the friend who first as-
saulted me with his sword has been driven back
by my pen, I rely upon your good feeling and
equity to lay blame on the one who brought,
and not on the one who repelled, the accusation.
Let us, if you please, exercise ourselves 5 in the
field of Scripture without wounding each other.

LETTER LXXXII.

(A.D. 405.)

A Reply to Letters LXXII., LXXV., and LXXXI.

TO JEROME, MY LORD BELOVED AND HONOURED
IN THE BOWELS OF CHRIST, MY HOLY BROTHER
AND FELLOW-PRESBYTER, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREET-
ING IN THE LORD.

I . Long ago I sent to your Charity a long letter
in reply to the one which you remember sending
to me by your holy son Asterius, who is now not
only my brother, but also my colleague. Whether

S Ludamus.


350


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


that reply reached you or not I do not know,
unless I am to infer this from the words in your
letter brought to me by our most sincere friend
Firmus, that if the one who first assaulted you
with his sword has been driven back by your
pen, you rely upon my good feeling and equity
to lay blame on the one who brought, not on the
one who repelled, the accusation. From this one
indication, though very slight, I infer that you
have read my letter. In that letter I expressed
indeed my sorrow that so great discord had arisen
between you and Rufinus, over the strength of
whose former friendship brotherly love was wont
to rejoice in all parts to which the fame of it
had come ; but I did not in this intend to re-
buke you, my brother, whom I dare not say that
I have found blameable in that matter. I only
lamented the sad lot of men in this world, in
whose friendships, depending as they do on the
continuance of mutual regard, there is no stability,
however great that regard may sometimes be.
I would rather, however, have been informed by
your letter whether you have granted me the
pardon which I begged, of which I now desire
you to give me more explicit assurance ; although
the more genial and cheerful tone of your letter
seems to signify that I have obtained what I
asked in mine, if indeed it was despatched after
mine had been read by you, which is, as I have
said, not clearly indicated.

2. You ask, or rather you give a command
with the confiding boldness of charity, that we
should amuse ourselves ' in the field of Scripture
without wounding each other. For my part, I
am by all means disposed to exercise myself in
earnest much rather than in mere amusement on
such themes. If, however, you have chosen this
word because of its suggesting easy exercise, let
me frankly say that I desire something more
from one who has, as you have, great talents
under the control of a benignant disposition,
together with wisdom enlightened by erudition,
and whose application to study, hindered by no
other distractions, is year after year impelled by
enthusiasm and guided by genius : the Holy
Spirit not only giving you all these advantages,
but expressly charging you to come with help to
those who are engaged in great and difficult
investigations ; not as if, in studying Scripture,
they were amusing themselves on a level plain,
but as men panting and toiling up a steep ascent.
If, however, perchance, you selected the expres-
sion "ludamus" [let us amuse ourselves] because
of the genial kindliness which befits discussion
between loving friends, whether the matter de-
bated be obvious and easy, or intricate and diffi-
cult, I beseech you to teach me how I may
succeed in securing this; so that when I am

' Litdainus. Letter LXXXI. On this unfortunate word of
Jerome's Augustin lingers with most provoking ingenuity.


dissatisfied with anything which, not through
want of carefiil attention, but perhaps through
my slowness of apprehension, has not been
demonstrated to me, if I should, in attempting
to make good an opposite opinion, express my-
self with a measure of unguarded frankness, I
may not fall under the suspicion of childish con-
ceit and forwardness, as if I sought to bring my
own name into renown by assailing illustrious
men ; - and that if, when something harsh has
been demanded by the exigencies of argument,
I attempt to make it less hard to bear by stating
it in mild and courteous phrases, I may not be
pronounced guilty of wielding a " honeyed
sword." The only way which I can see for
avoiding both these faults, or the suspicion of
either of them, is to consent that when I am
thus arguing with a friend more learned than
myself, I must approve of everything which he
says, and may not, even for the sake of more
accurate information, hesitate before accepting
his decisions.

3. On such terms we might amuse ourselves
without fear of offending each other in the field
of Scripture, but I might well wonder if the
amusement was not at my expense. For I con-
fess to your Charity that I have learned to yield
this respect and honour only to the canonical
books of Scripture : of these alone do I most
firmly believe that the authors were completely
free from error. And if in these writings I am
perplexed by anything which appears to me op-
posed to truth, I do not hesitate to suppose that
either the ms. is faulty, or the translator has not
caught the meaning of what was said, or I my-
self have failed to understand it. As to all other
writings, in reading them, however great tlie su-
periority of the authors to myself in sanctity
and learning, I do not accept their teaching as
true on the mere ground of the opinion being
held by them ; but only because they have suc-
ceeded in convincing my judgment of its truth
either by means of these canonical writings
themselves, or by arguments addressed to my
reason. I believe, my brother, that this is your
own opinion as well as mine. I do not need to
say that I do not suppose you to wish your
books to be read like those of prophets or of
apostles, concerning which it would be wrong to
doubt that they are free from error. Far be
such arrogance from that humble piety and just
estimate of yourself which I know you to have,
and without which assuredly you would not have
said, " Would that I could receive your embrace,
and that by converse we might aid each other
in learning ! " 3 i

Chap. ii. — 4. Now if, knowing as I do your
life and conversation, I do not believe in regard

2 See letter LXXTL, sec. 2.

3 Letter LXVllL sec. 2.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


351


to you that you have spoken anything with an
intention of dissimulation and deceit, how mucli
more reasonable is it for me to believe, in re-
gard to the Apostle Paul, that he did not think
one thing and affirm another when he wrote of
Peter and Barnabas : " When I saw that they
walked not uprightly, according to the truth of
the gospel, I said unto Peter before them all,
' If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of
the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why com-
pellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the
Jews?'"' For whom can I confide in, as as-
suredly not deceiving me by spoken or written
statements, if the apostle deceived his own
"children," for whom he "travailed in birth
again until Christ (who is the Truth) were
formed in them"?^ After having previously
said to them, " The things which 1 write unto
you, behold, before God, I He not," ^ could he
in writing to these same persons state what
was not true, and deceive them by a fraud which'
was in some way sanctioned by expediency, when
he said that he had seen Peter and Barnabas not
walking uprightly, according to the truth of the
gospel, and that he had withstood Peter to the face
because of this, that he was compelling the Gen-
tiles to live after the manner of the Jews ?

5. But you will say it is better to believe that
the Apostle Paul wrote what was not true, than
to believe that the Apostle Peter did what was
not right. On this principle, we must say (which
far be it from us to say), that it is better to be-
lieve that the gospel history is false, than to
believe that Christ was denied by Peter ; ^ and
better to charge the book of Kings [second
book of Samuel] with false statements, than be-
lieve that so great a prophet, and one so sig-
nally chosen by the Lord God as David was,
committed adultery in lusting after and taking
away the wife of another, and committed such
detestable homicide in procuring the death of
her husband. 5 Better far that I should read with
certainty and persuasion of its truth the Holy
Scripture, placed on the highest (even the heav-
enly) pinnacle of authority, and should, without
questioning the trustworthiness of its statements,
learn from it that men have been either com-
mended, or corrected, or condemned, than that,
through fear of believing that by men, who,
though of most praiseworthy excellence, were
no more than men, actions deserving rebuke
might sometimes be done, I should admit sus-
picions affecting the trustworthiness of the whole
" oracles of God."

6. The Manichjeans maintain that the greater
jpart of the Divine Scripture, by which their
I " ^ — ^^_^^^^^^_

' ' Gal. ii. 14.
^ Gal. iv. iQ.

3Ch. i. 21.

* Matt, xxvi 75.

* a Sam. xi. 4, 17.


wicked error is in the most explicit terms con-
futed, is not worthy of credit, because they cannot
pervert its language so as to support their opin-
ions ; yet they lay the blame of the alleged mis-
take not upon the apostles who originally wrote
the words, but upon some unknown corrupters
of the manuscripts. Forasmuch, however, as
they have never succeeded in proving this by
more numerous and by earlier manuscripts, or
by appealing to the original language from which
the Latin translations have been drawn, they re-
tire from the arena of debate, vanquished and
confounded by truth which is well known to all.
Does not your holy prudence discern how great
scope is given to their malice against the truth,
if we say not (as they do) that the apostolic
writings have been tampered with by others, but
that the apostles themselves wrote what they
knew to be untrue?

7. You say that it is incredible that Paul
should have rebuked in Peter that which Paul
himself had done. I am not at present inquir-
ing about what Paul did, but about what he
wrote. This is most pertinent to the matter
which I have in hand, — namely, the confirma-
tion of the universal and unquestionable truth
of the Divine Scriptures, which have been de-
livered to us for our edification in the faith, not
by unknown men, but by the apostles, and have
on this account been received as the authori-
tative canonical standard. For if Peter did on
that occasion what he ought to have done, Paul
falsely affirmed that he saw him walking not
uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel.
For whoever does what he ought to do, walks
uprightly. He therefore is guilty of falsehood,
who, knowing that another has done what he
ought to have done, says that he has not done
uprightly. If, then, Paul wrote what was true,
it is true that Peter was not then walking up-
rightly, according to the truth of the gospel.
He was therefore doing what he ought not to
have done ; and if Paul had himself already
done something of the same kind, I would pre-
fer to believe that, having been himself cor-
rected, he could not omit the correction of his
brother aposde, than to believe that he put down
any false statement in his epistle ; and if in any
epistle of Paul this would be strange, how much
more in the one in the preface of which he says,
" The things which I write unto you, behold,
before God, I he not" !

8. For my part, I believe that Peter so acted
on this occasion as to compel the Gentiles to
live as Jews : because I read that Paul wrote
this, and I do not believe that he lied. And
therefore Peter was not acting uprightly. For it
was contrary to the truth of the gospel, that
those who beheved in Christ should think that
without those ancient ceremonies they could not


352


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


be saved. This was the position maintained at
Antioch by those of the circumcision who had
believed ; against whom Paul protested con-
stantly and vehemently. As to Paul's circum-
cising of Timothy/ performing a vow at Cen-
chrea/ and undertaking on the suggestion of
James at Jerusalem to share the performance
of the appointed rites with some who had made
a vo\v,3 it is manifest that Paul's design in these
things was not to give to others the impression
that he thought that by these observances salva-
tion is given under the Christian dispensation,
but to prevent men from believing that he con-
demned as no better than heathen idolatrous
worship, those rites which God had appointed
in the former dispensation as suitable to it, and
as shadows of things to come. For this is what
James said to him, that the report had gone
abroad concerning him that he taught men " to
forsake Moses." * This would be by all means
wrong for those who believe in Christ, to forsake
him who prophesied of Christ, as if they detested
and condemned the teaching of him of whom
Christ said, " Had ye believed Moses, ye would
have believed Me ; for he wrote of Me."

9. For mark, I beseech you, the words of
James : " Thou seest, brother, how many thou-
sands of Jews there are which believe ; and they
are all zealous of the law : and they are informed
of thee, that thou teachest all the Jews which
are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying
that they ought not to circumcise their children,
neither to walk after the customs. What is it
therefore? the multitude must needs come to-
gether : for they will hear that thou art come.
Do therefore this that we say to thee : We have
four men which have a vow on them ; them take,
and purify thyself with them, and be at charges
with them, that they may shave their heads : and
all may know that those things, whereof they
were informed concerning thee, are nothing ;
but that thou thyself also walkest orderly, and
keepest the law. As touching the Gentiles which
have believed, we have written and concluded
that they observe no such thing, save only that
they keep themselves from things offered to
idols, and from blood, and from things strangled,
and from fornication." 5 It is, in my opinion,
very clear that the reason why James gave this
advice was, that the falsity of what they had
heard concerning him might be known to those
Jews, who, though they had believed in Christ,
were jealous for the honour of the law, and
would not have it thought that the institutions
which had been given by Moses to their fathers
were condemned by the doctrine of Christ as if

* Acts xvi. 3.

* Acts xviii. 18.
3 Acts xxi. 26.

* Acts xxi. 21.

S Acts xxi. 20-25.


they were profane, and had not been originally
given by divine authority. For the men who
had brought this reproach against Paul were not
those who understood the right spirit in which
observance of these ceremonies should be prac-
tised under the Christian dispensation by be-
lieving Jews, — namely, as a way of declaring the
divine authority of these rites, and their holy use
in the prophetic dispensation, and not as a means
of obtaining salvation, which was to them already
revealed in Christ and ministered by baptism.
On the contrary, the men who had spread abroad
this report against the apostle were those who
would have these rites observed, as if without
their observance there could be no salvation to
those who believed the gospel. For these false
teachers had found him to be a most zealous
preacher of free grace, and a most decided
opponent of their views, teaching as he did that
men are not justified by these things, but by
the grace of Jesus Christ, which these ceremonies
of the law were appointed to foreshadow. This
party, therefore, endeavouring to raise odium
and persecution against him, charged him with
being an enemy of the law and of the divine in-
stitutions ; and there was no more fitting way in
which he could turn aside the odium caused by
this false accusation, than by himself celebrating
those rites which he was supposed to condemn
as profane, and thus showing that, on the one
hand, the Jews were not to be debarred from
them as if they were unlawful, and on the other
hand, that the Gentiles were not to be com-
pelled to observe them as if they were neces-
sary.

10, For if he did in truth condemn these
things in the way in which he was reported to
have done, and undertook to perform these rites
in order that he might, by dissembling, disguise
his real sentiments, James would not have said
to him, "and all shall know," but, "all shall
f/u'nk that those things whereof they were in-
formed concerning thee are nothing ; " ^ espe-
cially seeing that in Jerusalem itself the apostles
had already decreed that no one should compel
the Gentiles to adopt Jewish ceremonies, but
had not decreed that no one should then pre-
vent the Jews from living according to their
customs, although upon them also Christian
doctrine imposed no such obligation. Where-
fore, if it was after the apostle's decree that
Peter's dissimulation at Antioch took place,
whereby he was compelling the Gentiles to live
after the manner of the Jews, which he himself
was not compelled to do, although he was not
forbidden to use Jewish rites in order to declare
the honour of the oracles of God which were
committed to the Jews ; — if this, I say, were

6 Acts xxi. 24.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


)3


the case, was it strange that Paul should exhort
him to declare freely that decree which he re-
membered to have framed in conjunction with
the other apostles at Jerusalem?

11. If, however, as I am more inclined to
think, Peter did this before the meeting of that
council at Jerusalem, in that case also it is not
strange that Paul wished him not to conceal
timidly, but to declare boldly, a rule of practice
in regard to which he already knew that they
were both of the same mind ; whether he was
aware of this from having conferred with him
as to the gospel which both preached, or from
having heard that, at the calling of the centurion
Cornelius, Peter had been divinely instructed in
regard to this matter, or from having seen him
eating with Gentile converts before those whom
he feared to offend had come to Antioch. For
we do not deny that Peter was already of the
same opinion in regard to this question as Paul
himself was. Paul, therefore, was not teaching
Peter wliat was the truth concerning that matter,
but was reproving his dissimulation as a thing by
which the Gentiles were compelled to act as
Jews did ; for no other reason than this, that the
tendency of all such dissembling was to convey
or confirm the impression that they taught the
truth who held that believers could not be saved
without circumcision and other ceremonies,
which were shadows of things to come.

12. For this reason also he circumcised Tim-
othy, lest to the Jews, and especially to his rela-
tions bv the mother's side, it should seem that
the Gentiles who had believed in Christ abhorred
circumcision as they abhorred the worship of
idols ; whereas the former was appointed by God,
and the latter invented by Satan. Again, he did
not circumcise Titus, lest he should give occasion
to those who said that believers could not be
isaved without circumcision, and who, in order to

! deceive the Gentiles, openly declared that this

vas the view held by Paul. This is plainly

enough intimated by himself, when he says :

' But neither Titus, who was with me, being a

jreek, was compelled to be circumcised : and

hat because of false brethren unawares brought

n, who came in privily to spy out our liberty

thich we have in Christ Jesus, that they might

>ring us into bondage : to whom we gave place

iy subjection, no, not for an hour, that the truth

f the gospel might continue with you." ' Here

■e see plainly what he perceived them to be

agerly watching for, and why it was that he did

ot do in the case of Titus as he had done in

le case of Timothy, and as he might otherwise

ave done in the exercise of that liberty, by

hich he had shown that these observances were

zither to be demanded as necessary to salvation,

or denounced as unlawful.


Gal.


"• 3-5.


13. You say, however, that in this discussion
we must beware of affirming, with the philoso-
phers, that some of the actions of men lie in
a region between right and wrong, and are to
be reckoned, accordingly, neither among good
actions nor among the opposite ; ^ and it is urged
in your argument that the observance of legal
ceremonies cannot be a thing indifferent, but
either good or bad ; so that if I affirm it to be
good, I acknowledge that we also are bound
to observe these ceremonies ; but if I affirm it to
be bad, I am bound to believe that the apostles
observed them not sincerely, but in a way of
dissimulation. I, for my part, would not be so
much afraid of defending the apostles by the
authority of philosophers, since these teach some
measure of truth in their dissertations, as of
pleading on their behalf the practice of advo-
cates at the bar, in sometimes serving their cli-
ents' interests at the expense of truth. If, as is
stated in your exposition of the Epistle to the
Galatians, this practice of barristers may be in
your opinion with propriety quoted as resembling
and justifying dissimulation on the part of Peter
and Paul, why should I fear to allege to you the
authority of philosophers whose teaching we ac-
count worthless, not because everything which
they say is false, but because they are in most
things mistaken, and wherein they are found
affirming truth, are notwithstanding strangers to
the grace of Christ, who is the Truth?

14. But why may I not say regarding these
institutions of the old economy, that they are
neither good nor bad : not good, since men
are not by them justified, they having been only
shadows predicting the grace by which we are
justified ; and not bad, since they were divinely
appointed as suitable both to the time and to the
people ? Why may I not say this, when I am
supported by that saying of the prophet, that
God gave unto His people "statutes that were
not good"?^ For we have in this perhaps the
reason of his not calling them " bad," but call-
ing them " not good," i.e. not such that either by
them men could be made good, or that with-
out them men could not possibly become good.
I would esteem it a favour to be informed by
your Sincerity, whether any saint, coming from
the East to Rome, would be guilty of dissimula-
tion if he fasted on the seventh day of each week,
excepting the Saturday before Easter. For if we
say that it is wrong to fast on the seventh day,
we shall condemn not only the Church of Rome,
but also many other churches, both neighbouring
and more remote, in which the same custom
continues to be observed. If, on the other
hand, we pronounce it wrong not to fast on the
seventh day, how great is our presumption in

2 See Jerome's Letter, LXXV. sec. 16, p. 340.
•3 Ezek. XX. 25.


354


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


censuring so many churches in the East, and by
far the greater part of the Christian world ! Or
do you prefer to say of this practice, that it is a
thing indifferent in itself, but commendable in
him who conforms with it, not as a dissembler,
but from a seemly desire for the fellowship and
deference for the feelings of others ? No pre-
cept, however, concerning this practice is given
to Christians in the canonical books. How much
more, then, may I shrink from pronouncing that
to be bad which I cannot deny to be of divine
institution ! — this fact being admitted by me in
the exercise of the same faith by which I know
that not through these observances, but by the
grace of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, I
am justified.

15. I maintain, therefore, that circumcision,
and other things of this kind, were, by means
of w^hat is called the Old Testament, given to
the Jews with divine authority, as signs of future
things which were to be fulfilled in Christ ; and
that now, when these things have been fulfilled,
the laws concerning these rights remained only
to be read by Christians in order to their under-
standing the prophecies which had been given
before, but not to be of necessity practised by
them, as if the coming of that revelation of faith
which they prefigured was still future. Although,
however, these rites were not to be imposed
upon the Gentiles, the compliance with them,
to which the Jews had been accustomed, was
not to be prohibited in such a way as to give
the impression that it was worthy of abhorrence
and condemnation. Therefore slowly, and by
degrees, all this observance of these types was
to vanish away through the power of the sound
preaching of the truth of the grace of Christ,
to which alone believers would be taught to as-
cribe their justification and salvation, and not to
those types and shadows of things which till then
had been future, but which were now newly come
and present, as at the time of the calling of those
Jews whom the personal coming of our Lord
and the apostolic times had found accustomed
to the observance of these ceremonial institu-
tions. The toleration, for the time, of their
continuing to observe these was enough to de-
clare their excellence as things which, though
they were to be given up, were not, like the
worship of idols, worthy of abhorrence ; but
they were not to be imposed upon others, lest
they should be thought necessary, either as
means or as conditions of salvation. This was
the opinion of those heretics who, while anxious
to be both Jews and Christians, could not be
either the one or the other. Against this opin-
ion you have most benevolently condescended
to warn me, although I never entertained it.
This also was the opinion with which, through
fear, Peter fell into the fault of pretending to


yield concurrence, though in reality he did not
agree with it ; for which reason Paul wrote most
truly of him, that he saw him not walking up-
rightly, according to the truth of the gospel, and
most truly said of him that he was compelling
the Gentiles to live as did the Jews. Paul did
not impose this burden on the Gentiles through
his sincerely complying, when it was needful,
with these ceremonies, with the design of prov-
ing that they were not to be utterly condemned
(as idol-worship ought to be) ; for he neverthe-
less constantly preached that not by these things,
but by the grace revealed to faith, believers
obtain salvation, lest he should lead any one to
take up these Jewish observances as necessary
to salvation. Thus, therefore, I believe that the
Apostle Paul did all these thmgs honestly, and
without dissimulation ; and yet if any one now
leave Judaism and become a Christian, I neither
compel nor permit him to imitate Paul's exam-
ple, and go on with the sincere observance of
Jewish rites, any more than you, who think that
Paul dissembled when he practised these rites,
would compel or permit such an one to follow
the apostle in that dissimulation.

16. Shall I also sum up " the matter in debate,
or rather your opinion concerning it " ■ (to quote
your own expression) ? It seems to me to be
this : that after the gospel of Christ has been
published, the Jews who believe do rightly if
they offer sacrifices as Paul did, if they circum-
cise their children as Paul circumcised Timothy,
and if they observe the " seventh day of the|
week, as the Jews have always done, providedi
only that they do all this as dissemblers and
deceivers." If this is your doctrine, we are now|
precipitated, not into the heresy of Ebion, o:
of those who are commonly called NazareneSj
or any other known heresy, but into some new!
error, which is all the more pernicious becaus
it originates not in mistake, but in deliberati
and designed endeavour to deceive. If, in ordi
to clear yourself from the charge of entertaininj
such sentiments, you answer that the apostlei
were to be commended for dissimulation in the&
instances, their purpose being to avoid giviilj
offence to the many weak Jewish believers wh
did not yet understand that these things were t(
be rejected, but that now, when the doctrim
of Christ's grace has been firmly establishe
throughout so many nations, and when, by th
reading of the Law and the Proj)hets throughout
all the churches of Christ, it is well known thaj
these are not read for our observance, but folj
our instruction, any man who should propose t(|
feign compliance with these rites would be rel
garded as a madman. What objection can thew
be to my affirming that the Apostle Paul, and'

I See Letter LXXV. sec. 13, p. 338.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


355


other sound and faithful Christians, were bound
sincerely to declare the worth of these old ob-
ser\ances by occasionally honouring them, lest
it should be thought that these institutions, origi-
nally full of prophetic significance, and cherished
sacredly by their most pious forefathers, were to
be abhorred by their posterity as profane inven-
tions of the devil? For now, when the faith
had come, which, previously foreshadowed by
these ceremonies, was re\ealed after the death
and resurrection of the Lord, they became, so
far as their office was concerned, defunct. But
just as it is seemly that the bodies of the deceased
be carried honourably to the grave by their kin-
dred, so was it fitting that these rites should be
removed in a manner worthy of their origin and :
history, and this not with pretence of respect,
but as a religious duty, instead of being forsaken
at once, or cast forth to be torn in pieces by the
reproaches of their enemies, as by the teeth of
dogs. To carry the illustration further, if now
any Christian (though he may have been con-
verted from Judaism) were proposing to imitate
the apostles in the observance of these ceremo-
nies, like one who disturbs the ashes of those
who rest, he would be not piously performing
his part in the obsequies, but impiously violating
the sepulchre.

17. I acknowledge that in the statement con-
tained in my letter, to the effect that the reason
why Paul undertook (although he was an apostle
of Christ) to perform certain rites, was that he
might show that these ceremonies were not per-
nicious to those who desired to continue that
which they had received by the Law from their
fathers, I have not explicitly enough qualified
[the statement, by adding that this was the case
\only in that time in ivhicJi the grace of faith was
\at first revealed ; for at that time this was not
jpernicious. These obsen-ances were to be given
lup by all Christians step by step, as time ad-
vanced ; not all at once, lest, if this were done,
taen should not perceive the difference between
tvhat God by Moses appointed to His ancient
»eople, and the rites which the unclean spirit
aught men to practise in the temples of heathen
leities. I grant, therefore, that in this your
:ensure is justifiable, and my omission deserved
■jbuke. jSfevertheless, long before the time of
ay receiving your letter, when I wrote a treatise
gainst Faustus the Manichaean, I did not omit
3 insert the qualifying clause which I have just
tated, in a short exposition which I gave of the
■ime passage, as you may see for yourself if you
indly condescend to read that treatise ; or you
lay be satisfied in any other way that you please
y the bearer of this letter, that I had long ago
nblished this restriction of the general affirma-
on. And I now, as speaking in the sight of
od, beseech you by the law of charity to believe


me when I say with my whole heart, that it never
was my opinion that in our time, Jews who be-
come Christians were either required or at lib-
erty to observe in any manner, or from any
motive whatever, the ceremonies of the ancient
dispensation ; although I have always held, in
regard to the Apostle Paul, the opinion which
you call in question, from the time that I became
acquainted with his writings. Nor can these two
things appear incompatible to you ; for you do
not think it is the duty of any one in our day
to feign compliance with these Jewish observ-
ances, although you believe that the apostles did
this.

18. Accordingly, as you in opposing me af-
firm, and, to quote your own words, " though
the world were to protest against it, boldly de-
clare that the Jewish ceremonies are to Chris-
tians both hurtful and fatal, and that whoever
observes them, whether he was originally Jew or
Gentile, is on his way to the pit of perdition," '
I entirely indorse that statement, and add to it,
" \^'hoever observes these ceremonies, whether
he was originally Jew or Gentile, is on his way
to the pit of perdition, not only if he is sincerely
observing them, but also if he is observing them
with dissimulation." What more do you ask?
But as you draw a distinction between the dis-
simulation which you hold to have been practised
by the apostles, and the rule of conduct befitting
the present time, I do the same between the
course which Paul, as I think, sincerely followed
in all these examples then, and the matter of
observing in our day these Jewish ceremonies,
although it were done, as by him, without any
dissimulation, since it was then to be approved,
but is now to be abhorred. Thus, although we
read that " the law and the prophets were until
John," ^ and that " therefore the Jews sought the
more to kill Him, because He not only had
broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was
His Father, making Himself equal with God," -5
and that " we have received grace for grace ; for
the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ ; " •♦ and although it was
promised by Jeremiah that God would make a
new covenant with the house of Judah, not ac-
cording to the covenant which He made with
their fathers ; 5 nevertheless I do not think that
the circumcision of our Lord by His parents was
an act of dissimulation. If any one object that
He did not forbid this because He was but an
infant, I go on to say that I do not think that it
was with intention to deceive that He said to
the leper, " Offer for thy cleansing those things
which Moses commanded for a testimony unto

' See Letter LXXV. sec. 14, pp. 338, 339.

2 Luke xvi. 16.

3 John V. 18.

* John i. t6, 17.
5 Jer. x.\xi. 31.


356


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


them,"' — thereby adding His own precept to
the authority of the law of Moses regarding that
ceremonial usage. Nor was there dissimulation
in His going up to the feast,^ as there was also
no desire to be seen of men ; for He went up,
not openly, but secretly.

19. But the words of the apostle himself may
be quoted against me : "Behold, I Paul say unto
you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing." 3 It follows from this that he de-
ceived Timothy, and made Christ profit him
nothing, for he circumcised Timothy. Do you
answer that this circumcision did Timothy no
harm, because it was done with an intention to
deceive ? I reply that the apostle has not made
any such exception. He does not say. If ye
be circumcised without dissimulation, any more
than. If ye be circumcised with dissimulation. He
says unreservedly, " If ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing." As, therefore, you
insist upon finding room for your interpretation,
by proposing to supply the words, " unless it be
done as an act of dissimulation," I make no un-
reasonable demand in asking you to permit me
to understand the words, " if ye be circumcised,"
to be in that passage addressed to those who
demanded circumcision, for this reason, that they
thought it impossible for them to be otherwise
saved by Christ. Whoever was then circumcised
because of such persuasion and desire, and with
this design, Christ assuredly profited him noth-
ing, as the apostle elsewhere expressly aflfirms,
'• If righteousness come by the law, Christ is
dead in vain." + The same is affirmed in words
which you have quoted : " Christ is become of
no effect to you, whosoever of you is justified by
the law; ye are fallen from grace." 5 His re-
buke, therefore, was addressed to those who
beheved that they were to be justified by the
law, — not to those who, knowing well the de-
sign with which the legal ceremonies were insti-
tuted as foreshadowing truth, and the time for
which they were destined to be in force, observed
them in order to honour Him who appointed
them at first. Wherefore also he says elsewhere,
" If ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the
law,"^ — a passage from which you infer, that
evidently " he has not the Holy Spirit who sub-
mits to the Law, not, as our fathers affirmed the
apostles to have done, feignedly under the
prompdngs of a wise discretion, but" — as I
suppose to have been the case — " sincerely." ^

20. It seems to me important to ascertain pre-
cisely what is that submission to the law which


' Mark i. 44.
^ John vii 10.
3 Gal. V. 2.
* Gal. ii. 21.

5 Gal. V. 4.

6 Gal. V. 18.

' Jerome, Letter LXXV. .sec. 14, p. 339.


the apostle here condemns ; for I do not think
that he speaks here of circumcision merely, or
of the sacrifices then offered by our fathers, but
now not offered by Christians, and other ob-
servances of the same nature. I rather hold
that he includes also that precept of the law,
" Thou shalt not covet," ^ which we confess that
Christians are unquestionably bound to obey,
and which we find most fully proclaimed by the
light which the Gospel has shed upon it.'' " The
law," he says, " is holy, and the commandment
holy, and just, and good ; " and then adds,
" ^^'as, then, that which is good made death
unto me ? God forbid." " But sin, that it might
appear sin, wrought death in me by that which
is good ; that sin, by the commandment, might
become exceeding sinful." '° As he says here,
" that sin by the commandment might become
exceeding sinful," so elsewhere, " The law en-
tered that the offence might abound ; but where
sin abounded, grace did much more abound." "
Again, in another place, after affirming, when
speaking of the dispensation of grace, that grace
alone justifies, he asks, " Wherefore then serveth
the law?" and answers immediately, "It was
added because of transgressions, until the Seed
should come to whom the promises were made." '*
The persons, therefore, whose submission to the
law the apostle here pronounces to be the cause
of their own condemnation, are those whom the
law brings in guilty, as not fulfilling its require-
ments, and who, not understanding the efficacy
of free grace, rely with self-satisfied presumption
on their own strength to enable them to keep
the law of God ; for " love is the fulfilling of the
law." '3 Now " the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts," not by our own power, but " by
the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us." '•* The
satisfactory discussion of this, however, would
require too long a digression, if not a separate
volume. If, then, that precept of the law,
"Thou shalt not covet," holds under it as guilty
the man whose human weakness is not assisted
by the grace of God, and instead of acquitting
the sinner, condemns him as a transgressor, how
much more was it impossible for those ordi-
nances which were merely t^'pical, circumcision
and the rest, which were destined to be abolished
when the revelation of grace became more widely
known, to be the means of justifying any man !
Nevertheless they were not on this ground to be
immediately shunned with abhorrence, like the
diabolical impieties of heathenism, from the first
beginning of the revelation of the grace which


8 Ex. XX. 17 and Deut. v 21.

9 Evangelica niaxtjne ilhistratioiie pmdicari.
'° Rom. vii. 13.

" Rom. V. 20.

'- Gal. iii. 19.

'^ Rom. xiii. 10. -

'^ Rom. V. 5.


i


l>


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


o/


had been by these shadows prefigured ; but to
be for a Httle while tolerated, especially among
those who joined the Christian Church from that
nation to whom these ordinances had been given.
When, however, they had been, as it were, hon-
ourably buried, they were thenceforward to be
finally abandoned by all Christians.

21. Now, as to the words which you use, " non
dispensative, ut nostri voluere majores," ' — " not
in a way justifiable by expediency, the ground
on which our fathers were disposed to explain
the conduct of the apostles," — pray what do
these words mean? Surely nothing else than
that which I call " officiosum mendacium," the
liberty granted by expediency being equivalent
to a call of duty to utter a falsehood with pious
intention. I at least can see no other explana-
I tion, unless, of course, the mere addition of the
i words " permitted by expediency " be enough
I to make a lie cease to be a lie ; and if this be
absurd, why do you not openly say that a lie
spoken in the way of duty ^ is to be defended ?
i Perhaps the name offends you, because the word
j] "officium" is not common in ecclesiastical books ;
I but this did not deter our Ambrose from its use,
l] for he has chosen the title " De Ofificiis " for
j some of his books that are full of useful rules.
I Do you mean to say, that whoever utters a lie
jj from a sense of duty is to be blamed, and who-
lever does the same on the ground of expediency
ills to be approved? I beseech you, consider
that the man who thinks this may lie whenever
he thinks fit, because this involves the whole
important question whether to say what is false
5 be at any time the duty of a good man, espe-
'cially of a Christian man, to whom it has been
said, " Let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay,
lest ye fall into condemnation," 3 and who be-
lieves the Psalmist's word, "Thou wilt destroy all
|them that speak lies." •*

2 2. This, however, is, as I have said, another
and a weighty question ; I leave him who is of
this opinion to judge for himself the circum-
istances in which he is at liberty to utter a lie :
provided, however, that it be most assuredly be-
ieved and maintained that this way of lying is
"ar removed from the authors who were em-
ployed to write holy writings, especially the
:anonical Scriptures ; lest those who are the
itevvards of Christ, of whom it is said, " It is
equired in stewards, that a man be found faith-
ul," 5 should seem to have proved their fidelity
)y learning as an important lesson to speak what
false when this is expedient for the truth's
Jake, although the word fidelity itself, in the
Latin tongue, is said to signify originally a real


' Letter LXXV. sec. 14, p. 339.
^ Mendacium officiosum,
3 Jas. V. 12; Matt. v. 37.
« Ps. V. 6.
5 I Cor. iv. 2.


correspondence between what is said and what
is done.*^ Now, where that which is spoken is
actually done, there is assuredly no room for
falsehood. Paul therefore, as a " faithful stew-
ard," doubtless is to be regarded as approving
his fidelity in his writings ; for he was a steward
of truth, not of falsehood. Therefore he wrote
the truth when he wrote that he had seen Peter
walking not uprightly, according to the truth of
the gospel, and that he had withstood him to
the face because he was compelling the Gentiles
to Hve as the Jews did. And Peter himself re-
ceived, with the holy and loving humility which
became him, the rebuke which Paul, in the in-
terests of truth, and with the boldness of love,
administered. Therein Peter left to those that
came after him an example, that, if at any time
they deviated from the right path, they should
not think it beneath them to accept correction
from those who were their juniors, — an exam-
ple more rare, and requiring greater piety, than
that which Paul's conduct on the same occasion
left us, that those who are younger should have
courage even to withstand their seniors if the
defence of evangelical truth required it, yet in
such a way as to preserve unbroken brotherly
love. For while it is better for one to succeed
in perfectly keeping the right path, it is a thing
much more worthy of admiration and praise to
receive admonition meekly, than to admonish a
transgressor boldly. On that occasion, there-
fore, Paul was to be praised for upright courage,
Peter was to be praised for holy humihty ; and
so far as my judgment enables me to form an
opinion, this ought rather to have been asserted
in answer to the calumnies of Porphyry, than
further occasion given to him for finding fault,
j by putting it in his power to bring against Chris-
tians this much more damaging accusation, that
either in writing their letters or in complying
with the ordinances of God they practised deceit.
Chap. hi. — 23. You call upon me to bring
fonvard the name of even one whose opinion I
have followed in this matter, and at the same
time you have quoted the names of many who
have held before you the opinion which you de-
fend.^ You also say that if I censure you for
an error in this, you beg to be allowed to remain
in error in company with such great men. I
have not read their writings ; but although they
are only six or seven in all, you have yourself
impugned the authority of four of them. For
as to the Laodicean author,^ whose name you do
not give, you say that he has lately forsaken the
Church ; Alexander you describe as a heretic
of old standing ; and as to Origen and Didy-
mus, I read in some of your more recent works,

6 Cum ipsa fides i?t latino sermone ab eo dicatur appellata
quia fil quod dicitur.

7 Jerome's Letter, LXXV. sec. 6, p. 335.

8 Ibid. sec. 4, p. 334.


JD


S8


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


censure passed on their opinions, and that in no
measured terms, nor in regard to insignificant
questions, although formerly you gave Origen
marvellous praise. I suppose, therefore, that
you would not even yourself be contented to be
in error with these men ; although the language
which I refer to is equivalent to an assertion that
in this matter they have not erred. For who is
there that would consent to be knowingly mis-
taken, with whatever company he might share
his errors? Three of the seven therefore alone
remain, Eusebius of Emesa, Theodorus of Hera-
clea, and John, whom you afterwards mention,
who formerly presided as pontiff over the Church
of Constantinople.

24. However, if you inquire or recall to mem-
ory the opinion of our Ambrose,' and also of
our Cyprian,^ on the point in question, you will
perhaps find that I also have not been without
some whose footsteps I follow in that which I have
maintained. At the same time, as I have said
already, it is to the canonical Scriptures alone
that I am bound to yield such implicit sul)jection
as to follow their teaching, without admitting
the slightest suspicion that in them any mis-
take or any statement intended to mislead could
find a place. Wherefore, when I look round
for a third name that I may oppose three on my
side to your three, I might indeed easily find
one, I believe, if my reading had been exten-
sive ; but one occurs to me whose name is as
good as all these others, nay, of greater author-
ity — I mean the Apostle Paul himself. To him
I betake myself; to himself I appeal from the
verdict of all those commentators on his writings
who advance an opinion different from mine. I
interrogate him, and demand from himself to
know whether he wrote what was true, or under
some plea of expediency wrote what he knew to
be false, when he wrote that he saw Peter not
walking upriglitly, according to the truth of the
gospel, and withstood him to his face because by
that dissimulation he was compelling the Gen-
tiles to live after the manner of the Jews. And
I hear him in reply proclaiming with a solemn
oath in an earlier part of the epistle, where he
began this narration, "The things that I write
unto you, behold, before God, I lie not." ^

25. Let those who think otherwise, however
great their names, excuse my differing from
them. The testimony of so great an apostle
using, in his own writings, an oath as a confir-
mation of their truth, is of more weight with me
than the opinion of any man, however learned,
who is discussing the writings of another. Nor
am I afraid lest men should say that, in vindi-


' In his Commentary on Galatians.

2 In his letter, LXX., to Quintus; Ante-Nicene Fathers, Am.
ed. vol. V. p. 377.

3 Gal. i. 20.


eating Paul from the charge of pretending to
conform to the errors of Jewish prejudice, I
affirm him to have actually so conformed. For
as, on the one hand, he was not guilty of pre-
tending conformity to error when, with the lib-
erty of an apostle, such as was suitable to that
period of transition, he did, by practising those
ancient holy ordinances, when it was necessary
to declare their original excellence as appointed
not by the wiles of Satan to deceive men, but
by the wisdom of God for the purpose of typi-
cally foretelling things to come ; so, on the other
hand, he was not guilty of real conformity to
the errors of Judaism, seeing that he not only
knew, but also preached constantly and vehe-
mently, that those were in error who thought
that these ceremonies were to be imposed upon
the Gentile converts, or were necessary to the
justification of any who believed.

26. Moreover, as to my saying that to the
Jews he became as a Jew, and to the Gentiles as
a Gentile, not with the subtlety of intentional
deceit, but with the compassion of pitying love,''
it seems to me that you have not sufficiently
considered my meaning in the words ; or rather,
perhaps, I have not succeeded in making it plain.
For I did not mean by this that I supposed him
to have practised in either case a feigned con-
formity ; but I said it because his conformity
was sincere, not less in the things in which he
became to the Jews as a Jew, than in those in
which he became to the Gentiles as a Gentile, —
a parallel which you yourself suggested, and by
which I thankfully acknowledge that you have
materially assisted my argument. For when I
had in my letter asked you to explain how it
could be supposed that Paul's becoming to the
Jews as a Jew involved the supposition that he
must have acted deceitfully in conforming to
the Jewish observances, seeing that no such
deceptive conformity to heathen customs was
involved in his becoming as a Gentile to the
Gentiles ; your answer was, that his becoming i
to the Gentiles as a Gentile meant no more
than his receiving the uncircumcised, and per-
mitting the free use of those meats which were
pronounced unclean by Jewish law. If, then,
when I ask whether in this also he practised
dissimulation, such an idea is repudiated as pal-
pably most absurd and false : it is an obvious
inference, that in his performing those things in
which he became as a Jew to the Jews, he was
using a wise liberty, not yielding to a degrading
compulsion, nor doing what would be still more
unworthy of him, viz. stooping from integrity to
fraud out of a regard to expediency.

27. For to believers, and to those who know
the truth, as the apostle testifies (unless here


4 Letter XL. sec,
12, p. 338.


4, p. 273 i quoted also by Jerome, LXXV. sec


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


159


too, perhaps, he is deceiving his readers) , " every
creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving." '
Therefore to Paul himself, not only as a man,
but as a steward eminently faithful, not only as
knowing, but also as a teacher of the truth, every
creature of God which is used for food was not
feignedly but truly good. If, then, to the Gen-
tiles he became as a Gentile, by holding and
teaching the truth concerning meats and circum-
cision, although he feigned no conformity to the
rites and ceremonies of the Gentiles, why say
that it was impossible for him to become as a Jew
to the Jews, unless he practised dissimulation in
performing the rites of their religion? Why did
he maintain the true faithfulness of a steward
towards the wild olive branch that was engrafted,
and yet hold up a strange veil of dissimulation,
on the plea of expediency, before those who
were the natural and original branches of the
olive tree ? Why was it that, in becoming as a
Gentile to the Gentiles, his teaching and his
conduct^ are in harmony with his real senti-
ments ; but that, in becoming as a Jew to the
Jews, he shuts up one thing in his heart, and
declares something wholly different in his words,
deeds, and writings ? But far be it from us to
entertain such thoughts of him. To both Jews
and Gentiles he owed " charity out of a pure
heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned ; " ^ and therefore he became all things
to all men, that he might gain all,'* not with the
subtlety of a deceiver, but with the love of one
filled with compassion ; that is to say, not by
pretending himself to do all the evil things which
other men did, but by using the utmost pains to
minister with all compassion the remedies re-
quired by the evils under which other men
laboured, as if their case had been his own.

28. When, therefore, he did not refuse to
practise some of these Old Testament observ-
ances, he was not led by his compassion for Jews
to feign this conformity, but unquestionably was
acting sincerely ; and by this course of action
declaring his respect for those things which in
the former dispensation had been for a time
enjoined by God, he distinguished between them
and the impious rites of heathenism. At that
time, moreover, not with the subtlety of a de-
ceiver, but with the love of one moved by com-
passion, he became to the Jews as a Jew, when,
seeing them to be in error, which either made
them unwilling to believe in Christ, or made them
think that by these old sacrifices and ceremonial
observances they could be cleansed from sin
and made partakers of salvation, he desired so


iof


' I Tim. iv. 4.

' We follow here the reading of fourteen MSS., " a^ii" instead
" ait."
3 I Tim. i. 5.
* I Cor. ix. 19-22.


to deliver them from that error as if he saw not
them, but himself, entangled in it ; thus truly
loving his neighbour as himself, and doing to
others as he would have others do to him if he
required their help, — a duty to the statement
of which our Lord added these words, " This is
the law and the prophets." 5

29. This compassionate affection Paul recom-
mends in the same Epistle to the Galatians, say-
ing : " If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which
are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of
meekness ; considering thyself, lest thou also be
tempted."^ See whether he has not said, " Make
thyself as he is, that thou mayest gain him."
Not, indeed, that one should commit or pretend
to have committed the same fault as the one
who has been overtaken, but that in the fault of
that other he should consider what might happen
to himself, and so compassionately render assist-
ance to that other, as he would wish that other
to do to him if the case were his ; that is, not
with the subtlety of a deceiver, but with the love
of one filled with compassion. Thus, whatever
the error or fault in which Jew or Gentile or any
man was found by Paul, to all men he became
all things, — not by feigning what was not true,
but by feeling, because the case might have been
his own, the compassion of one who put himself
in the other's place, — that he might gain all.

Ch.a.p. IV, — 30. I beseech you to look, if you
please, for a little into your own heart, — I mean,
into your own heart as it stands affected towards
myself, — and recall, or if you have it in writing
beside you, read again, your own words in that
letter (only too brief) which you sent to me by
Cyprian our brother, now my colleague. Read
with what sincere brotherly and loving earnest-
ness you have added to a serious complaint of
what I had done to you these words : '* In this
friendship is wounded, and the laws of brotherly
union are set at nought. Let not the world see
us quarrelling like children, and giving material
for angry contention between those who may be-
come our respective supporters or adversaries." '
These words I perceive to be spoken by, you from
the heart, and from a heart kindly seeking to give
me good advice. Then you add, what would have
been obvious to me even without your stating it :
" I write what I have now written, because I desire
to cherish towards you pure and Christian love,
and not to hide in my heart anything which does
not agree with the utterance of my lips." O
pious man, beloved by me, as God who seeth
my soul is witness, with a true heart I believe
your statement ; and just as I do not question
the sincerity of the profession which you have
thus made in a letter to me, so do I by all


S Matt. vii. 12.

f" Gal. vii. 2.

7 Letter LXXII. sec. 4.


36o


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


means believe the Apostle Paul when he makes
the very same profession in his letter, addressed
not to any one individual, but to Jews and Greeks,
and all those Gentiles who were his children in
the gospel, for whose spiritual birth he travailed,
and after them to so many thousands of believers
in Christ, for whose sake that letter has bee^
preserved. I believe, I say, that he did not
" hide in his heart anything which did not agree
with the utterance of his lips."

31. You have indeed yourself done towards
me this very thing, — becoming to me as I am,
— " not with the subtlety of deception, but with
the love of compassion," when you thought that
it behoved you to take as much pains to prevent
me from being left in a mistake, in which you
believed me to be, as you would have wished
another to take for your deliverance if the case
had been your own. Wherefore, gratefully ac-
knowledging this evidence of your goodwill
towards me, I also claim that you also be not
displeased with me, if, when anything in your
treatises disquieted me, I acquainted you with my
distress, desiring the same course to be followed
by all towards me as I have followed towards
you, that whatever they think worthy of censure
m my writings, they would neither flatter me
with deceitful commendation nor blame me be-
fore others for that of which they are silent
towards myself; thereby, as it seems to me, more
seriously " wounding friendship and setting at
nought the laws of brotherly union." For I
would hesitate to give the name of Christian to
those friendships in which the common proverb,
" Flattery makes friend?, and truth makes ene-
mies," ' is of more authority than the scriptural
proverb, " Faithful are the wounds of a friend,
but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful." ^

32. Wherefore let us rather do our utmost to
set before our beloved friends, who most cordially
wish us well in our labours, such an example
that they may know that it is possible for the
most intimate friends to differ so much in opinion,
that the views of the one may be contradicted by
the other without any diminution of their mutual
affection, and without hatred being kindled by
that truth which is due to genuine friendship,
whether the contradiction be in itself in accord-
ance with truth, or at least, whatever its intrinsic
value is, be spoken from a sincere heart by one
who is resolved not " to hide in his heart anything
which does not agree with the utterance of his
lips." Let therefore our brethren, your friends,
of whom you bear testimony that they are vessels
of Christ, believe me when I say that it was
wholly against my will that my letter came into
the hands of many others before it reached your
own, and that my heart is filled with no small

' Terence, Attdria, Act i. So. i.
2 Prov. xxvii. 6.


sorrow for this mistake. How it happened would
take long to tell, and this is now, if I am not
mistaken, unnecessary ; since, if my word is to
be taken at all in regard to this, it suffices for
me to say that it was not done by me with the
sinister intention which is supposed by some,
and that it was not by my wish, or arrangement,
or consent, or design that this has taken place.
If they do not believe this, which I affirm in the
sight of God, I can do no more to satisfy them.
Far be it, however, from me to believe that they
made this suggestion to your Holiness with the
malicious desire to kindle enmity between you
and me, from which may God in His mercy
defend us ! Doubtless, without any intention
of doing me wrong, they readily suspected me,
as a man, to be capable of failings common to
human nature. For it is right for me to believe
this concerning them, if they be vessels of Christ
appointed not to dishonour, but to honour, and
made meet by God for every good work in His
great house. ^ If, however, this my solemn prot-
estation come to their knowledge, and they still
persist in the same opinion of my conduct, you
will yourself see that in this they will do wrong.
33. As to my having written that I had never
sent to Rome a book against you, I wrote this
because, in the first place, I did not regard the
name " book " as applicable to my letter, and
therefore was under the impression that you had
heard of something else entirely different from
it ; in the second place, I had not sent the letter
in question to Rome, but to you ; and in the
third place, I did not consider it to be against
you, because I knew that I had been prompted
by the sincerity of friendship, which should give
liberty for the exchange of suggestions and cor-
rections between us. Leaving out of sight for
a little while your friends of whom I have spoken,
I implore yourself, by the grace whereby we have
been redeemed, not to suppose that I have been
guilty of artful flattery in anything which I have
said in my letters concerning the good gifts which
have been by the Lord's goodness bestowed on
you. If, however, I have in anything wronged
you, forgive me. As to that incident in the life
of some forgotten bard, which, with perhaps
more pedantry than good taste, I quoted from
classic literature, I beg you not to carry the ap-
plication of it to yourself further than my words
warranted ; for I immediately added : " I do not
say this in order that you may recover the faculty
of spiritual sight — far be it from me to say that
you have lost it ! — but that, having eyes both
clear and quick in discernment, you may turn
them to this matter." ■♦ I thought a reference to
that incident suitable exclusively in connection
with the TraAti/wSta, in which we ought all to imi-

3 2 Tim. ii. 20, 21.

* Letter XL. sec. 7, p. 274.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


361


tate Stesichorus if we have written anything
which it becomes our duty to correct in a writ-
ing of later date, and not at all in connection
with the blindness of Stesichorus, which I neither
ascribed to your mind, nor feared as likely to be-
fall you. And again, I beseech you to correct
boldly whatever you see needful to censure in
my writings. For although, so far as the titles
of honour which prevail in the Church are con-
cerned, a bishop's rank is above that of a pres-
byter, nevertheless in many things Augustin is
inferior to Jerome ; albeit correction is not to be
refused nor despised, even when it comes from
one who in all respects may be an inferior.

Chap. v. — 34. As to your translation, you
have now convinced me of the benefits to be
secured by your proposal to translate the Scrip-
tures from the original Hebrew, in order that
you may bring to light those things which have
been either omitted or perverted by the Jews.
But I beg you to be so good as state by what
Jews this has been done, whether by those who
before the Lord's advent translated the Old Tes-
tament — and if so, by what one or more of
them — or by the Jews of later times, who may
be supposed to have mutilated or corrupted the
Greek mss., in order to prevent themselves from
being unable to answer the evidence given by
these concerning the Christian faith. I cannot
find any reason which should have prompted the
earlier Jewish translators to such unfaithfulness.
I beg of you, moreover, to send us your transla-
tion of the Septuagint, which I did not know
that you had published. I am also longing to
read that book of yours which you named De
Optimo gene?-e iiiterpretandi, and to know from it
how to adjust the balance between the product
of the translator's acquaintance with the original
language, and the conjectures of those who are
able commentators on the Scripture, who, not-
withstanding their common loyalty to the one
true faith, must often bring forward various opin-
ions on account of the obscurity of many pas-
sages ; ' although this difference of interpretation
by no means involves departure from the unity
of the faith ; just as one commentator may him-
self give, in harmony with the faith which he
holds, two different interpretations of the same
passage, because the obscurity of the passage
makes both equally admissible.

35. I desire, moreover, your translation of the
jSeptuagint, in order that we may be delivered,
so far as is possible, from the consequences of
the notable incompetency of those who, whether
qualified or not, have attempted a Latin trans-
jlation ; and in order that those who think that I
look with jealousy on your useful labours, may at

' An important sentence, as indicating the estimation in which
Augustin held the " consensus patrum " as an authority in the inter-
pretation of Scripture.


length, if it be possible, perceive that my only
reason for objecting to the public reading of your
translation from the Hebrew in our churches was,
lest, bringing forward anything which was, as it
were, new and opposed to the authority of the
Septuagint version, we should trouble by serious
cause of offence the flocks of Christ, whose ears
and hearts have become accustomed to listen to
that version to which the seal of approbation was
given by the apostles themselves. Wherefore, as
to that shrub in the book of Jonah,^ if in the
Hebrew it is neither " gourd " nor " ivy," but
something else which stands erect, supported by
its own stem without other props, I would pre-
fer to call it " gourd " in all our Latin versions ;
for I do not think that the Seventy would have
rendered it thus at random, had they not known
that the plant was something like a gourd.

36. I think I have now given a sufficient
answer (perhaps more than sufficient) to your
three letters ; of which I received two by Cyp-
rian, and one by Firmus. In replying, send
whatever you think likely to be of use in in-
structing me and others. And I shall take more
care, as the Lord may help me, that any letter
which I may write to you shall reach yourself
before it falls into the hand of any other, by
whom its contents may be published abroad ;
for I confess that I would not like any letter of
yours to me to meet with the fate of which you
justly complain as having befallen my letter to
you. Let us, however, resolve to maintain be-
tween ourselves the liberty as well as the love of
friends ; so that in the letters which we exchange,
neither of us shall be restrained from frankly
stating to the other whatever seems to him open
to correction, provided always that this be done
in the spirit which does not, as inconsistent with
brotherly love, displease God. If, however, you
do not think that this can be done between us
without endangering that brotherly love, let us
not do it : for the love which I should like to see
maintained between us is assuredly the greater
love which would make this mutual freedom pos-
sible ; but the smaller measure of it is better
than none at all.^

LETl^ER LXXXIII.

(a.d. 405.)

to my lord alypius most blessed, my brother
and colleague, beloved and longed for

2 Ch. iv. 6.

3 It is interesting to know that Jerome afterwards admitted the
soundness of the view so ably and reasonably defended by Augustin
in this letter concerning the rebuke of Peter at Antioch. In Letter
CLXXX., addressed to Oceanus, we have these words: " This ques-
tion the venerable Father Jerome and I have discussed fully in letters
which we exchanged; and in the last work which he has published
against Pelagius, under the name of Critobulus, he has maintained
the same opinion concerning that event, and the sayings of the apos-
tles, as I myself had adopted, following the blessed Cyprian." See
Jerome, book i., against the Pelagians, and Cyprian, Letter LXX., to
CJuintus.


362


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


WITH SINCERE VENERATION, AND TO THE BRETH-
REN THAT ARE WITH HIM, AUGUSTIN AND THE
BRETHREN WITH HIM SEND GREETING IN THE
LORD.

I. The sorrow of the members of the Church
at Thiave prevents my heart from having any
rest until I hear that they have been brought
ac^ain to be of the same mind towards you as
they formerly were ; which must be accomplished
without delay. For if the apostle was concerned
about one individual, " lest perhaps such an one
should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow,"
adding in the same context the words, "lest
Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are
not ignorant of his devices," ' how much more
does it become us to act with caution, lest we
cause similar grief to a whole flock, and especially
one composed of persons who have lately been
reconciled to the Catholic Church, and whom I
can upon no account forsake ! As, however, the i
short time at our disposal did not permit us so j
to take counsel together as to arrive at a mature j
and satisfactory decision, may it please your |
Holiness to accept in this letter the finding whicb
commended itself most to me when I had long
reflected upon the matter since we parted ; and
if you approve of it, let the enclosed letter,^ i
which I have written to them in the name of
both of us, be sent to them without delay,
t 2. You proposed that they should have the
one half [of the property left by Honoratus],
and that the other half should be made up to
them by me from such resources as might be at
my disposal. I think, however, that if the
whole property had been taken from them, men
might reasonably have said that we had taken
the great pains in this matter which we have
done, for the sake of justice, not for pecuniary
advantage. But when we concede to them one
half, and in that way setde with them by a com-
promise, it will be manifest that our anxiety has
been only about the money ; and you see what
harm must follow from this. For, on the one
hand, we shall be regarded by them as having
taken away one half of a property to which we
had no claim ; and, on the other hand, they will
be regarded by us as dishonourably and unjusUy
consenting to accept aid from one half of a
property of which the whole belonged to the poor.
For your remark, " We must beware lest, in our
efforts to obtain a right adjustment of a diffi-
cult question, we cause more serious wounds,"
applies with no less force if the half be conceded
to them. For those whose turning from the
world to monastic life we desire to secure, will,
for the sake of this half of their private estates,
be disposed to find some excuse for putting off


the sale of these, in order that their case may be
dealt with according to this precedent. More-
over, would it not be strange, if, in a question
like this, where much may be said on both sides,
a whole community should, through our not
avoiding the appearance of evil, be offended by
the impression that their bishops, whom they
hold in high esteem, are smitten with sordid

avarice ?

3. For when any one is turned to adopt the
life of a monk, if he is adopting it with a true
heart, he does not think of that which I have
just mentioned, especially if he be admonished
of the sinfulness of such conduct. But if he be
a deceiver, and is seeking " his own things, not
the things which are Jesus Christ's," 3 he has not
charity; and without this, what does it profit
him, " though he bestow all his goods to feed
the poor, and though he give his body to be
burned " ? ■♦ Moreover, as we agreed when con-
versing together, this may be henceforth avoided,
and an arrangement made with each hidividual
who is disposed to enter a monastery, if he can-
not be admitted to the society of the brethren
before he has relieved himself of all these en-
cumbrances, and comes as one at leisure from
; all business, because the property which belonged
' to him has ceased to be his. But there is no
other way in which this spiritual death of weak


brethren, and grievous obstacle to the salvation
of those for whose reconciliation with the Catho-
lic Church we so earnesdy labour, can be avoided,
than by our giving them most clearly to under-
stand that we are by no means anxious about
money in such cases as this. And this they
cannot be made to understand, unless we leave
to their use the estate which they always sup-
posed to belong to their late presbyter ; because,
even if it was not his, they ought to have known
this from the beginning.

4. It seems to me, therefore, that in matters
of this kind, the rule which ought to hold is, that
whatever belonged, according to the ordinary
civil laws regarding property, to him who is an
ordained clergyman in any place, belongs after
his death to the Church over which he was or- j
dained. Now, by civil law, the property in .
question belonged to the presbyter Honoratus ;
so that not only on accotmt of his being or-
dained elsewhere, but even had he remained m
the monastery of Thagaste, if he had died with-
out having either sold his estate or handed it
over by express deed of gift to any one, the right
of succession to it would belong only to his heirs :
as brother .'F:milianus inherited those thirty shil-
lings 5 left by the brother Privatus. This, there-
fore, behoved to be considered and provided for


' 2 Cor. ii. 7, II.

2 This letter has not been preserved.


3 Phil. ii. 21.

4 I Cor. xiii. 3.

5 Solidi.


i


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


3^3


in time ; but if no provision was made for it, we
must, in the disposal of the estate, comply with
the laws which have been appointed to regulate
in civil society the holding or not holding of
proper-ty ; that we may, so far as is in our power,
abstain not only from the reality, but also from
all appearance of evil, and preserve that good
name which is so necessary to our office as
stewards. How truly this procedure has the
appearance of evil, I beseech your wisdom to
observe. For having heard of their sorrow,
which we ourselves witnessed at Thiave, fearing
lest, as frequently happens, I should myself be
mistaken through partiality for my own opinion,
I stated the facts of the case to our brother and
colleague Samsucius, without telling him at the
time my present view of the matter, but rather
stating the view taken up by both of us when
we were resisting their demands. He was ex-
ceedingly shocked, and wondered that we had
entertained such a view ; being moved by noth-
ing else but the ugly appearance of the transac-
tion, as one wholly unworthy not only of us, but
of any man.

5. Wherefore I implore you to subscribe and
transmit without delay the letter which I have
written to them in name of both of us. And
even if, perchance, you discern the other course
to be a just one in the matter, let not these
brethren who are weak be compelled to learn
now what I myself cannot understand ; rather
let this word of the Lord be remembered in
dealing with them : " I have yet many things to
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now." '
For He Himself, out of condescension to such
weakness, said on another occasion (it was in
reference to the payment of tribute), "Then
are the children free ; notwithstanding lest we
offend them," etc. ; and sent Peter to pay the
didrachmge which were then exacted.^ For He
knew another law according to which he was not
bound to make any such payment ; but He
made the payment which was imposed upon
Him by that law according to which, as I have
said, succession to the estate of Honoratus be-
hoved to be regulated, if he died before either
giving away or selling his property. Nay, even
in regard to the law of the Church, Paul showed
forbearance towards the weak, and did not insist
upon his receiving the money due to him, al-
though fully persuaded in his conscience that he
might with perfect justice insist upon it ; waiv-
ing his claim, however, only because he thereby
avoided a suspicion of his motives which would
mar the sweet savour of Christ among them,
and abstained from the appearance of evil in a
region in which he knew that this was his duty,
and probably even before he had known by ex-

' John xvi. 12.

^ Matt. xvii. 26, 27.


perience the sorrow which it would occasion.
Let us now, though we are somewhat behind-
hand, and have been admonished by experience,
correct that which we ought to have foreseen.

6. I remember that you proposed when we
parted that the brethren at Thagaste should hold
me responsible to make up the half of the sum
claimed ; let me say in conclusion, that as I fear
everything which may make my attempt unsuc-
cessful, if you clearly perceive that proposal to
be a just one, I do not refuse to comply with
it, on this condition, however, that I am to pay
the amount only when I have it in my power,
i.e. when something so considerable falls to our
monastery at Hippo that this can be done with-
out unduly straitening us, — the amount remain-
ing after the subtraction of so large a sum being
still such as to provide for our monastery here
an equal share in proportion to the number of
resident brethren.


LETTER LXXXIV.

(a.d. 405.)

to my lord kovatus, most blessed, my broth-
er and partner in the priestly office,
esteemed and longed for, and to the
brethren who are with him, augustin and
the brethren with him send greeting in

THE LORD.

I. I myself feel how hard-hearted I must ap-
pear to you, and I can scarcely excuse to my-
self my conduct in not consenting to send to
your Holiness my son the deacon Lucillus, your
own brother. But when your own time comes
to surrender to the claims of Churches in re-
mote places some of those whom you have edu-
cated, and who are most dear and sweet to you,
then, and not till then, will you know the pangs
of longing which pierce me through and through
for some who, once united to me in the strong-
est and most pleasing intimacy, are no more be-
side me. Let me submit to your thoughts the
case of one who is far away. However strong
be the bond of kindred between brothers, it
does not surpass the bond by which my brother
Severus and I are united to each other, and yet
you know how rarely I have the happiness of see-
ing him. And this has been caused neither by
his wish nor by mine, but because of our giving to
the claims of our mother the Church precedency
above the claims of this present world, out of
regard to that coming eternity in which we shall
dwell together and part no more. How much
more reasonable, therefore, is it for you to sub-
mit for the sake of the Church's welfare to the
absence of that brother, with whom you have
not shared the food which the Lord our Shep-
herd provides for nearly so long a period as I


364


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


did with my most amiable fellow-townsman Seve-
rus, who now only with an effort and at long in-
tervals converses with me by means of brief
letters, — letters, moreover, which are for the
most part burdened with the cares and affairs of
other men, instead of bearing to me any remi-
niscence of those green pastures in which we
were wont to lie down under Christ's loving care !
2. You will perhaps reply, " What then? May
not my brother be of service to the Church here
also ? Is it for any other end than usefulness to
the Church that I desire to have him with me? "
Truly, if his being beside you seemed to me to
be as important for the gathering in or ruling of
the Lord's flock as his presence here is for these
ends, every one might justly blame me for being
not merely hard-hearted, but unjust. But since
he is conversant with the Punic ' language,
through want of which the preaching of the
gospel is greatly hindered in these parts, where-
as the use of that language is general with you,
do you think that we would be doing our duty
in consulting for the welfare of the Lord's flocks,
if we were to send this talent to a place where it
is not specially needful, and remove it from this
region, where we thirst for it with such parched
spirits? Forgive me, therefore, when I do, not
only against your will, but also against my own
feeling, what the care of the burden imposed upon
me compels me to do. The Lord, to whom you
have given your heart, will grant you such aid in
your labours that you shall be recompensed for
this kindness ; for we acknowledge that you have
with a good grace rather than of necessity con-
ceded the deacon Lucillus to the burning thirst
of the regions in which our lot is cast. For you
will do me no small favour if you do not burden
me with any further request upon this subject,
lest I should have occasion to appear anything
more than somewhat hard-hearted to you, whom
I revere for your holy benignity of disposition.


LETTER LXXXV.
(A.D. 405.)

TO MY LORD PAULUS, MOST BELOVED, MY BROTHER
AND COLLEAGUE IN THE PRIESTHOOD, WHOSE
HIGHEST WELFARE IS SOUGHT BY ALL MY PRAYERS,
AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING IN THE LORD.

I. You would not call me so inexorable if you
did not think me also a dissemljler. For what
else do you believe concerning my spirit, if I am
to judge by what you have written, than that I
cherish towards you dislike and antipathy which
merit blame and detestation ; as if in a matter
about which there could be but one opinion I

■ The text here gives latind. All that we know of the languages
then spoken in Hippo would lead us to suppose that pnnicd must
have been written here by Augustin.


I


& - -. - my-

^ or were wishing to


was not careful lest, while warning others
self should deserve reproof,
cast the mote out of your eye while retaining
and fostering the beam in my own?^ It is by
no means as you suppose. Behold ! I repeat
this, and call God to witness, that if you were
only to desire for yourself what I desire on your
behalf, you would now be living in Christ free
from all disquietude, and would make the whole
Church rejoice in glory brought by you to His
name. Observe, I pray you, that I have ad-
dressed you not only as my brother, but also as
my colleague. For it cannot be that any bishop
whatsoever of the Catholic Church should cease
to be my colleague, so long as he has not been
condemned by any ecclesiastical tribunal. As
to my refusing to hold communion with you,
the only reason for this is that I cannot flatter
you. For inasmuch as I have begotten you in
Christ, I am under very special obligation to
render to you the salutary severity of love in
faithful admonition and reproof. It is true that
I rejoice in the numbers who have been, by
God's blessing on your work, gathered into the
Catholic Church ; but this does not make me
less bound to weep that a greater number are
being by you scattered from the Church. For
you have so wounded the Church of Hippo,'*
that unless the Lord make you disengage your-
self from all secular cares and burdens, and re-
call you to the manner of living and deportment
which become the true bishop, the wound may
soon be beyond remedy.

2. Seeing, however, that you continue to in-
volve yourself more and more deeply in these
affairs, and have, notwithstanding your vow of
renunciation, entangled yourself again with the
things which you had solemnly laid aside, — a
step which could not be justified even by the
laws of ordinary human affairs ; seeing also that
you are reported to be living in a style of ex-
travagance which cannot be maintained by the
slender income of your church, — why do you
insist upon communion with me, wliile you refuse
to hear my rebuke of your faults? Is it that
men whose complaints I cannot bear, may justly
blame me for whatever you do ? You are, more-
over, mistaken in suspecting that those who find
fault with you are persons who have always been
against you even in your earlier life. It is not
so : and you have no reason to be surprised that
many things escape your observation. But even
were this the case, it is your duty to secure that
they find nothing in your conduct which they
might reasonably blame, and for which they
might bring reproach against the Church. Per-
haps you think that my reason for saying these


2 I Cor. ix. 27.

3 Matt. vii. 4.
•« Cataqua (?).


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


365


things is, that I have not accepted what you
urged in your defence. Nay, rather my reason
is, that if I were to say nothing regarding these
things, I would be guilty of that for which I
could urge nothing in my defence before God.
I know your abilities ; but even a man of dull
mind is kept from disquietude if he sets his
affections on heavenly things, whereas a man of
acute mind has this gift in vain if he set his
affections on earthly things. The office of a
bishop is not designed to enable one to spend
a life of vanity. The Lord God, who has closed
against }-ou all the ways by which you were dis-
posed to make Him minister to your gain, in
order that He may guide you, if you but under-
stand Him, into that way, with a view to the
pursuit of which that holy responsibility was laid
upon you, will Himself teach you what I now say.

LETTER LXXXVL

(a.d. 405.)

to my noble lord c/ecilianus, my son truly
and justly honourable and esteemed in the
love of christ, augustin, bishop, sends
greeting in the lord.

The renown of your administration and the
fame of your virtues, as well as the praiseworthy
zeal and faithful sincerity of your Christian piety,
— gifts of God which make you rejoice in Him
from whom they came, and from whom you
hope to receive yet greater things, — have moved
me to acquaint your Excellency by this letter
with the cares which agitate my mind. As our
joy is great that throughout the rest of Africa
you have taken measures with remarkable success
on behalf of Catholic unity, our sorrow is pro-
iportionately great because the district of Hippo '
'and the neighbouring regions on the borders of
Numidia have not enjoyed the benefit of the
i vigour with which as a magistrate you have en-
forced your proclamation, my noble lord, and
my son truly and justly honourable and esteemed
in the love of Christ. Lest this should be re-
garded rather as due to the neglect of duty by
me who bear the burden of the episcopal office
at Hippo, I have considered myself bound to
mention it to your Excellency. If you conde-
scend to acquaint yourself with the extremities
to which the effrontery of the heretics has pro-
ceeded in the region of Hippo, as you may do
by questioning my brethren and colleagues, who
are able to furnish your Excellency with infor-
mation, or the presbyter whom I have sent with
this letter, I am sure you will so deal v^'ith this
tumour of impious presumption, that it shall be
healed by warning rather than painfully removed
afterwards by punishment.

' Regioneni Hipponensium Regiorum,


LETTER LXXXVH.

(a.d. 405.)

to his brother emeritus, beloved and longed
for, augustin sends greeting.

I. I know that it is not on the possession of
good talents and a liberal education that the
salvation of the soul depends ; but when I hear
of any one who is thus endowed holding a
different view from that which truth impera-
tively insists upon on a point which admits of
very easy examination, the more I wonder at
such a man, the more I bum with desire to
make his acquaintance, and to converse with
him ; or if that be impossible, I long to bring
his mind and mine into contact by exchanging
letters, which wing their flight even between
places far apart. As I have heard that you are
such a man as I have spoken of, I grieve that
you should be severed and shut out from the
Catholic Church, which is spread abroad through-
out the whole world, as was foretold by the Holy
Spirit. What your reason for this separation is
I do not know. For it is not disputed that the
party of Donatus is wholly unknown to a great
part of the Roman world, not to speak of the
barbarian nations (to whom also the apostle said
that he was a debtor^) whose communion in the
Christian faith is joined with ours, and that in
fact they do not even know at all when or upon
what account the dissension began. Now, unless
you admit these Christians to be innocent of
those crimes with which you charge the Chris-
tians of Africa, you must confess that all of you
are defiled by participation in the wicked actions
of all worthless characters, so long as they suc-
ceed (to put the matter mildly) in escaping de-
tection among you. For you do occasionally
expel a member from your communion, in which
case his expulsion takes place only after he has
committed the crime for which he merited ex-
pulsion. Is there not some intervening time
during which he escapes detection before he is
discovered, convicted, and condemned by you ?
I ask, therefore, whether he involved you in his
defilement so long as he was not discovered by
you? You answer, "By no means." If, then,
he were not to be discovered at all, he would in
that case never involve you in his defilement ;
for it sometimes happens that the crimes com-
mitted by men come to light only after their
death, yet this does not bring guilt upon those
Christians who communicated with them while
they were alive. Why, then, have you severed
yourselves by so rash and profane schism from the
communion of innumerable Eastern Churches, in
which all that you truly or falsely affirm to have
been done in Africa has been and still is utterly
unknown ?

2 Rom. i. 14.


l66


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


2. For it is ciiiite another question whether or
not there be truth in the assertions made by you.
These assertions we disprove by documents
much more worthy of credit than those which
you bring forward, and we further find in your
own documents more abundant proof of those
positions which you assail. But this is, as I have
said, another question altogether, to be taken up
and discussed when necessary. Meanwhile, let
your mind give special attention to this : that no
one can be involved in the guilt of unknown
crimes committed by persons unknown to him.
Whence it is manifest that you have been guilty
of impious schism in separating yourselves from
the communion of the whole world, to which the
things charged, whether truly or falsely, by you
against some men in Africa, have been and still
are wholly unknown ; although this also should
not be forgotten, that even when known and dis-
covered, bad men do not harm the good who
are in a Church, if either the power of restrain-
ing them from communion be wanting, or the
interests of the Church's peace forbid this to be
done. For who were those who, according to
the prophet Ezekiel,' obtained the reward of
being marked before the destruction of the
wdcked, and of escaping unhurt when they were
destroyed, but those who sighed and cried for
the sins and iniquities of the people of God
which were done in the midst of them? Now
who sighs and cries for that which is unknown
to him? On the same principle, the Apostle
Paul bears with false brethren. For it is not
of persons unknown to him that he says, " All
seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ's ; " yet these persons he shows plainly to
have been beside him. And to what class do
the men belong who have chosen rather to burn
incense to idols or surrender the divine books
than to suffer death, if not to those who " seek
their own, not the things of Jesus Christ"?

3. I omit many proofs which I might give
from Scripture, that I may not make this letter
longer than is needful ; and I leave many more
things to be considered by yourself in the light
of your own learning. But I beseech you mark
this, which is quite enough to decide the whole
question : If so many transgressors in the one
nation, which was then the Church of God, did
not make those who were associated with them
to be guilty like themselves ; if that multitude
of false brethren did not make the Apostle Paul,
who was a member of the same Church with
them, a seeker not of the things of Jesus Christ,
but of his own, — it is manifest that a man is
not made wicked by the wickedness of any one
with whom he goes to the altar of Christ, even
though he be not unknown to him, provided

I Ch. ix. 4-6.


only that he do not encourage him in his wick-
edness, but by a good conscience disallowing
his conduct keep himself apart from him. It
is therefore obvious that, to be art and part with
a thief, one must either help him in the theft,
or receive with approbation what he has stolen.
This I say in order to remove out of the way
endless and unnecessary questions concerning
the conduct of men, which are wholly irrelevant
when advanced against our position.

4. If, however, you do not agree with what I
have said, you involve the whole of your party
in the reproach of being such men as Optatus
was, while, notwithstanding your knowledge of
his crimes, he was tolerated in communion with
you ; and far be it from me to say this of such
a man as Emeritus, and of others of like integ-
rity among you, who are, I am sure, wholly averse
to such deeds as disgraced him. For we do not
lay any charge against you but the one of schism,
which by your obstinate persistence in it you
have now made heresy. How great this crime
is in the judgment of God Himself, you may see
by reading what without doubt you ha\e read
ere now. You will find that Dathan and Abiram
were swallowed up by an opening of the earth
beneath them,^ and that all the others who had
conspired with them were devoured by fire
breaking forth in the midst of them. As a
warning to men to shun this crime, the Lord
God signahzed its commission with this imme-
diate punishment, that He might show what He
reserves for the final recompense of persons
guilty of a similar transgression, whom His great
forbearance spares for a time. We do not, in-
deed, find fault with the reasons by which you
excuse your tolerating Optatus among you. We
do not blame you, because at the time when he
was denounced for his furious conduct in the
mad abuse of power, when he was impeached
by the groans of all Africa, — groans in which
you also shared, if you are what good report
declares you to be, — a report which, God knows,
I most willingly believe, — you forbore from ex-
communicating him, lest he should under such
sentence draw away many with him, and rend
your communion asunder with the frenzy of
schism. But this is the thing which is itself
an indictment against you at the bar of God,
O brother Emeritus, that although you saw that
the division of the party of Donatus was so great
an evil, that it was thought better that Optatus
should be tolerated in your communion than
that division should be introduced among you,
you nevertheless perpetuate the evil which was
wrought in the division of the Church of Christ
by your forefathers.

5. Here perhaps you will be disposed, under


^ Num. xvi. 31-35.


m


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


7>^1


the exigencies of debate, to attempt to defend
Optatus. Do not so, I beseech you ; do not so,
my brother : it would not become you ; and if
it would perchance be seemly for any one to do
it (though, in fact, nothing is seemly which is
wrong), it assuredly would be unseemly for
Emeritus to defend Optatus. Perhaps you reply
that it would as little become you to accuse him.
Granted, by all means. Take, then, the course
which lies between defending and accusing him.
Say, " Every man shall bear his own burden ; " '
" Who art thou that judgest another man's ser-
vant?"- If, then, notwithstanding the testi-
mony of all Africa, — nay more, of all regions
to which the name of Gildo was carried, for
Optatus was not less notorious than he, — you
have not dared to pronounce judgment concern-
ing Optatus, lest you should rashly decide in
regard to one unknown to you, is it, I ask, either
possible or right for us, proceeding solely on
your testimony, to pronounce sentence rashly
upon persons whom we do not know? Is it not
enough that you should charge them with things
of which you have no certain knowledge, with-
out our pronouncing them guilty of things of
which we know as little as yourselves? For
even though Optatus were in peril through the
falsehood of detractors, you defend not him,
but yourself, when you say, " I do not know
what his character was." How much more ob-
vious, then, is it that the Eastern world knows
nothing of the character of those Africans with
whom, though much less known to you than
Optatus, you find fault ! Yet you are disjoined
by scandalous schism from Churches in the East,
the names of which you have and you read in
the sacred books. If your most famous and
most scandalously notorious Bishop of Thamu-
gada 3 was at that very time not known to his
colleague, I shall not say in Cffisarea, but in
Sitifa, so close at hand, how was it possible for
the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Colosse, Phi-
lippi, Thessalonica, Antioch, Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, and others which were founded in
Christ by the apostles, to know the case of these
African traditors, whoever they were ; or how
was it consistent with justice that they should
be condemned by you for not knowing it ? Yet
with these Churches you hold no communion.
You say they are not Christian, and you labour
to rebaptize their members. What need I say?
What complaint, what protest is necessary here?
If I am addressing a right-hearted man, I know
that with you I share the keenness of the indig-
nation which I feel. For you doubtless see at
once what I might say if I would.

6. Perhaps, however, your forefathers formed


' Gal. vi. 5.
" Rom. xiv.
3 Optatus.


of themselves a council, and placed the whole
Christian world except themselves under sen-
tence of excommunication. Have you come so
to judge of things, as to affirm that the council
of the followers of Maximianus who were cut
off from you, as you were cut off from the
Church, was of no authority against you, because
their number was small compared with yours ;
and yet claim for your council an authority
against the nations, which are the inheritance
of Christ, and the ends of the earth, which are
His possession?'* I wonder if the man who
does not blush at such pretensions has any blood
in his body. W>ite me, I beseech you, in reply
to this letter ; for I have heard from some, on
whom I could not but rely, that you would
write me an answer if I were to address a letter
to you. Some time ago, moreover, I sent you
a letter ; but I do not know whether you received
it or answered it, and perhaps your reply did not
reach me. Now, however, I beg you not to re-
fuse to answer this letter, and state what you
think. But do not occupy yourself with other
questions than the one which I have stated, for
this is the leading point of a well-ordered dis-
cussion of the origin of the schism,

7. The civil powers defend their conduct in
persecuting schismatics by the rule which the
apostle laid down : " Whoso resisteth the power,
resisteth the ordinance of God ; and they that
resist shall receive to themselves judgment. For
rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power?
Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise
of the same : for he is the minister of God to
thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil,
be afraid ; for he beareth not the sword in vain :
for he is the minister of God, a revenger to exe-
cute wrath upon him that doeth evil." s The
whole question therefore is, whether schism be
not an evil work, or whether you have not caused
schism, so that your resistance of the powers
that be is in a good cause and not in an evil
work, whereby you would bring judgment on
yourselves. Wherefore with infinite wisdom the
Lord not merely said, " Blessed are they who
are persecuted," but added, " for righteousness'
sake."^ I desire therefore to know from you,
in the light of what I have said above, whether
it be a work of righteousness to originate and
perpetuate your state of separation from the
Church. I desire also to know whether it be
not rather a work of unrighteousness to condemn
unheard the whole Christian world, either be-
cause it has not heard what you have heard, or
because no proof has been furnished to it of
charges which were rashly believed, or without


4 Ps. ii. 8.

s Rom. xiii. 2-4.

6 Matt. V. 10.


368


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


sufificient evidence advanced by you, and to pro-
pose on this ground to baptize a second time
the members of so many churches founded by
the preaching and labours either of the Lord
Himself while He was on earth, or of His apos-
tles ; and all this on the assumption that it is
excusable for you either not to know the wick-
edness of your African colleagues who are living
beside you, and are using the same sacraments
with you, or even to tolerate their misdeeds
when known, lest the party of Donatus should
be divided, but that it is inexcusable for them,
though they reside in most remote regions, to
be ignorant of what you either know, or believe,
or have heard, or imagine, concerning men in
Africa. How great is the perversity of those who
cling to their own unrighteousness, and yet find
fault with the severity of the civil powers !

8. You answer, perhaps, that Christians ought
not to persecute even the wicked. Be it so ; let
us admit that they ought not : but is it lawful to
lay this objection in the way of the powers which
are ordained for this very purpose? Shall we
erase the apostle's words ? Or do your mss. not
contain the words which I mentioned a little
while ago ? But you will say that we ought not
to communicate with such persons. What then ?
Did you withdraw, some time ago, from com-
munion with the deputy Flavianus, on tlie ground
of his putting to death, in his administration of
the laws, those whom he found guilty? Again,
you will say that the Roman emperors are incited
against you by us. Nay, rather blame yourselves
for this, seeing that, as was long ago foretold in
the promise concerning Christ, " Yea, all kings
shall fall down before him," ' they are now mem-
bers of the Church ; and you have dared to
wound the Church by schism, and still presume
to insist upon rebaptizing her members. Our
brethren indeed demand help from the powers
which are ordained, not to persecute you, but to
protect themselves against the lawless acts of
violence perpetrated by individuals of your party,
which you yourselves, who refrain from such
things, bewail and deplore ; just as, before the
Roman Em.pire became Christian, the Apostle
Paul took measures to secure that the protection
of armed Roman soldiers should be granted him
against the Jews who had conspired to kill him.
But these emperors, whatever the occasion of
their becoming acquainted with the crime of
your schism might be, frame against you such
decrees as their zeal and their office demand.
For they bear not the sword in vain ; they are
the ministers of God to execute wrath upon those
that do evil. Finally, if some of our party trans-
gress the bounds of Christian moderation in this
matter, it displeases us ; nevertheless, we do not

' Ps. IxxiL II.


on their account forsake the Catholic Church
because we are imable to separate the wheat
from the chaff before the final winnowing, espe-
cially since you yourselves have not forsaken the
Donatist party on account of Optatus, when you
had not courage to excommunicate him for his
crimes.

9. You say, however, "Why seek to have us
joined to you, if we be thus stained with guilt?"
I reply : Because you still live, and may, if you
are willing, be restored. For when you join
yourselves to us, i.e. to the Church of God, the
heritage of Christ, who has the ends of the earth
as his possession, you are restored so that you
live in vital union with the Root. For the apos-
tle says of the branches which were broken off:
" God is able to graff them in again." ^ We ex-
hort you to change, in so far as concerns your
dissent from the Church ; although, as to the
sacraments which you had, we admit that they
are holy, since they are the same in all. Where-
fore we desire to see you changed from your ob-
stinacy, that is, in order that you who have been
cut off may be vitally united to the Root again.
For the sacraments which you have not changed
are approved by us as you have them ; else, in
our attempting to correct your sin, we should do
impious wrong to those mysteries of Christ which
have not been deprived of their worth by your
unworthiness. For even Saul did not, with all
his sins, destroy the efficacy of the anointing
which he received ; to which anointing David,
that pious servant of God, showed so great re-
spect. We therefore do not insist upon rebap-
tizing you, because we only wish to restore to
you connection with the Root : the form of the
branch which has been cut off we accept with
approval, if it has not been changed ; but the
branch, however perfect in its form, cannot bear
fruit, except it be united to the root. As to the
persecution, so gentle and tempered with clem-
ency, which you say you suffer at the hands of
our party, while unquestionably your own party
inflict greater harm in a lawless and irregular
way upon us, — this is one question : the ques-
tion concerning baptism is wholly distinct from
it ; in regard to it, we inquire not where it is,
but where it profits. For wherever it is, it is the
same ; but it cannot be said of him who receives
it, that wherever he is, he is the same. We
therefore detest the impiety of which men as
individuals are guilty in a state of schism ; but
we venerate everywhere the baptism of Christ.
If deserters carry with them the imperial stand-
ards, these standards are welcomed back again
as they were, if they have remained unharmed,
when the deserters are either punished with a
severe sentence, or, in the exercise of clemency,


2 Rom. xi. 23.


%


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


369


restored. If, in regard to this, any more partic-
ular inquiry is to be made, that is, as I have said,
another question ; for in these things, the prac-
tice of the Church of God is the rule of our
practice.

10. The question between us, however, is,
whether your Church or ours is the Church of
God. To resolve this, we must begin with the
original inquiry, why you became schismatics.
If you do not write me an answer, I believe that
before the bar of God I shall be easily vindicated
as having done my duty in this matter ; because
I have sent a letter in the interests of peace to a
man of whom I have heard that, excepting only
his adherence to schismatics, he is a good and
well-educated man. Be it yours to consider how
you shall answer Him whose forbearance now
demands your praise, and His judgment shall in
the end demand your fears. If, however, you
write a reply to me with as much care as you
see me to have bestowed upon this, I believe
that, by the mercy of God, the error which now
keeps us apart shall perish before the love of
peace and the logic of truth. Observe that I
have said nothing about the followers of Rogatus,'
who call you Firmiani, as you call us Macariani.
Nor have I spoken of your bishop of Rucata (or
Rusicada), who is said to have made an agree-
ment with Firmus, promising, on condition of
the safety of all his adherents, that the gates
should be opened to him, and the Catholics
given up to slaughter and pillage. Many other
such things I pass unnoticed. Do you therefore
in like manner desist from the commonplaces
of rhetorical exaggeration concerning actions of
men which you have either heard of or known ;
for you see how I am silent concerning deeds of
[your party, in order to confine the debate to the

uestion upon which the whole matter hinges, —
jnamely, the origin of the schism.

My brother, beloved and longed for, may the
ILord our God breathe into you thoughts tending

owards reconciliation.


i


LETTER LXXXVIIL

(a.d. 406.)

januarius,2 the catholic clergy of the
district of hippo ^ send the following.

I. Your clergy and your Circumcelliones are
anting against us their rage in a persecution of

new kind, and of unparalleled atrocity. Were
'e to render evil for evil, we should be trans-
ressing the law of Christ. But now, when all

' Rogatus, bishop of Canenna in Mauritania, who left the Dona-
its and suffered much persecution at the hands of Firmus, a brother
Gildo; hence the Donatists were named by the Rogatists Firmiani.
:e Augustin, Contra Literas Petiliani, book ii ch. 83.

^ Bishop of Casa: Nigrae in Numidia, and at that time the Dona-
t primate, as the oldest of their bishops.

^ Hipponensium Regiorum,


that has been done, both on your side and on
ours, is impartially considered, it is found that
we are suffering what is written, " They rewarded
me evil for good ; " ■♦ and (in another Psalm),
" My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth
peace. I am for peace : but when I speak, they
are for war." 5 For, seeing that you have arrived
at so great age, we suppose you to know per-
fectly well that the party of Donatus, which at
first was called at Carthage the party of Majori-
nus, did of their own accord accuse Csecilianus,
then bishop of Carthage, before the famous Em-
peror Constantine. Lest, however, you should
have forgotten this, venerable sir, or should pre-
tend not to know, or perhaps (which we scarcely
think possible) may never have known it, we
insert here a copy of the narrative of Anulinus,
then proconsul, to whom the party of Majorinus
appealed, requesting that by him as proconsul a
statement of the charges which they brought
against Csecilianus should be sent to the Em-
peror aforesaid : —

2. To ConstaiTtine Augustus^ from Anulinus, a
man of consular rank, proconsul of Africa,
these : ^

The welcome and adored celestial writing sent
by your Majesty to Caecilianus, and those over
whom he presides, who are called clergy, have
been, by the care of your Majesty's most hum-
ble servant, engrossed in his Records ; and he
has exhorted these parties that, heartily agreeing
among themselves, since they are seen to be ex-
empted from all other burdens by your Majesty's
clemency, they should, preserving Catholic unity,,
devote themselves to their duties with the rev-
erence due to the sanctity of law and to divine-
things. After a few days, however, there arose
some persons to whom a crowd of people joined
themselves, who thought that proceedings should
be taken against Csecilianus, and presented to-
me 7 a sealed packet wrapped in leather, and a.
small document without seal, and earnestly be-
sought me to transmit them to your Majesty's
sacred and venerable court, which your Ma-
jesty's most humble servant ^ has taken care to
do, Csecilianus continuing meanwhile as he was.
The Acts pertaining to the case are subjoined,
in order that your Majesty may be able to arrive
at a decision concerning the whole matter. The
documents sent are two : the one in a leathern
envelope, with this title, " A document of the
Catholic Church containing charges against Cse-
cilianus, and furnished by the party of Majori-


■• Ps. XXXV. 12,

5 Ps. cxx. 6, 7.

'> The actual heading of the Report stands thus : " A. GGG. NNN.
Anulinus VC. proconsul Africae." For the interpretation we are in-
debted to the marginal note on the Codex Gervasianus.

^ Dicationi niece.

8 Payvitoi mea.


370


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


nus ; " the other attached without a seal to the
same leathern envelope.

Given on the i yth clay before the Calends of
May, in the third consulship of our lord Con-
stantine Augustus [/.<?. April 15, a.d. 313].

3. After this report had been sent to him,
the Emperor summoned the parties before a
tribunal of bishops to be constituted at Rome.
The ecclesiastical records show how the case
was there argued and decided, and Ceecilianus
pronounced innocent. Surely now, after the
peacemaking decision of the tribunal of bishops,
all the pertinacity of strife and bitterness should
have given way. Your forefathers, however,
appealed again to the Emperor, and complained
that the decision was not just, and that their
case had not been fully heard. Accordingly, he
appointed a second tribunal of bishops to meet
in Aries, a town of Gaul, where, after sentence
had been pronounced against your worthless and
diabolical schism, many of your party returned
to a good understanding with Crecilianus ; some,
however, who were most obstinate and conten-
tious, appealed to the Emperor again. After-
wards, when, yielding to their importunity, he
personally interposed in this dispute, which be-
longed properly to the bishops to decide, having
heard the case, he gave sentence against your
party, and was the first to pass a law that the
properties of your congregations should be con-
fiscated ; of all which things we could insert the
documentary evidence here, if it were not for
making the letter too long. We must, however,
by no means omit the investigation and decision
in open court of the case of Felix of x'\ptunga,
whom, in the Council of Carthage, under Secun-
dus of Tigisis, primate, your fathers affirmed to
be the original cause of all these evils. For the
Emperor aforesaid, in a letter of which we annex
a copy, bears witness that in this trial your party
were before him as accusers and most strenuous
prosecutors : —

.4. The Emperors Flavins Constantimis, ATaxi-
tnus C(xsar, and Valerius Licinius Ccesar, to
Probianus, proconsul of Africa :

Your predecessor ^lianus, who acted as sub-
>stitute for Verus, the superintendent of the pre-
fects, when that most excellent magistrate was
by severe illness laid aside in that part of Africa
-which is under our sway, considered it, and most
justly, to be his duty, amongst other things, to
"bring again under his investigation and decision
the matter of Csecilianus, or rather the odium
which seems to have been stirred up against that
bishop of the Catholic Church. Wherefore, hav-
ing ordered the compearance of Superius, cen-
turion, Csecilianus, magistrate of Aptunga, and


Saturninus, the ex-president of police, and his
successor in the office, Calibius the younger, and
Solon, an official belonging to Aptunga, he heard
the testimony of these witnesses ; ' the result of
which was, that whereas objection had been taken
to Caecilianus on the ground of his ordination
to the office of bishop by Felix, against whom
it seemed that the charge of surrendering and
burning the sacred books had been made, the
innocence of Felix in this matter was clearly
established. Moreover, when Maximus affirmed
that Ingentius, a decurion of the town of Ziqua,
had forged a letter of the ex-magistrate Ca^cili-
anus, we found, on examining the Acts which
were before us, that this same Ingentius had been
put on the rack ^ for that offence, and that the
infliction of torture on him was not, as alleged,
on the ground of his affirming that he was a
decurion of Ziqua. Wherefore we desire you to
send under a suitable guard to the court of
Augustus Constantine the said Ingentius, that
in the presence and hearing of those who are
now pleading in this case, and who day after
day persist in their complaints, it may be made
manifest and fully known that they labour in vain
to excite odium against the bishop Caecilianus,
and to clamour violently against him. This, we
hope, will bring the people to desist, as they
should do, from such contentions, and to devote
themselves with becoming reverence to their re-
ligious duties, undistracted by dissension among
themselves.

5. Since you see, therefore, that these things
are so, why do you provoke odium against us
on the ground of the imperial decrees which are
in force against you, when you have yourselves
done all this before we followed your example?
If emperors ought not to use their authority in
such cases, if care of these matters lies beyond
the province of Christian emperors, who urged
your forefathers to remit the case of Csecilianus,
by the proconsul, to the Emperor, and a second
time to bring before the P^mperor accusations
against a bishop whom you had somehow con-
demned in absence, and on his acquittal to in-
vent and bring before the same Emperor other
calumnies against Felix, by whom the bishop
aforesaid had been ordained? And now, what
other law is in force against your party than that
decision of the elder Constantine, to which your
forefathers of their own choice appealed, which
they extorted from him by their importunate

' The value of the evidence of these witnesses is apparent when
we remember that they were all in a position to speak from personal
knowledge of the persecution in a.d. 303 (under Diocletian and Max-
imian), and had in their public capacity some share in enforcing the
demand made in that persecution for the surrender of the sacred
books. These could tell whether Felix the Bishop of Aptunga was
guilty or not of the unfaithfulness to his religion with which the faction
of Majorinus reproached him.

- Suspemum.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


o7^


complaints, and which they preferred to the
decision of an episcopal tribunal ? If you are dis-
satisfied with the decrees of emperors, who were
the first to compel the emperors to set these
in array against you ? For you have no more
reason for crying out against the Catholic Church
because of the decrees of emperors against you,
than those men would have had for crving out
against Daniel, who, after his deliverance, were
thrown in to be devoured by the same lions by
which they first sought to have him destroyed ;
as it is written : " The king's wrath is as the roar-
ing of a lion." ' These slanderous enemies in-
sisted that Daniel should be thrown into the den
of lions : his innocence prevailed over their
malice ; he was taken from the den unharmed,
and they, being cast into it, perished. In like
manner, your forefathers cast Ceecilianus and his
companions to be destroyed by the king's wrath ;
and when, by their innocence, they were delivered
from tliis, you yourselves now suffer from these
I kings what your party wished them to suffer ; as
it is written : " Whoso diggeth a pit for his neigh-
jbour, shall himself fall therein."^

6. You have therefore no ground for com-
Iplaint against us : nay more, the clemency of
Ithe Catholic Church would have led us to desist
[from even enforcing these decrees of the em-
Iperors, had not your clei^gj^nd Circumcelliones,
listurbing our peace, and CT^roying us by their
lost monstrous crimes and furious deeds of vio-
lence, compelled us to have these decrees re-
med and put in force again. For before these
lore recent edicts of which you complain had
:ome into Africa, these desperadoes laid ambush
for our bishops on their journeys, abused our |
pergy with savage blows, and assaulted our laity |
In the same most cruel manner, and set fire to i
Iheir habitations. A certain presbyter who had
pf his own free choice preferred the unity of our 1
church, was for so doing dragged out of his own ]
kouse, cruelly beaten without form of law, rolled
Jver and over in a miry pond, covered with a
latting of rushes, and exhibited as an object of
|ity to some and of ridicule to others, while his
persecutors gloried in their crime ; after which
hey carried him away where they pleased, and
pluctantly set him at liberty after twelve days.
i^hen Proculeianus ^ was challenged by our
tshop concerning this outrage, at a meeting of
lie municipal courts, he at first endeavoured to
pde inquiry into the matter by pretending that
knew nothing of it ; and when the demand
'as immediately repeated, he publicly declared
!at he would say nothing more on the subject,
nd the perpetrators of that outrage are at this
jiy among your presbyters, continuing moreover


' Prov. xix. 12.

^ Ecclus. xxvii. 29, and Prov. xxvi. 27.

3 Donatist bishop of Hippo. See Letter XXXIII. p. 260.


to keep us in terror, and to persecute us to the
utmost of their power.

7. Our bishop, however, did not complain to
the emperors of the wrongs and persecution
which the Catholic Church in our district suf-
fered in those days. But when a Council had
been convened,-* it was agreed that you should
be invited to meet our party peaceably, in order
that, if it were possible, you [/>. the bishops on
both sides, for the letter is written by the clergy
of Hippo] miglit have a conference, and the
error being taken out of the way, brotherly love
might rejoice in the bond of peace between us.
You may learn from your own records the an-
swer which Proculeianus made at first on that
occasion, that you would call a Council together,
and would there see what you ought to answer ;
and how afterwards, when he was again publicly
reminded of his promise, he stated, as the Acts
bear witness, that he refused to have any confer-
ence with a view to peace. After this, when the
notorious atrocities of your clergy and Circum-
celliones continued, a case was brought to trial ; 5
and Crispinus being condemned as a heretic,
although he was through the forbearance of the
Catholics exempted from the fine which the im-
perial edict imposed on heretics of ten pounds
of gold, nevertheless thought himself warranted
in appealing to the emperors. As to the answer
which was made to that appeal, was it not ex-
torted by the preceding wickedness of your party
and by his own appeal? And yet, even after
that answer was given, he was permitted to escape
the infliction of that fine, through the intercession
of our bishops with the Emperor on his behalf.
From that Council, however, our bishops sent
deputies to the court, who obtained a decree
that not all your bishops and clergy should be
held liable to this fine of ten pounds of gold,
which the decree had imposed on all heretics,
but only those in whose districts the Catholic
Church suffered violence at the hands of your
party. But by the time that the deputation
came to Rome, the wounds of the Catholic
bishop of BagK, who had just then been dread-
fully injured, had moved the Emperor to send
such edicts as were actually sent. \\'hen these
edicts came to Africa, seeing especially that
strong pressure had begun to be brought upon
you, not to any evil thing, but for your good,
what should you have done but invited our
bishops to meet you, as they had invited yours
to meet them, that by a conference the truth
might be brought to light?

8. Not only, however, have you failed to do
this, but your party go on inflicting yet greater

* At Carthage, a.d. 403.

5 For a more detailed reference to this case, see Letter CV. sec.
4. Crispinus was charged with an attempt to kill Possidius the bishop
of Calama. See also Aug. Cont. Crescon. b. iii. c. 46, n. 50, and
c. 47, n. SI,


Zl^


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


injuries upon us. Not contented with beating
us vvitli bludgeons and killing some with the
sword, they even, with incredible ingenuity in
crime, throw lime mixed with acid [? vitriol]
into our people's eyes to blind them. For pil-
laging our houses, moreover, they have fashioned
huge and formidable implements, armed with
which they wander here and there, breathing out
threats of slaughter, rapine, burning of houses,
and blinding of our eyes ; by which things we
have been constrained in the first instance to
complain to you, venerable sir, begging you to
consider how, under these so-called terrible laws
of Catholic emperors, many, nay all of you, who
say that you are the victims of persecution, are
setded in peace in the possessions which were
your own, or which you have taken from others,
while we suffer such unheard-of wrongs at the
hands of your party. You say that you are
persecuted, while we are killed with clubs and
swords by your armed men. You say that you
are persecuted, while our houses are pillaged by
your armed robbers. You say that you are per-
secuted, while many of us have our eyesight de-
stroyed by the lime and acid with which your
men are armed for the purpose. Moreover, if
their course of crime brings some of them to
death, they make out that these deaths are jusdy
the occasion of odium against us, and of glory to
them. They take no blame to themselves for
the harm which they do to us, and they lay upon
us the blame of the harm which they bring upon
themselves. They live as robbers, they die as
Circumcelliones, they are honoured as martyrs !
Nay, I do injustice to robbers in this compari-
son, for we have never heard of robbers de-
stroying the eyesight of those whom they have
plundered : they indeed , take away those whom
they kill from the light, but they do not take
away the light from those whom they leave in
life.

9. On the other hand, if at any time we get
men of your party into our power, we keep them
unharmed, showing great love towards them ;
and we tell them everything by which the error
which has severed brother from brother is re-
futed. We do as the Lord Himself commanded
us, in the words of the prophet Isaiah : " Hear
the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at His
word ; say, Ye are our brethren, to those who
hate you, and who cast you out, that the name
of the Lord may be glorified, and that He may
appear to them with joy ; but let them be put
to shame." ' And thus some of them we per-
suade, through their considering the evidences
of the truth and the beauty of peace, not to be
baptized anew for this sign of allegiance to our
king they have already received (though they

* Isa. Ixvi. 5, as given by Augustin.


were as deserters), but to accept that faith, and
love of the Holy Spirit, and union to the body
of Christ, which formerly they had not. For it
is written, " Purifying their hearts by faith ; " ^
and again, " Charity covereth a multitude of
sins." 3 If, however, either through too great
obduracy, or through shame making them unable
to bear the taunts of those with whom they were
accustomed to join so frequently in falsely re-
proaching us and contriving evil against us, or
perhaps more through fear lest they should come
to share along with us such injuries as they were
formerly wont to inflict on us, — if, I say, from
any of these causes, they refuse to be reconciled
to the unity of Christ, they are allowed to de-
part, as they were detained, without suffering any
harm. We also exhort our laity as far as we can
to detain them without doing them any harm,
and bring them to us for admonition and instruc-
tion. Some of them obey us and do this, if it
is in their power : others deal with them as they
would with robbers, because they actually suffer
from them such things as robbers are wont to
do. Some of them strike their assailants in pro-
tecting their own bodies from their blows : while
others apprehend them and bring them to the
magistrates ; and though we intercede on their
behalf, they do not let them off, because they
are very much afraid of their savage outrages.
Yet all the while, these men, though persisting
in the practices of robbers, claim to be honoured
as martyrs when they receive the due reward of
their deeds !

10. Accordingly our desire, which we lay be-
fore you, venerable sir, by this letter and by the
brethren whom we have sent, is as follows. In
the first place, if it be possible, let a peaceable
conference be held with our bishops, so that an
end may be put to the error itself, not to the
men who embrace it, and men corrected rather
than punished ; and as you formerly despised
their proposals for agreement, let them now pro-
ceed from your side. How much better for you
to have such a conference between your bishops
and ours, the proceedings of which may D^
written down and sent with signature of the par-
ties to the Emperor, than to confer with the civil
magistrates, who cannot do otherwise than ad-
minister the laws which have been passed against
you ! For your colleagues who sailed from thisi
country said that they had come to have theirJ
case heard by the prefects. They also named||
our holy father the Catholic bishop Valentinus,|
who was then at court, saying that they wishedl
to be heard along with him. This the judge'
could not concede, as he was guided in his judi-
cial functions by the laws which were passed
against you : the bishop, moreover, had not

2 Acts XV. 9. ■

■i I Pet. iv. 8.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


373


come on this footing, or with any such instruc-
tions from his colleagues. How much better
qualified therefore will the Emperor himself be
to decide regarding your case, when the report
of that conference has been read before him,
seeing that he is not bound by these laws, and
has power to enact other laws instead of them ;
although it may be said to be a case upon which
final decision was pronounced long ago ! Yet,
in wishing this conference with you, we seek not
to have a second final decision, but to have it
made known as already settled to those who
meanwhile are not aware that it is so. If your
bishops be willing to do this, what do you there-
by lose ? Do you not rather gain, inasmuch as
vour willingness for such conference will become
known, and the reproach, hitherto deserved, that
you distrust your own cause will be taken away?
Do you, perchance, suppose that such confer-
ence would be unlawful? Surely you are aware
that Christ our Lord spoke even to the devil
concerning the law,' and that by the Apostle
Paul debates were held not only with Jews, but
even with heathen philosophers of the sect of the
Stoics and of the Epicureans.^ Is it, perchance,
that the laws of the Emperor do not permit you
to meet our bishops ? If so, assemble together
in the meantime your bishops in the region of
Hippo, in which we are suffering such wrongs
from men of your party. For how much more
legitimate and open is the way of access to us
for the writings which you might send to us, than
"or the arms with which they assail us !

II. Finally, we beg you to send back such
ritings by our brethren whom we have sent to
you. If, however, you will not do this, at least
lear us as well as those of your own party, at
5e hands we suffer such wrongs. Show us
Ihe truth for which you allege that you suffer
persecution, at the time when we are suffering so
reat cruelties from your side. For if you con-
ict us of being in error, perhaps you will con-
jede to us an exemption from being rebaptized
}y you, because we were baptized by persons
Vhom you have not condemned ; and you
Iranted this exemption to those whom Felicia-
jus of Musti, and Prsetextatus of Assuri, had
iptized during the long period in which you
rere attempting to cast them out of their
lurches by legal interdicts, because they were
!i communion with Maximianus, along with
ihom they were condemned explicitly and by
.me in the Council of Bagae. All which things
!e can prove by the judicial and municipal
jansactions, in which you brought forward the
•-cisions of this same Council of yours, when
i)u wished to show the judges that the persons
iiom you were expelling from your ecclesiastical


' Matt. iv. 4.
1^ Acts xvii. 18.


buildings were persons by schism separated from
you. Nevertheless, you who have by schism
severed yourselves from the seed of Abraham,
in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed,^
refuse to be expelled from our ecclesiastical
buildings, when the decree to this effect pro-
ceeds not from judges such as you employed in
dealing with schismatics from your sect, but
from the kings of the earth themselves, who
worship Christ as the prophecy had foretold,
and from whose bar you retired vanquished when
you brought accusation against Csecilianus.

12. If, however, you will neither instruct us
nor listen to us, come yourselves, or send into
the district of Hippo some of your party, with
some of us as their guides, that they may see
your army equipped with their weapons ; nay,
more fully equipped than ever army was before,
for no soldier when fighting against barbarians
was ever known to add to his other weapons
lime and acid to destroy the eyes of his enemies.
If you refuse this also, we beg you at least to
write to them to desist now from these things,
and refrain from murdering, plundering, and
blinding our people. We will not say, condemn
them ; for it is for yourselves to see how no con-
tamination is brought to you by the toleration
within your communion of those whom we
prove to be robbers, while contamination is
brought to us by our having members against
whom you have never been able to prove' that
they were traditors. If, however, you treat all our
remonstrances with contempt, we shall never
regret that we desired to act in a peaceful and
orderly way. The Lord will so plead for His
Church, that you, on the other hand, shall regret
that you despised our humble attempt at con-
ciUation.

LETTER LXXXIX.

(a.d. 406.)

to festus, my lord well beloved, my son hon-
ourable and worthy of esteem, augustin
sends greeting in the lord.

I. If, on behalf of error and inexcusable dis-
sension, and falsehoods which have been in every
way possible disproved, men are so presump-
tuous as to persevere in boldly assailing and
threatening the Catholic Church, which seeks
their salvation, how much more is it reasonable
and right for those who maintain the truth of
Christian peace and unity, — truth which com-
mends itself even to those who profess to deny
it or attempt to resist it, — to labour constantly
and with energy, not only in the defence of those
who are already Catholics, but also for the cor-
rection of those who are not yet within the

3 Gen. xxii. 18.


374


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


Church ! For if obstuiacy aims at the posses-
sion and exercise of indomitable strength, how
great should be the strength of constancy which
devotes persevering and unwearied labours to a
cause which it knows to be both pleasing to God,
and beyond all question necessarily aj^proved by
the judgment of wise men !

2. Could there, moreover, be anything more
lamentable as an instance of perversity, than for
men not only to refuse to be humbled by the
correction of their wickedness, but even to claim
commendation for their conduct, as is done by
the Donatists, when they boast that they are the
victims of persecution ; either through incredi-
ble blindness not knowing, or through inexcus-
able passion pretending not to know, that men
are made martyrs not by the amount of their
suffering, but by the cause in which they suffer?
This I would say even were I opposing men
who were only involved in the darkness of error,
and suffering penalties on that account most
truly merited, and who had not dared to assault
any one^with insane violence. But what shall I
say against those whose fatal obstinacy is such
that it is checked only by fear of losses, and is
taught only by exile how universal (as had been
foretold) is the diffusion of the Church, which
they prefer to attack rather then to acknowl-
edge? And if the things which they suffer
under this most gentle discipline be compared
with those things which they in reckless fury
perpetrate, who does not see to which party the
name of persecutors more truly belongs? Nay,
even though wicked sons abstain from violence,
they do, by their abandoned way of life, inflict
upon their affectionate parents a much more
serious wrong than their father and mother
inflict upon them, when, with a sternness pro-
portioned to the strength of their love, they
endeavour without dissimulation to compel them
to live uprightly.

3. There exist the strongest evidences in
public documents, which you can read if you
please, or rather, which I beseech and exhort
you to read, by which it is proved that their
predecessors, who originally separated them-
selves from the peace of the Church, did of
their own accord dare to bring accusation
against Csecilianus before the Emperor by
means of Anulinus, who was proconsul at that
time. Had they gained the day in that trial,
what else would Csecilianus have suffered at the
hands of the Emperor than that which, when
they were defeated, he awarded to them ? But '
truly, if they having accused him had prevailed, 1
and Csecilianus and his colleagues had been ex-
pelled from their sees, or, through persisting in 1
their conspiracy, had exposed themselves to
severer punishments (for the imperial censure
could not pass unpunished the resistance of per- ,


sons who had been defeated in the civil courts),
they would then have published as worthy of all
praise the Emperor's wise measures and anxious
care for the good of the Church. But now, be-
cause they have themselves lost their case, being
wholly unable to prove the charges which they
advanced, if they suffer anything for their iniq-
uity, they call it persecution ; and not only set
no bounds to their wicked violence, but also
claim to be honoured as martyrs : as if the Cath-
olic Christian emperors were following in their
measures against their most obstinate wicked-
ness any other precedent than the decision of
Constantine, to whom they of their own accord
appealed as the accusers of Caecilianus, and
whose authority they so esteemed above that of
all the bishops beyond the sea, that to him rather
than to them they referred this ecclesiastical dis-
I)ute. To him, again, they protested against the
first judgment given against them by the bishops
whom he had appointed to examine the case in
Rome, and to him also they appealed against
the second judgment given by the bishops at
Aries : yet when at last they were defeated by his
own decision, they remained unchanged in their
perversity. I think that even the devil himself
would not have had the assurance to persist in
such a cause, if he had been so often overthrown
by the authority of the judge to whom he had
of his own will chosen to appeal.

4. It may be said, however, that these are
human tribunals, and that they might have been
cajoled, misguided, or bribed. Why, then, is
the Christian world libelled and branded with the
crime laid to the charge of some who are said
to have surrendered to persecutors the sacred
books? For surely it was neither possible for
the Christian world, nor incumbent upon it, to
do otherwise than believe the judges whom the
plaintiffs had chosen, rather than the plaintiffs
against whom these judges pronounced judg-
ments. These judges are responsible to God for
their opinion, whether just or unjust ; but what
has the Church, diffused throughout the world,
done that it should be deemed necessary for her
to be rebaptized by the Donatists upon no other
ground than because, in a case in which she was !j
not able to decide as to the truth, she has thought
herself called upon to believe those who were in
a position to judge it rightly, rather than those
who, though defeated in the civil courts, refused
to yield ? O weighty indictment against all the
nations to which God promised that they should
be blessed in the seed of Abraham, and has now
made His promise good ! When they with one
voice demand. Why do you wish to rebaptize us ?
the answer given is, Because you do not know
what men in Africa were guilty of surrendering ij
the sacred books ; and being thus ignorant, ac-
cepted the testimony of the judges who decided


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


75


the case as more worthy of credit than that of
those by whom the accusation was brought. No
man deserves to be blamed for the crime of
another ; what, then, has the whole world to do
with the sin wliich some one in Africa may have
committed? No man deserves to be blamed
for a crime about which he knows nothing ; and
how could the whole world possibly know the
crime in this case, whether the judges or the
party condemned were guilty? Ye who have
understanding, judge what I say. Here is the
justice of heretics : the party of Donatus con-
demns the whole world unheard, because the
whole world does not condemn a crime unknown.
But for the world, truly, it suffices to have the
promises of God, and to see fulfilled in itself
what prophets predicted so long ago, and to
recognise the Church by means of the same
Scriptures by which Christ her King is recog-
nised. For as in them are foretold concerning
Christ the things which we read in gospel history
to have been fulfilled in Him, so also in them
have been foretold concerning the Church the
things which we now behold fulfilled in the world.
5. Possibly some thinking people might be
disturbed by what they are accustomed to say
regarding baptism, viz. that it is the true baptism
of Christ only when it is administered by a
righteous man, were it not that on this subject
the Christian world holds what is most manifestly
evangelical truth as taught in the words of John :
" He that sent me to baptize with water, the
same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see
the Spirit descending, and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy
Ghost." ' Wherefore the Church calmly declines
to place her hope in man, lest she fall under the
curse pronounced in Scripture, " Cursed be the
man that trusteth in man," ^ but places her hope
in Christ, who so took upon Him the form of a
servant as not to lose the form of God, of whom
it is said, " The same is He which baptizeth."
Therefore, whoever the man be, and whatever
office he bear who administers the ordinance, it
is not he who baptizes, — that is the work of
Him upon whom the dove descended. So great
is the absurdity in which the Donatists are in-
volved in consequence of these foolish opinions,
that they can find no escape from it. For when
they admit the validity and reality of baptism
when one of their sect baptizes who is a guilty
man, but whose guilt is concealed, we ask them,
Who baptizes in this case ? and they can only
answer, God ; for they cannot affirm that a man
guilty of sin (say of adultery) can sanctify any i
one. If, then, when baptism is administered by
a man known to be righteous, he sanctifies the
person baptized ; but when it is administered by

' John i. 33.

^ Jer. xvii. 5. I


a wicked man, whose wickedness is hidden, it is
npt he, but God, who sanctifies. Those who are
baptized ought to wish to be baptized rather by
men who are secretly bad than by men manifestly
good, for God sanctifies much more effectually
than any righteous man can do. If it be palpably
absurd that one about to be baptized ought to
wish to be baptized by a hypocritical adulterer
rather than by a man of known chastity, it follows
plainly, that whoever be the minister that dis-
penses the rite, the baptism is valid, because He
Himself baptizes upon whom the dove descended.

6. Notwithstanding the impression which truth
so obvious should produce on the ears and hearts
of men, such is the whirlpool of evil custom by
which some have been engulfed, that rather than
yield, they will resist both authority and argu-
ment of every kind. Their resistance is of two
kinds — either with active rage or with passive
immobihty. What remedies, then, must the
Church apply when seeking with a mother's anx-
iety the salvation of them all, and distracted by
the frenzy of some and the lethargy of others ?
Is it right, is it possible, for her to despise or
give up any means which may promote their
recovery? She must necessarily be esteemed
burdensome by both, just because she is the
enemy of neither. For men in frenzy do not
like to be bound, and men in lethargy do not like
to be stirred up ; nevertheless the diligence of
charity perseveres in restraining the one and
stimulating the other, out of love to both. Both
are provoked, but both are loved ; both, while
they continue under their infirmity, resent the
treatment as vexatious ; both express their
thankfulness for it when they are cured.

7. Moreover, whereas they think and boast
that we receive them into the Church just as they
were, it is not so. We receive them completely
changed, because they do not begin to be Cath-
olics until they have ceased to be heretics. For
their sacraments, which we have in common
with them, are not the objects of dislike to us,
because they are not human, but Divine. That
which must be taken from them is the error,
which is their own, and which they have wickedly
imbibed ; not the sacraments, which they have
received like ourselves, and which they bear and
have, — to their own condemnation, indeed, be-
cause they use them so unworthily ; nevertheless,
they truly have them. Wherefore, when their
error is forsaken, and the perversity of schism
corrected in them, they pass over from heresy
into the peace of the Church, which they for-
merly did not possess, and without which all that
they did possess was only doing them harm. If,
however, in thus passing over they are not sin-
cere, this is a matter not for us, but for God, to
judge. And yet, some who were suspected of
insincerity because they had passed over to us


1^


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


through fear, have been found in some subse-
quent temptations so foithful as to surpass others
who had been origuially Cathohcs. Therefore
let it not be saitl that nothing is accomphshed
when strong measures are employed. For when
the entrenchments of stubborn custom are
stormed by fear of human authority, this is not
all that is done, because at the same time faith
is strengtliened, and the understanding convinced,
by authority and arguments which are Divine.

8. These things being so, be it known to your
Grace that your men in the region of Hippo are
still Donatists, and that your letter has had no
intluence upon them. The reason why it failed
to move them I need not write ; but send some
one, either a servant or a friend of your own,
whose fidelity you can entrust with the commis-
sion, and let him come not to them in the first
place, but to us without their knowledge ; and
when he has carefully consulted with us as to
what is best to be done, let him do it with the
Lord's help. For in these measures we are act-
ing not only for their welfare, but also on behalf
of our own men who have become Catholics, to
whom the vicinity of these Donatists is so dan-
gerous, that it cannot be looked upon by us as a
small matter.

I could have written much more briefly ; but
I wished you to have a letter from me, by which
you might not only be yourself informed of the
reason of my solicitude, but also be provided
with an answer to any one who might dissuade
you from earnestly devoting your energies to the
correction of the people who belong to you, and
might speak against us for wishing you to do
this. If in this I have done what was unneces-
sary, because you had yourself either learned or
thought out these principles, or if I have been
burdensome to you by inflicting so long a
letter upon one so engrossed with public affairs,
I beg you to forgive me. I only entreat you
not to despise what I have brought before you
and requested at your hands. May the mercy
of God be your safeguard !

LETTER XC.

(a.d. 408.)

to my noble lord and brother, worthy of
all esteem, bishop augustin, nectarius sends
greeting.

I do not dwell upon the strength of the love
men bear to their native land, for you know it.
It is the only emotion which has a stronger claim
than love of kindred. If there were any limit
or time beyond which it would be lawful for
right-hearted men to withdraw themselves from
its control, I have by this time well earned ex-
emption from the burdens which it imposes.


But since love and gratitude towards our country
gain strength every day, and the nearer one
comes to the end of life, the more ardent is his
desire to leave his country in a safe and pros-
perous condition, I rejoice, in beginning this
letter, thar I am addressing myself to a man who
is versed in all kinds of learning, and therefore
able to enter into my feelings.

There are many things in the colony of Cal-
ama which justly bind my love to it. I was born
here, and I have (in the opinion of others) ren-
dered great services to this community. Now,
my lord most excellent and worthy of all esteem,
this town has fallen disastrously by a grievous
misdemeanour on the part of her citizens,' which
must be punished with very great severity, if we
are dealt with according to the rigour of the
civil law. But a bishop is guided by another
law. His duty is to promote the welfare of
men, to interest himself in any case only with a
view to the benefit of the parties, and to obtain
for other men the pardon of their sins at the hand
of the Almighty God. Wherefore I beseech you
with all possible urgency to secure that, if the
matter is to be made the subject of a prosecu-
tion, the guiltless be protected, and a distinction
drawn between the innocent and those who
did the wrong. This, which, as you see, is a
demand in accordance with your own natural
sentiments, I pray you to grant. An assessment
to compensate for the losses caused by the tu-
mult can be easily levied. We only deprecate
the severity of revenge. May you live in the
more full enjoyment of the Divine favour, my
noble lord, and brother worthy of all esteem.


LETTER XCI.

(a.d. 408.)

to my noble lord and justly honoured
brother nectarius, augustin sends greet-
ING,

I. I do not wonder that, though your limbs
are chilled by age, your heart still glows with
patriotic fire. I admire this, and, instead of
grieving, I rejoice to learn that you not only re-
member, but by your life and practice illustrate,
the maxim that there is no limit either in measure
or in time to the claims which their country has
upon the care and service of right-hearted men.
\Vherefore we long to have you enrolled in the
service of a higher and nobler country, through
holy love, to which (up to the measure of our
capacity) we are sustained amid the perils and
toils which we meet with among those whose
welfare we seek in urging them to make that
country their own. Oh that we had you such a


J

I


4


' He reters to a riot in which the Pagans, after celebrating a
heathen festival, attacked the Christians on June i, 408 a.d.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


Zll


citizen of that country, that you would think that
there ought to be no limit either in measure or
in time to your efforts for the good of that small
portion of her citizens who are on this earth
pilgrims ! This would be a better loyalty, be-
cause you would be responding to the claims of
a better country ; and if you resolved that in
your time on earth your labours for her welfare
should have no end, you would in her eternal
peace be recompensed with joy that shall have
no end.

2. But till this be done, — and it is not beyond
hope that you should be able to gain, or should
even now be most wisely considering that you
ought to gain, that country to which your father
has gone before you, — till this be done, I say, you
must excuse us if, for the sake of that country
which we desire never to leave, we cause some
distress to that country which you desire to leave
in the full bloom of honour and prosperity. As
to the flowers which thus bloom in your country,
if we were discussing this subject with one of your
wisdom, we have no doubt that you would be
easily convinced, or rather, would yourself readily
perceive, in what way a commonwealth should
flourish. The foremost of your poets has sung
of certain flowers of Italy ; but in your own
country we have been taught by experience, not
how it has blossomed with heroes, so much as
how it has gleamed with weapons • of war : nay,
I ought to write how it has burned rather than
how it has gleamed ; and instead of the weapons
of war, I should write the fires of incendiaries.
If so great a crime were to remain unpunished,
without any rebuke such as the miscreants have
deserved, do you think that you would leave your
country in the full bloom of honour and pros-
perity? O blooming flowers, yielding not fruit,
but thorns ! Consider now whether you would

J prefer to see your country flourish by the piety
i of its mhabitants, or by their escaping the pun-
ishment of their crimes ; by the correction of
their manners, or by outrages to which impunity
emboldens them. Compare these things, I say,
and judge whether or not you love your country
more than we do ; whether its prosperity and
honour are more truly and earnestly sought by
you or by us.

3. Consider for a little those books, De Repub-
\lica, from which you imbibed that sentiment of
W most loyal citizen, that there is no limit either
in measure or in time to the claims which their
Icountry has upon the care and service of right-
hearted men. Consider them, I beseech you, and
observe how great are the praises there bestowed
bpon frugality, self-control, conjugal fidelity, and
those chaste, honourable, and upright manners,
the prevalence of which in any city entitles it to
je spoken of as flourishing. Now the Churches
vhich are multiplying throughout the world are,


as it were, sacred seminaries of public instruc-
tion, in which this sound morality is inculcated
and learned, and in which, above all, men are
taught the worship due to the true and faithful
God, who not only commands men to attempt,
but also gives grace to perform, all those things
by which the soul of man is furnished and fitted
for fellowship with God, and for dwelling in the
eternal heavenly kingdom. For this reason He
hath both foretold and commanded the casting
down of the images of the many false gods which
are in the world. For nothing so effectually ren-
ders men depraved in practice, and unfit to be
good members of society, as the imitation of such
deities as are described and extolled in pagan
writings.

4. In fact, those most learned men (whose
beau ideal of a republic or commonwealth in
this world was, by the way, rather investigated or
described by them in private discussions, than
established and realized by them in public meas-
ures) were accustomed to set forth as models
for the education of youth the examples of men
whom they esteemed eminent and praiseworthy,
rather than the example given by their gods.
And there is no cjuestion that the young man in
Terence,' who, beholding a picture upon the wall
in which was portrayed the licentious conduct of
the king of the gods, fanned the flame of the pas-
sion which mastered him, by the encouragement
which such high authority gave to wickedness,
would not have fallen into the desire, nor have
plunged into the commission, of such a shameful
deed if he had chosen to imitate Cato instead of
Jupiter ; but how could he make such a choice,
when he was compelled in the temples to wor-
ship Jupiter rather than Cato ? Perhaps it may
be said that we should not bring forward from a
comedy arguments to put to shame the wanton-
ness and the impious superstition of profane
men. But read or recall to mind how wisely it
is argued in the books above referred to, that the
style and the plots of -comedies would never be
approved by the public voice if they did not
harmonize with the manners of those who ap-
proved them ; wherefore, by the authority of men
most illustrious and eminent in the common-
wealth to which they belonged, and engaged in
debating as to the conditions of a perfect com-
monwealth, our position is established, that the
most degraded of men may be made yet worse
if they imitate their gods, — gods, of course,
which are not true, but false and invented.

5. You will perhaps reply, that all those things
which were written long ago concerning the life
and manners of the gods are to be far otherwise
than literally understood and interpreted by the
wise. Nay, we have heard within the last few

■ Eunuchus, Act iii. Sc. 5.


Z1^


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


days that such wholesome interpretations are
now read to the people when assembled in the |
temples. Tell me, is the human race so blind .
to truth as not to perceive things so plain and ,
palpable as these? When, by the art of painters, '
founders, hammermen, sculptors, authors, play- '<
ers, singers, and dancers, Jupiter is in so many '
places exhibited in flagrant acts of lewdness, how 1
important it was that in his own Capitol at least
his worshippers might have read a decree from ;
himself prohibiting such crimes ! If, through 1
the absence of such prohibition, these monsters, '
in which shame and profanity culminate, are
regarded with enthusiasm by the people, wor- '
shipped in their temples, and laughed at in their |
theatres ; if, in order to provide sacrifices for
them, even the poor must be despoiled of their
flocks ; if, in order to provide actors who shall |
by gesture and dance represent their infamous
achievements, the rich squander their estates,
can it be said of the communities in which these
things are done, that they flourish ? The flowers
with which they bloom owe their birth not to a
fertile soil, nor to a wealthy and bounteous vir-
tue ; for them a worthy parent is found in that
goddess Flora,' whose dramatic games are cele-
brated with a profligacy so utterly dissolute and
shameless, that any one may infer from them
what kind of demon that must be which cannot
be appeased unless — not birds, nor quadrupeds,
nor even human life — but (oh, greater villany !)
human modesty and virtue, perish as sacrifices
on her altars. |

6. These things I have said, because of your
having written that the nearer you come to the
end of life, the greater is your desire to leave
your country in a safe and flourishing condition. !
Away with all these vanities and follies, and let
men be converted to the true worship of God,
and to chaste and pious manners : then will you
see your country flourishing, not in the vain
opinion of fools, but in the sound judgment of
the wise ; when your fatherland here on earth
shall have become a portion of that Fatherland
into which we are born not by the flesh, but by
faith, and in which all the holy and faithful ser-
vants of God shall bloom in the eternal summer,
when their labours in the winter of time are done.
We are therefore resolved, neither on the one
hand to lay aside Christian gentleness, nor on
the other to leave in your city that which would
be a most pernicious example for all others to
follow. For success in this dealing we trust to
the help of God, if His indignation against the
evil-doers be not so great as to make Him with-

■ Here culminates in the original a play upon words, towards
which Augustin has been working with the ingenuity of a rhetorician
from the beginning of the second paragraph; but the zest of his wit is
necessarily lost in translation, because in our language the words
" flower" and " flourish" are not so immediately suggestive of each
other as the corresponding noun and verb in Latin {Jlos and
jlorere) .


hold His blessing. For certainly both the gen-
tleness which we desire to maintain, and the
discipline which we shall endeavour without pas-
sion to administer, may be hindered, if God in
His hidden counsels order it otherwise, and
either appoint that this so great wickedness be
punished with a more severe chastisement, or
in yet greater displeasure leave the sin without
punishment in this world, its guilty authors being
neither reproved nor reformed.

7. You have, in the exercise of your judgment,
laid down the principles by which a bishop should
be influenced ; and after saying that your town
has fallen disastrously by a grievous misdemean-
our on the part of your citizens, which must be
punished with great severity if they are dealt
with according to the rigour of the civil law, you
add : " But a bishop is guided by another law ;
his duty is to promote the welfare of men, to
interest himself in any case only with a view to
the benefit of the parties, and to obtain for other
men the pardon of their sins at the hand of the
Almighty God." ^ This we by all means labour
to secure, that no one be visited with undue
severity of punishment, either by us or by any
other who is influenced by our interposition ;
and we seek to promote the true welfare of men,
which consists in the blessedness of well-doing,
not in the assurance of impunity in evil-doing.
We do also seek earnestly, not for ourselves
alone, but on behalf of others, the pardon of
sin : but this we cannot obtain, except for those
who have been turned by correction from the
practice of sin. You add, moreover : " I be-
seech you with all possible urgency to secure
that if the matter is to be made the subject of a
prosecution, the guiltless be protected, and a
distinction drawn between the innocent and
those who did the wrong."

8. Listen to a brief account of what was done,
and let the distinction between innocent and
guilty be drawn by yourself. In defiance of the
most recent laws,^ certain impious rites were
celebrated on the Pagan feast-day, the calends
of June, no one interfering to forbid them, and
with such unbounded effrontery that a most in-
solent multitude passed along the street in which
the church is situated, and went on dancing in
front of the building, — an outrage which was
never committed even in the time of Julian.
When the clergy endeavoured to stop this most
illegal and insulting procedure, the church was
assailed with stones. About eight days after
that, when the bishop had called the attention
of the authorities to the well-known laws on the
subject, and they were preparing to carry out
that which the law prescribed, the church was a

2 Letter XC. p. 376.

3 The law of Honorius, passed on Nov. 24, 407, forbidding the
celehration of public heathen solemnities and festivals {guidguam
solemnitatis a^tare).


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


379


seeking

mortification that through


outrage
things went on


second time assailed with stones. When, on tlie
following day, our people wished to make such
complaint as they deemed necessary in open
court, in order to make these villains afraid,
their rights as citizens were denied them. On
the same day there was a storm of hailstones,
that they might be made afraid, if not by men,
at least by the divine power, thus requiting them
for their showers of stones against the church ;
but as soon as this was over they renewed the
attack for the third time with stones, and at last
endeavoured to destroy both the buildings and
the men in them by fire : one servant of God
who lost his way and met them they killed on
the spot, all the rest escaping or concealing
themselves as they best could ; while the bishop
hid himself in some crevice into which he forced
himself with difficulty, and in which he lay folded
double while he heard the voices of the ruffians
him to kill him, and expressing their
his escaping them
their principal design in this grievous
had been frustrated. These
from about the tenth hour until the night was far
advanced. No attempt at resistance or rescue
was made by those whose authority might have
had influence on the mob. The only one who
interfered was a stranger, through whose exer-
tions a number of the servants of God were
delivered from the hands of those who were try-
ing to kill them, and a great deal of property
was recovered from the plunderers by force :
whereby it was shown how easily these riotous
proceedings might have been either prevented
wholly or arrested, if the citizens, and especially
the leading men, had forbidden them, either
from the first or after they had begun.

9. Accordingly you cannot in that community
draw a distinction between innocent and guilty
persons, for all are guilty ; but perhaps you may
distinguish degrees of guilt. Those are in a
comparatively small fault, who, being kept back
by fear, especially by fear of offending those
whom they knew to have leading influence in
the community and to be hostile to the Church,
did not dare to render assistance to the Chris-
tians ; but all are guilty who consented to these
outrages, though they neither perpetrated them
nor instigated others to the crime : more guilty
are those who perpetrated the wrong, and most
guilty are those who instigated them to it. Let
us, however, suppose that the instigation of
others to these crimes is a matter of suspicion
rather than of certain knowledge, and let us not
investigate those things which can be found out
in no other way than by subjecting witnesses to


torture. Let us also


forgive


those who through


fear thought it better for them to plead secretly
with God for the bishop and His other servants,
than openly to displease the powerful enemies \


of the Church. What reason can you give for
holding that those who remain should be sub-
jected to no correction and restraint? Do you
really think that a case of such cruel rage should
be held up to the world as passing unpunished ?
We do not desire to gratify our anger by vindic-
tive retribution for the past, but we are concerned
to make provision in a truly merciful spirit for
the future. Now, wicked men have something
in respect to which they may be punished, and
that by Christians, in a merciful way, and so as
to promote their own profit and well-being. For
they have these three things : the life and health
of the body, the means of supporting that lite,
and the means and opportunities of living a
wicked life. Let the two former remain un-
touched in the possession of those who repent
of their crime : this we desire, and this we spare
no pains to secure. But as to the third, upon it
God will, if it please Him, inflict punishment in
His great compassion, dealing with it as a decay-
ing or diseased part, which must be removed
with the pruning-knife. If, however. He be
pleased either to go beyond this, or not to permit
the punishment to go so far, the reason for this
higher and doubtless more righteous counsel
remains with Him : our duty is to devote pains
and use our influence according to the light
which is granted to us, beseeching His approval
of our endeavours to do that which shall be
most for the gooel of all, and praying Him not
to permit us to do anything which He who
knoweth all things much better than we do sees
to be inexpedient both for ourselves and for His
Church.

10. When I went recently to Calama, that
under so grievous sorrow I might either comfort
the downcast or soothe the indignant among our
people, I used all my influence with the Chris-
tians to persuade them to do what I judged to
be their duty at that time. I then at their own
request admitted to an audience the Pagans also,
the source and cause of all this mischief, in order
that I might admonish them what they should
do if they were wise, not only for the removal
of present anxiety, but also for the obtaining of
everlasting salvation. They listened to many
things which I said, and they preferred many
recjuests to me ; but far be it from me to be
such a servant as to find pleasure in being peti-
tioned by those who do not humble themselves
before my Lord to ask from Him. With your
quick intelligence, you will readily perceive that
our aim must be, while preserving Christian gen-
tleness and moderation, to act so that we may
either make others afraid of imitating their per-
versity, or have cause to desire others to imitate
their profiting by correction. As for the loss
sustained, this is either borne by the Christians
or remedied by the help of their brethren.


38o


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


What concerns us is the gaining of souls, which
even at the risk of Hfe we are impatient to
secure ; and our desire is, that in your district
we may have larger success, and that in other
districts we may not be hindered by the influ-
ence of your example. May God in His mercy
grant to us to rejoice in your salvation !

LETTER XCII.
(a.d. 40S.)

TO THE NOBLE AND JUSTLY DISTINGUISHED LADY
ITALICA, A DAUGHTER WORTHY OF HONOUR IN
THE LOVE OF CHRIST, BISHOP AUGUSTIN SENDS
GREETING IN THE LORD.

1. I have learned, not only by your letter, but
also by the statements of the person who brought
it to me, that you earnestly solicit a letter from
me, believing that you may derive from it very
great consolation. What you may gain from my
letter it is for yourself to judge ; I at least felt
that I should neither refuse nor delay compli-
ance with your request. May your own faith
and hope comfort you, and that love which is
shed abroad in the hearts of the pious by the
Holy Ghost,' whereof we have now a portion as
an earnest of the whole, in order that we may
learn to desire its consummate fulness. For you
ought not to consider yourself desolate while you
have Christ dwelling in your heart by faith ; nor
ought you to sorrow as those heathens who have
no hope, seeing that in regard to those friends,
who are not lost, but only called earlier than
ourselves to the country whither we shall follow
them, we ha\'e hope, resting on a most sure
promise, that from this life we shall pass into
that other life, in which they shall be to us more
beloved as they shall be better known, and in
which our pleasure in loving them shall not be
alloyed by any fear of separation.

2. Your late husband, by whose decease you
are now a widow, was truly well known to you,
but better known to himself than to you. And
how could this be, when you saw his face, which
he himself did not see, if it were not that the
inner knowledge which we have of ourselves is
more certain, since no man " knoweth the things
of a man, save the spirit of man which is in
man "?^ but when the Lord cometh, " who both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts," ^ then shall nothing in any one be con-
cealed from his neighbour ; nor shall there be
anything which any one might reveal to his
friends, but keep hidden from strangers, for no
stranger shall be there. What tongue can de-


■ Rom. V. 5.
* I Cor. ii. II.
3 I Cor. iv. 5.


scribe the nature and the greatness of that light
by which all those things which are now in the
hearts of men concealed shall be made manifest ?
who can with our weak faculties even approach
it? Truly that Light is God Himself, for " God
is Light, and in Him is no darkness at all ; " •♦
but He is the Light of purified minds, not of
these bodily eyes. And the mind shall then be,
what meanwhile it is not, able to see that light.

3. But this the bodily eye neither now is, nor
shall then be, able to see. For everything
which can be seen by the bodily eye must be in
some place, nor can be everywhere in its totality,
but with a smaller part of itself occupies a
smaller space, and with a larger part a larger
space. It is not so with God, who is invisible
and incorruptible, " who only hath immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach
unto ; whom no man hath seen nor can see." 5
For He cannot be seen by men through the
bodily organ by which men see corporeal things.
For if He were inaccessible to the minds also
of the saints, it would not be said, " They looked
unto Him, and were lightened " [translated by
Aug., " Draw near unto Him, and be enlight-
ened "] ;^ and if He was invisible to the minds
of the saints, it would not be said, " We shall
see Him as He is : " for consider the whole con-
text there in that Epistle of John : " Beloved,"
he says, " now are we the sons of God ; and it
doth not yet appear what we shall be : but we
know that, when He shall appear, we shall be
like Him ; for we shall see Him as He is." 7
We shall therefore see Him according to the
measure in which we shall be like Him ; because
now the measure in which we do not see Him is
according to the measure of our unlikeness to
Him. We shall therefore see Him by means of
that in which we shall be like Him. But who
would be so infatuated as to assert that we either
are or shall be in our bodies like unto God?
The likeness spoken of is therefore in the inner
man, " which is renewed in knowledge after the
image of Him that created him." ^ And we shall
become the more like unto Him, the more we
advance in knowledge of Him and in love ; be-
cause " though our outward man perish, our
inward man is renewed day by day,"^ yet so as
that, however far one may have become advanced
in this life, he is far short of that perfection of
likeness which is fitted for seeing God, as the
apostle says, " face to face." '° If by these words
we were to understand the bodily face, it would
follow that God has a face such as ours, and


■• I John i. 5.
5 I Tim. vi. 16.
* Ps. xxxiv. 5.
^ I John iii. 2.
^ Col. iii. 10.
9 2 Cor. iv. 6.
'° I Cor. xiii. 12.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


381


that between our face and His there must be a
space intervening when we shall see Him face to
face. And if a space intervene, this presup-
poses a limitation and a definite conformation
of members and other things, absurd to utter,
and impious even to think of, by which most
empty delusions the natural man, which " re-
ceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God," '
is deceived.

4. For some of those who talk thus foolishly
affirm, as I am informed, that we see God now
by our minds, but shall then see Him by our
bodies ; yea, they even say that the wicked shall
in the same manner see Him. Observe how far
they have gone from bad to worse, when, unpun-
ished for their foolish speaking, they talk at
random, unrestrained by either fear or shame.
They used to say at first, that Christ endowed
only His own flesh with this faculty of seeing
God with the bodily eye ; then they added to
this, that all the saints shall see God in the same
way when they have received their bodies again
in the resurrection ; and now they have granted
that the same thing is possible to the wicked
also. Well, let them grant what gifts they please,
and to whom they please : for who may say any-
thing against men giving away that which is their
own? for he that speaketh a lie, speaketh of his
own.^ Be it yours, however, in common with all
who hold sound doctrine, not to presume to
take in this way from your own any of these
errors ; but when you read, '• Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God," ^ learn
from it that the impious shall not see Him : for
the impious are neither blessed nor pure in heart.
Moreover, when you read, "Now we see through
a glass darkly,* but then face to face," s learn
from this that we shall then see Him face to
face by the same means by which we now see
Him through a glass darkly. In both cases
alike, the vision of God belongs to the inner
man, whether when we walk in this pilgrimage
still by faith, in which it uses the glass and the
aiviyii.a, or wlien, in the country which is our
home, we shall perceive by sight, which vision
the words " face to face " denote.

5. Let the flesh raving with carnal imagina-
tions hear these words : " God is a Spirit, and
they that worship Him must worship Him in
spirit and in truth." ^ If this be the manner of
worshipping Him, how much more of seeing
Him ! For who durst affirm that the Divine
essence is seen in a corporal manner, when He
has not permitted it to be worshipped in a cor-
poral manner? They think, however, that they


■ I Cor. ii. 14.
^ John viii. 44.
3 Matt. V. 8.
^ €v aifi-ywart.
5 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
* John IV. 24.


are very acute in saying and in pressing as a
question for us to answer : Was Christ able to en-
, dow His flesh so as that He could with His eyes
see the Father, or was He not? If we reply that
j He was not, they publish abroad that we have
denied the omnipotence of God ; if, on the other
hand, we grant that He was able, they affirm that
their argument is established by our reply. How
much more excusable is the folly of those who
maintain that the flesh shall be changed into the
Divine substance, and shall be what God Him-
self is, in order that thus they may endow with
fitness for seeing God that which is meanwhile
removed by so great diversity of nature from
likeness to Him ! Yet I believe they reject
from their creed, perhaps also refuse to hear,
this error. Nevertheless, if they were in like
manner pressed with the question above quoted,
as to whether God can or cannot do this [viz.
change our flesh into the Divine substance],
which alternative will they choose? Will they
limit His power by answering that He cannot ;
or if they concede that He can, will they by this
concession grant that it shall be done ? Let
them get out of the dilemma which they have ,
proposed to others as above, in the same way by
which they get out of this dilemma proposed to
others by them. Moreover, why do they con-
tend that this gift is to be attributed only to the
eyes, and not to all the other senses of Christ?
Shall God then be a sound, that He may be per-
ceived by the ear? and an exhalation, that He
may be discerned by the sense of smell? and a
liquid of some kind, that He may be also im-
bibed? and a solid body, that He may be also
touched? No, they say. What then? we re-
ply ; can God be this, or can He not? If they
say He cannot, why do they derogate from the
omnipotence of God ? If they say He can, but
is not willing, why do they show favour to the
eyes alone, and grudge the same honour to
the other senses of Christ ? Do they carry their
folly just as far as they please? How much bet-
ter is our course, who do not prescribe limits to
their folly, but would fain prevent them from
entering into it at all !

6. Many things may be brought forward for
the confutation of that madness. Meanwhile,
however, if at any time they assail your ears,
read this letter to the supporters of such error,
and do not count it too great a labour to write
back to me as well as you can what they say in
reply. Let me add that our hearts are purified
liy faith, because the vision of God is promised
to us as the reward of faith. Now, if this vision
of God were to be through the bodily eyes, in
vain are the souls of saints exercised for receiv-
ing it ; nay, rather, a soul which cherishes such
sentiments is not exercised in itself, but is wholly
in the flesh. For where will it dwell more reso-


;82


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


lutelyand fixedly than in that by means of which
it expects that it shall see God ? How great an
evil this would be I rather leave to }'our own
intelligence to observe, than labour to prove by
a long argument.

May your heart dwell always under the Lord's
keeping, noble and justly distinguished lady, and
daughter worthy of honour in the love of Christ !
Salute from me, with the respect due to your
worth, your sons, who are along with yourself
honourable, and to me dearly beloved in the Lord.

LETTER XCIIL

(a.d. 408.)

to vincentius, my brother dearly beloved,
augustin sends greeting.

Chap. i. — i. I have received a letter which I
believe to be from you to me : at least I have
not thought this incredible, for the person who
brought it is one whom I know to be a Catholic
Christian, and who, I think, would not dare to
impose upon me. But even though the letter
may perchance not be from you, I have consid-
ered it necessary to write a reply to the author,
whoever he may be. You know me now to be
more desirous of rest, and earnest in seeking it,
than when you knew me in my earlier years at
Carthage, in the lifetime of your immediate
predecessor Rogatus. But we are precluded
from this rest by the Donatists, the repression
and correction of whom, by the powers which
are ordained of God, appears to me to be labour
not in vain. For we already rejoice in the cor-
rection of many who hold and defend the Catho-
lic unity with such sincerity, and are so glad to
have been delivered from their former error, that
we admire them with great thankfulness and
pleasure. Yet these same persons, under some
indescribable bondage of custom, would in no
way have thought of being changed to a better
condition, had they not, under the shock of this
alarm, directed their minds earnestly to the
study of the truth ; fearing lest, if without profit,
and in vain, they suffered hard things at the
hands of men, for the sake not of righteousness,
but of their own obstinacy and presumption,
they should afterwards receive nothing else at
the hand of God than the punishment due to
wicked men who despised the admonition which
He so gently gave and His paternal correction ;
and being by such reflection made teachable,
they found not in mischievous or frivolous human
fables, but in the promises of the divine books,
that universal Church which they saw extending
according to the promise throughout all nations :
just as, on the testimony of prophecy in the
same Scriptures, they believed without hesitation
that Christ is exalted above the heavens, though


He is not seen by them in His glory. Was it
my duty to be displeased at the salvation of
these men, and to call back my colleagues from
a fatherly diligence of this kind, the result of
which has been, that we see many blaming their
former blindness? For they see that they were
blind who believed Christ to have been exalted
above the heavens although they saw Him not,
and yet denied that His glory is spread over all
the earth although they saw it ; whereas the
prophet has with so great plainness included
both in one sentence, " Be Thou exalted, O God,
above the heavens, and Thy glory above all the
earth." '

2. Wherefore, if we were so to overlook and
forbear with those cruel enemies who seriously
disturb our peace and quietness by manifold
and grievous forms of violence and treachery,
as that nothing at all should be contrived and
done by us with a view to alarm and correct
them, truly we would be rendering evil for evil.
For if any one saw his enemy running head-
long to destroy himself when he had become
delirious through a dangerous fever, would he
not in that case be much more truly rendering
evil for evil if he permitted him to run on thus,
than if he took measures to have him seized and
bounei? And yet he would at that moment ap-
pear to the other to be most vexatious, and most
like an enemy, when, in truth, he had proved
himself most useful and most compassionate ;
although, doubtless, when health was recovered,
would he express to him his gratitude with a
warmth proportioned to the measure in which
he had felt his refusal to indulge him in his time
of phrenzy. Oh, if I could but show you how
many we have even from the Circumcelliones,
who are now approved Catholics, and condemn
their former life, and the wretched delusion
under which they believed that they were doing
in behalf of the Church of God whatever they
did under the promptings of a restless temerity,
who nevertheless would not have been brought
to this soundness of judgment had they not
been, as persons beside themselves, bound with
the cords of those laws which are distasteful to
you ! As to another form of most serious dis-
temper,-^ that, namely, of those who had not,
indeed, a boldness leading to acts of violence,
but were pressed down by a kind of inveterate
sluggishness of mind, and would say to us :
" What you affirm is true, nothing can be said
against it ; but it is hard for us to leave off what
we have received by tradition from our fathers,"
— why should not such persons be shaken up in
a beneficial way by a law bringing upon them
inconvenience in worldly things, in order that
they might rise from their lethargic sleep, and

' Ps. cviii. 5.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


383


awake to the salvation which is to be found in
the unity of the Church ? How many of them,
now rejoicing with us, speak bitterly of the
weight with which their ruinous course formerly
oppressed them, and confess that it was our
duty to inflict annoyance upon them, in order to
prevent them from perishing under the disease
of lethargic habit, as under a fatal sleep !

3. You will say that to some these remedies
are of no service. Is the art of healing, there-
fore, to be abandoned, because the malady of
some is incurable ? You look only to the case
of those who are so obdurate that they refuse
even such correction. Of such it is written,
" In vain have I smitten your children : they
received no correction : " ' and yet I suppose
that those of whom the prophet speaks were
smitten in love, not from hatred. But you ought
to consider also the very large number over ',
whose salvation we rejoice. For if they were '
only made afraid, and not instructed, this might ,
appear to be a kind of inexcusable tyranny.
Again, if they were instructed only, and not
made afraid, they would be with more difficulty
persuaded to embrace the way of salvation, j
having become hardened through the inveteracy
of custom : whereas many whom we know well,
when arguments had been brought beibre them,
and the truth made apparent by testimonies
from the word of God, answered us that they
desired to pass into the communion of the Cath-
olic Church, but were in fear of the violence of
worthless men, whose enmity they would incur ;
which violence they ought indeed by all means
to despise when it was to be borne for right-
eousness' sake, and for the sake of eternal hfe.
Nevertheless the weakness of such men ought not
to be regarded as hopeless, but to be supported
until they gain more strength. Nor may we for-
get what the Lord Himself said to Peter when
he was yet weak : " Thou canst not follow Me
now, but thou shalt follow Me afterwards." ^
When, however, wholesome instruction is added
to means of inspiring salutary fear, so that not
only the light of truth may dispel the darkness
of error, but the force of fear may at the same
time break the bonds of evil custom, we are
made glad, as I have said, by the salvation of
many, who with us bless God, and render thanks
to Him, because by the fulfilment of His cove-
nant, in which He promised that the kings of
the earth should serve Christ, He has thus cured
|the diseased and restored health to the weak.

Chap. ii. — 4. Not every one who is indulgent
is a friend ; nor is every one an enemy who
Ismites. Better are the wounds of a friend than
[the proffered kisses of an enemy.^ It is better


' Jer. ii. 30.
^ John xiii. 36.
3 Prov. xxvii. 6.


with severity to love, than with gentleness to
deceive. More good is done by taking away
food from one who is hungry, if, through freedom
from care as to his food, he is forgetful of right-
eousness, than by providing bread for one who
is hungry, in order that, being thereby bribed,
he may consent to unrighteousness. He who
binds the man who is in a phrenzy, and he
who stirs up the man who is in a lethargy, are
alike vexatious to both, and are in both cases alike
prompted by love for the patient. Who can
love us more than God does? And yet He not
only give us sweet instruction, but also quickens
us by salutary fear, and this unceasingly. Often
adding to the soothing remedies by which He
comforts men the sharp medicine of tribulation,
He afflicts with famine even the pious and de-
vout patriarchs,'' disquiets a rebellious people by
more severe chastisements, and refuses, though
thrice besought, to take away the thorn in the
flesh of the apostle, that He may make His
strength perfect in weakness. 5 Let us by all
means love even our enemies, for this is right,
and God commands us so to do, in order that
we may be the children of our Father who is in
heaven, " who maketh His sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just
and on the unjust." ^ But as we praise these
His gifts, lets us in like manner ponder His cor-
rection of those whom He loves.

5. You are of opinion that no one should be
compelled to follow righteousness ; and yet you
read that the householder said to his sen^ants,
" Whomsoever ye shall find, compel them to
come in." 7 You also read how he who was at
first Saul, and afterwards Paul, was compelled,
by the great violence with which Christ coerced
him, to know and to embrace the truth : for you
cannot but think that the light which your eyes
enjoy is more precious to men than money or
any other possession. This light, lost suddenly
by him when he was cast to the ground by the
heavenly voice, he did not recover until he be-
came a member of the Holy Church. You are
also of opinion that no coercion is to be used
with any man in order to his deliverance from
the fatal consequences of error ; and yet you
see that, in examples which cannot be disputed,
this is done by God, who loves us with more real
regard for our profit than any other can ; and
you hear Christ saying, " No man can come to
me except the Father draw hmi," ^ which is done
in the hearts of all those who, through fear of
the wrath of God, betake themselves to Him.
You know also that sometimes the thief scatters
food before the flock that he mav lead them


■4 Gen. xii., xxvi., xlii., and xliii.
S 2 Cor. xii. 7-9.
<> Matt. V. 45.
' Luke xiv. 23.
^ John vi. 44.


384


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


astray, and sometimes the shepherd brings wan-
dering sheep back to the flock with his rod.

6. Did not Sarah, when she had the power,
choose rather to afflict the insolent bondwoman ?
And truly she did not cruelly hate her whom
she had formerly by an act of her own kindness
made a mother ; but she put a wholesome re-
straint upon her pride." Moreover, as you well
know, these two women, Sarah and Hagar, and
their two sons Isaac and Ishmael, are figures
representing spiritual and carnal persons. And
although we read that the bondwoman and her
son suffered great hardships from Sarah, never-
theless the Apostle Paul says that Isaac suf-
fered persecution from Ishmael : " But as then
he that was born after the flesh persecuted him
that was born after the Spirit, even so it is
now ; " ^ whence those who have understanding
may perceive that it is rather the Catholic Church
which suffers persecution through the pride and
impiety of those carnal men whom it endeavours
to correct by afflictions and terrors of a temporal
kind. Whatever therefore the true and rightful
Mother does, even when something severe and
bitter is felt by her children at her hands, she is
not rendering evil for evil, but is applying the
benefit of discipline to counteract the evil of
sin, not with the hatred which seeks to harm, but
with the love which seeks to heal. When good
and bad do the same actions and suffer the same
afflictions, they are to be distinguished not by
what they do or suffer, but by the causes of
each : e.g. Pharaoh oppressed the people of God
by hard bondage ; Moses afflicted the same peo-
ple by severe correction when they were guilty
of impiety : ^ their actions were alike ; but they
were not alike in the motive of regard to the
people's welfare, — the one being inflated by
the lust of power, the other inflamed by love.
Jezebel slew prophets, Elijah slew false proph-
ets ; •♦ I suppose that the desert of the actors
and of the sufferers respectively in the two cases
was wholly diverse.

7. Look also to the New Testament times, in
which the essential gentleness of love was to be
not only kept in the heart, but also manifested
openly : in these the sword of Peter is called
back into its sheath by Christ, and we are taught
that it ought not to be taken from its sheath
even in Christ's defence. s We read, however,
not only that the Jews beat the Apostle Paul,
but also that the Greeks beat Sosthenes, a Jew,
on account of the Apostle Paul.^ Does not the
similarity of the events apparently join both ;
and, at the same time, does not the dissimilarity

' Gen. xvi. 5.
^ Gal. iv. 29.
3 Ex. V. 9 and xxxl!. 27.

* I Kings xviii. 4, 40.
S Matt. xxvi. 52.

* Acts xvi. 22, 23, and xviii. 17.


of the causes make a real difference? Again,
God spared not His own Son, but delivered
Him up 7 for us all.^ Of the Son also it is said,
" who loved me, and gave Himself*^ for me ; " '°
and it is also said of Judas that Satan entered
into him that he might betray" Christ.'^ Seeing,
therefore, that the Father delivered up His Son,
and Christ delivered up His own body, and
Judas delivered up his Master, wherefore is God
holy and man guilty in this delivering up of
Christ, unless that in the one action which both
did, the reason for which they did it was not the
same ? Three crosses stood in one place : on
one was the thief who was to be saved ; on the
second, the thief who was to be condemned ;
on the third, between them, was Christ, who was
about to save the one thief and condemn the
other. WHiat could be more similar than these
crosses? what more unlike than the persons who
were suspended on them ? Paul was given up
to be imprisoned and bound, '^ but Satan is un-
questionably worse than any gaoler : yet to him
Paul himself gave up one man for the destruc-
tion of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus.'-* And what say
we to this? Behold, both deliver a man to
bondage ; but he that is cruel consigns his pris-
oner to one less severe, while he that is compas-
sionate consigns his to one who is more cruel.
Let us learn, my brother, in actions which are
similar to distinguish the intentions of the agents ;
and let us not, shutting our eyes, deal in ground-
less reproaches, and accuse those who seek men's
welfare as if they did them wrong. In like
manner, when the same apostle says that he had
delivered certain persons unto Satan, that they
might learn not to blaspheme, '^ did he render to
these men evil for evil, or did he not rather
esteem it a good work to correct evil men by
means of the evil one ?

8. If to suffer persecution were in all cases a
praiseworthy thing, it would have sufficed for the
Lord to say, " Blessed are they which are per-
secuted," without adding, "for righteousness'
sake." '^ Moreover, if to inflict persecution
were in all cases blameworthy, it would not
have been written in the sacred books, " Whoso
privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I per-
secute [cut off, E.V.]." '7 In some cases, there-
fore, both he that suffers persecution is in the
wrong, and he that inflicts it is in the right. But
the truth is, that always both the bad have per-


7 TTapeSbjKev.

8 Rom. viii. 32.

9 TTafid8ovTOs»
■° Gal. ii. 20.
*^ rrapa&w,

'- John xiii. 2.
'3 Acts xxi. 23, 24.
■^ I Cor. V. 5.
'S I Tim. i. 20.
'6 Matt. V. 10.
" Ps. ci. 5.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


385


secuted the good, and the good have persecuted
the bad : the former doing harm by their un-
righteousness, the latter seeking to do good by
the administration of disciphne ; the former with
cruelty, the latter with moderation ; the former
impelled by lust, the latter under the constraint
of love. For he whose aim is to kill is not care-
ful how he wounds, but he whose aim is to cure
is cautious with his lancet ; for the one seeks to
destroy what is sound, the other that which is
decaying. The wicked put prophets to death ;
prophets also put the wicked to death. The
Jews scourged Christ ; Christ also scourged the
Jews. The apostles were given up by men to
the civil powers ; the apostles themselves gave
men up to the power of Satan. In all these cases,
what is important to attend to but this : who were
on the side of truth, and who on the side of in-
iquity ; who acted from a desire to injure, and
who from a desire to correct what was amiss ?

Chap. irr. — 9. You say that no example is
found in the writings of evangelists and apostles,
of any petition presented on behalf of the Church
to the kings of the earth against her enemies.
Who denies this ? None such is found. But at
that time the prophecy, " Be wise now, there-
fore, O ye kings ; be instructed, ye judges of the
earth : serve the Lord with fear," was not yet
fulfilled. Up to that time the words which we
find at the beginning of the same Psalm were
receiving their fulfilment, " Why do the heathen
rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The
kings of the earth set themselves, and tlie rulers
take counsel together against the Lord, and
against His Anointed." ' Truly, if past events
recorded in the prophetic books were figures of
the future, there was giv^en under King Nebu-
chadnezzar a figure both of the time which the
Church had under the apostles, and of that which
she has now. In the age of the apostles and
martyrs, that was fulfilled which was prefigured
jwhen the aforesaid king compelled pious and
just men to bow down to his image, and cast
I into the flames all who refused. Now, however,
is fulfilled that which was prefigured soon after
lin the same king, when, being converted to the
Iworship of the true God, he made a decree
Ithroughout his empire, that whosoever should
Ispeak against the God of Shadrach, Meshach,
land Abednego, should suffer the penalty which
their crime deserved. The earlier time of that
cing represented the former age of emperors
i^ho did not believe in Christ, at whose hands
|the Christians suffered because of the wicked ;
Jut the later time of that king represented the
ige of the successors to the imperial throne, now
jelieving in Christ, at whose hands the wicked
buffer because of the Christians.


« Ps.


I, 2.


10. It is manifest, however, that moderate se-
verity, or rather clemency, is carefully observed
towards those who, under the Christian name,
have been led astray by perverse men, in the
measures used to prevent them who are Christ's
sheep from wandering, and to bring them back
to the flock, when by punishments, such as exile
and fines, they are admonished to consider what
they suffer, and wherefore, and are taught to
prefer the Scriptures which they read to human
legends and calumnies. For which of us, yea,
which of you, does not speak well of the laws

j issued by the emperors against heathen sacri-
[ fices ? In these, assuredly, a penalty much more
I severe has been appointed, for the punishment
of that impiety is death. But in repressing and
restraining you, the thing aimed at has been
I rather that you should be admonished to depart
from evil, than that you should be punished for
a crime. For perhaps what the apostle said of
the Jews may be said of you : " I bear them
record that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge : for, being ignorant of
the righteousness of God, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, they have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of
God." ^ For what else than your own righteous-
ness are you desiring to establish, when you
say that none are justified but those who may
have had the opportunity of being baptized by
you ? In regard to this statement made by the
apostle concerning the Jews, you differ from
those to whom it originally applied in this, that
you have the Christian sacraments, of which
they are still destitute. But in regard to the
words, " being ignorant of God's righteousness,
and going about to establish their own righteous-
ness," and " they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge," you are exactly like
them, excepting only those among you who
know what is the truth, and who in the wilfulness
of their perversity continue to fight against truth
which is perfectly well known to them. The
impiety of these men is perhaps even a greater
sin than idolatry. Since, however, they cannot
be easily convicted of this (for it is a sin which
lies concealed in the mind), you are all alike re-
strained with a comparatively gentle severity, as
being not so far alienated from us. And this I
may say, both concerning all heretics without
distinction, who, while retaining the Christian
sacraments, are dissenters from the truth and
unity of Christ, and concerning all Donatists
without exception.

11. But as for you, who are not only, in com-
mon with these last, styled Donatists, from Do-
natus, but also specially named Rogatists, from
Rogatus, you indeed seem to be more gentle in

2 Rom. X. 2, 3.


;86


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


not rage up


and


disposition, because you do
down with bands of these savage Circumcel-
liones : but no wild beast is said to be gentle if,
because of its not having teeth and claws, it
wounds no one. You say that you have no wish
to be cruel : I think that power, not will, is
wanting to you. For you are in number so few,
that even if you desire it, you dare not move
against the multitudes which are opposed to
you. Let us suppose, however, that you do not
wish to do that which you have not strength to
do ; let us suppose that the gospel rule, " If
any man will sue thee at the law and take away
thy coat, let him have thy cloak also," ' is so
understood and obeyed by you that resistance to
those who persecute you is unlawful, whether
they have right or wrong on their side. Ro-
gatus, the founder of your sect, either did not
hold this view, or was guilty of inconsistency ;
for he fought with the keenest determination in
a lawsuit about certain things which, according
to your statement, belonged to you. If to him
it had been said. Which of the apostles ever de-
fended his property in a matter concerning faith
by appeal to the civil courts ? as you have put
the question in your letter, " Which of the apos-
tles ever invaded the property of other men in a
matter concerning faith?" he could not find any
example of this in the Divine writings ; but he
might perhaps have found some true defence if
he had not separated himself from the true
Church, and then audaciously claimed to hold
in the name of the true Church the disputed
possession.

Chap. iv. — 12. As to the obtaining or putting
in force of edicts of the powers of this world
against schismatics and heretics, those from
whom you separated yourselves were very active
in this matter, both against you, so far as we
have heard, and against the followers of Max-
imianus, as we prove by the indisputable evi-
dence of their own Records ; but you had not
yet separated yourselves from them at the time
when in their petition they said to the Emperor
Julian that " nothing but righteousness found a
place with him," — a man whom all the while
they knew to be an apostate, and whom they saw
to be so given over to idolatry, that they must
either admit idolatry to be righteousness, or be
unable to deny that they had wickedly lied when
they said that nothing but righteousness had a
place with him with whom they saw that idolatry
had so large a place. Grant, however, that that
was a mistake in the use of words, what say you
as to the deed itself? If not even that which is
just is to be sought by appeal to an emperor,
why was that which was by you supposed to be
just sought from Julian ?

' Matt. V. 40.


13. Do you reply that it is lawful to petition
the Emperor in order to recover what is one's
own, but not lawful to accuse another in order
that he may be coerced by the Emperor? I
may remark, in passing, that in even petitioning
for the recovery of what is one's own, the ground
covered by apostolic example is abandoned, be-
cause no apostle is found to have ever done this.
But apart from this, when your predecessors
brought before the Emperor Constantine, by
means of the proconsul Anulinus, their accusa-
tions against Csecilianus, who was then bishop
of Carthage, with whom as a guilty person they
refused to have communion, they were not en-
deavouring to recover something of their own
which they had lost, but were by calumnies as-
sailing one who was, as we think, and as the issue
of the judicial proceedings showed, an innocent
man ; and what more heinous crime could have
been perpetrated by them than this ? If, how-
ever, as you erroneously suppose, they did in his
case deliver up to the judgment of the civil pow-
ers a man who was indeed guilty, why do you
object to our doing that which your own party
first presumed to do, and for doing which we
would not find fault with them, if they had done
it not with an envious desire to do harm, but
with the intention of reproving and correcting
what was wrong. But we have no hesitation in
finding fault with you, who think that we are
criminal in bringing any complaint before a
Christian emperor against the enemies of our
communion, seeing that a document given by
your predecessors to Anulinus the proconsul, to
be forwarded by him to the Emperor Constan-
tine, bore this superscription : " Libellus Eccle-
sise Catholics, criminum Caeciliani, traditus a
parte Majorini." ^ We find fault, moreover, with
them more particularly, because when they had
of their own accord gone to the Emperor with
accusations against Coecilianus, which they ought
by all means to have in the first place proved
before those who were his colleagues beyond the
sea, and when the Emperor, acting in a much
more orderly way than they had done, referred
to bishops the decision of this case pertaining to
bishops which had been brought before him,
they, even when defeated by a decision against
them, would not come to peace with their breth-
ren. Instead of this, they next accused at the
bar of the temporal sovereign, not Caecilianus
only, but also the bishops who had been ap-
pointed judges ; and finally, from a second epis-
copal tribunal they appealed to the Emperor
again. Nor did they consider it their duty to
yield either to truth or to peace when he him-
self inquired into the case and gave his decis-
ion.

2 See Letter LXXXVIII. § 2.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


3^7


14. Now what else could Constantine have
decreed against Ciecilianus and his friends, if
they had been defeated when your predecessors
accused them, than the things decreed against
the very men who, having of their own accord
brought the accusations, and having failed to
prove what they alleged, refused even when de-
feated to acquiesce in the truth ? The Emperor,
as you know, in that case decreed for the first
time that the property of those who were con-
victed of schism and obstinately resisted the
unitv of the Church should be confiscated. If,
however, the issue had been that your prede-
cessors who brought the accusations had gained
their case, and the Emperor had made some
such decree against the communion to which
C^cilianus belonged, you would have wished the
emperors to be called the friends of the Church's
interests, and the guardians of her peace and
unity. But when such things are decreed by
emperors against the parties who, having of their
own accord brought fonvard accusations, were
unable to substantiate them, and who, when a
welcome back to the bosom of peace was offered
to them on condition of their amendment, re-
fused the terms, an outcry is raised that this is
an unworthy wrong, and it is maintained that no
one ought to be coerced to unity, and that evil
should not be requited for evil to any one.
What else is this than what one of yourselves
wrote : "What we wish is holy"?' And in view
of these things, it was not a great or difficult
thing for vou to reflect and discover how the
decree and sentence of Constantine, which was
published against you on the occasion of your
predecessors so frequently bringing before the
Emperor charges which they could not make
good, should be in force against you ; and how
all succeeding emperors, especially those who
are Catholic Christians, necessarily act according
to it as often as the exigencies of your obstinacy
make it necessary for them to take any measures
in regard to you.

15. It was an easy thing for you to have re-
flected on these things, and perhaps some time to !
have said to yourselves : Seeing that Csecilianus '
either was innocent, or at least could not be '
proved guilty, what sin has the Christian Church
spread so far and wide through the world com- [
mitted in this matter? On what ground could
it be unlawful for the Christian world to remain
ignorant of that which even those who made it '
matter of accusation against others could not
prove ? Why should those whom Christ has
sown in His field, that is, in this world, and has
commanded to grow alongside of the tares until
the harvest,^ — those many thousands of beliex'-
ers in all nations, whose multitude the Lord

' " Quod volumus sanctum est." — Tychonius.
* Matt. xiii. 24-30.


compared to the stars of heaven and the sand
of the sea, to whom He promised of old, and
has now given, the blessing in the seed of Abra-
ham, — why, I ask, should the name of Chris-
tians be denied to all these, because, forsooth,
in regard to this case, in the discussion of which
they took no part, they preferred to believe the
judges, who under grave responsibility gave their
decision, rather than the plaintiffs, against whom
the decision was given? Surely no man's crime
can stain with guilt another who does not know
of its commission. How could the faithful,
scattered throughout the world, be cognisant of
the crime of surrendering the sacred books as
committed by men, whose guilt their accusers,
even if they knew it, were at least unable to
prove ? Unquestionably this one fact of ignorance
on their part most easily demonstrates that they
had no share in the guilt of this crime. Why
then should the innocent be charged with crimes
which they never committed, because of their
being ignorant of crimes which, justly or unjust-
ly, are laid to the charge of others? What room
is left for innocence, if it is criminal for one to
be ignorant of the crimes of others? More-
over, if the mere fact of their ignorance proves,
as has been said, the innocence of the people in
so many nations, how great is the crime of sep-
aration from the communion of these innocent
people ! For the deeds of guilty parties which
either cannot be proved to those who are inno-
cent, or cannot be believed by them, bring no
stain upon any one, since, even when known,
they are borne with in order to preserve fellow-
ship with those who are innocent. For the good
are not to be deserted for the sake of the wicked,
but the wicked are to be borne with for the sake
of the good ; as the prophets bore with those
against whom they delivered such testimonies,
and did not cease to take part in the sacraments
of the Jewish people ; as also our Lord bore
with guilty Judas, even until he met the end
which he deserved, and permitted him to take
part in the sacred supper along with the inno-
cent disciples ; as the apostles bore with those
who preached Christ through envy, — a sin
peculiarly satanic ; ^ as Cyprian bore with col-
leagues guilty of avarice, which, after the exam-
ple of the apostle,-* he calls idolatry. In fine,
whatever was done at that time among these
bishops, although perhaps it was known by
some of them, is, unless there be respect of
persons in judgment, unknown to all : why, then,
is not peace loved by all ? These thoughts might
easily occur to you ; perhaps you already enter-
tain them. But it would be better for you to be
devoted to earthly possessions, through.fear of
losing which you might be proved to consent to

3 Phil. i. 15, 18.

* Col. iti. 5.


3SS


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


known truth, than to be devoted to that worth-
less vainglory which you think you will by such
consent forfeit in the estimation of men.

Chap. v. — i6. You now see therefore, I sup-
pose, that the thing to be considered when any
one is coerced, is not the mere fact of the coer-
cion, but the nature of that to which he is co-
erced, whether it be good or bad : not that any
one can be good in spite of his own will, but
that, through fear of suffering what he does not
desire, he either renounces his hostile prejudices,
or is compelled to examine truth of which he
had been contentedly ignorant ; and under the
influence of this fear repudiates the error which
he was wont to defend, or seeks the truth of
which he formerly knew nothing, and now wil-
lingly holds what he formerly rejected. Perhaps
it would be utterly useless to assert this in words,
if it were not demonstrated by so many examples.
We see not a few men here and there, but many
cities, once Donatist, now Catholic, vehemently
detesting the diabolical schism, and ardently
loving the unity of the Church ; and these be-
came Catholic under the influence of that fear
which is to you so offensive by the laws of em-
perors, from Constantine, before whom your party
of their own accord impeached C?ecilianus, down
to the emperors of our own time, who most
justly decree that the decision of the judge whom
your own party chose, and whom they preferred
to a tribunal of bishops, should be maintained
in force against you.

17. I have therefore yielded to the evidence
afforded by these instances which my colleagues
have laid before me. For originally my opinion
was, that no one should be coerced into the unity
of Christ, that we must act only by words, fight
only by arguments, and prevafl by force of reason,
lest we should have those whom we knew as
avowed heretics feigning themselves to be Cath-
olics. But this opinion of mine was overcome
not by the words of those who controverted it,
but by the conclusive instances to which they
could point. For, in the first place, there was
set over against my opinion my own town, which,
although it was once wholly on the side of Do-
natus, was brought over to the Catholic unity by
fear of the imperial edicts, but which we now
see filled with such detestation of your ruinous
perversity, that it would scarcely be believed that
it had ever been involved in your error. There
were so many others which were mentioned to
me by name, that, from facts themselves, I was
made to own that to this matter the word of
Scripture might be understood as applying :
" Give opportunity to a wise man, and he will be
yet wiser." ' For how many were already, as
we assuredly know, willing to be Catholics, being

' Prov. ix. 9.


moved by the indisputable plainness of truth, but
daily putting off their avowal of this through fear
of offending their own party ! How many were
bound, not by truth — for you never pretended to
that as yours — but by the heavy chains of invet-
erate custom, so that in them was fulfilled the di-
vine saying: "A servant (who is hardened) will
not be corrected by words ; for though he under-
stand, he will not answer " ! ^ How many sup-
posed the sect of Donatus to be the true Church,
merely because ease had made them too lisdess,
or conceited, or sluggish, to take pains to exam-
ine Catholic truth ! How many would have en-
tered earlier had not the calumnies of slanderers,
who declared that we offered something else
than we do upon the altar of God, shut them
out ! How many, believing that it mattered not
to which party a Christian might belong, re-
mained in the schism of Donatus only because
they had been born in it, and no one was com-
pelling them to forsake it and pass over into the
Catholic Church !

18. To all these classes of persons the dread
of those laws in the promulgation of which kings
serve the Lord in fear has been so useful, that
now some say we were willing for this some time
ago ; but thanks be to God, who has given us
occasion for doing it at once, and has cut off the
hesitancy of procrastination ! Others say : We
already knew this to be true, but we were held
prisoners by the force of old custom : thanks be
to the Lord, who has broken these bonds asunder,
and has brought us into the bond of peace !
Others say : We knew not that the truth was
here, and we had no wish to learn it ; but fear
made us become earnest to examine it when we
became alarmed, lest, without any gain in things
eternal, we should be smitten with loss in tem-
poral things : thanks be to the Lord, who has by
the stimulus of fear startled us from our negli-
gence, that now being disquieted we might in-
quire into those things which, when at ease, we
did not care to know ! Others say : We were
prevented from entering the Church by false re-
ports, which we could not know to be false unless
we entered it ; and we would not enter unless we
were compelled : thanks be to the Lord, who
by His scourge took away our timid hesitation,
and taught us to find out for ourselves how vain
and absurd were the lies which rumour had.
spread abroad against His Church : by this we
are persuaded that there is no truth in the ac-
cusations made by the authors of this heresy,
since the more serious charges which their fol-
lowers have invented are without foundation.
Others say : We thought, indeed, that it mattered
not in what communion we held the faith of
Christ ; but thanks to the Lord, who has gath-

^ Prov. xxix. 19.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


389


ered us in from a state of schism, and has taught
us that it is fitting that the one God be wor-
shipped in unity.

19. Could I therefore maintain opposition to
my colleagues, and by resisting them stand in
the way of such conquests of the Lord, and pre-
vent the sheep of Christ which were wandering
on your mountains and hills — that is, on the
swellings of your pride — from being gathered
into the fold of peace, in which there is one
flock and one Shepherd ? ' Was it my duty to
obstruct these measures, in order, forsooth, that
you might not lose what you call your own, and
might without fear rob Christ of what is His :
that you might frame your testaments according
to Roman law, and might by calumnious accusa-
tions break the Testament made with the sanc-
tion of Divine law to the fathers, in which it was
written, " In thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed " : ^ that you might have free-
dom in your transactions in the way of buying
and selling, and might be emboldened to divide
and claim as your own that which Christ bought
by giving Himself as its price : that any gift
made over by one of you to another might re-
main unchallenged, and that the gift which the
God of gods has bestowed upon His children,
called from the rising of the sun to the going
down thereof,^ might become invalid : that you
might not be sent into exile from the land of
your natural birth, and that you might labour to
banish Christ from the kingdom bought with His
blood, which extends from sea to sea, and from
the river to the ends of the earth ? ■* Nay verily ;
let the kings of the earth serve Christ by making
laws for Him and for His cause. Your prede-
cessors exposed Caecilianus and his companions
to be punished by the kings of the earth for
crimes with which they were falsely charged : let
the lions now be turned to break in pieces the
bones of the calumniators, and let no interces-
sion for them be made by Daniel when he has
been proved innocent, and set free from the den 1
in which they meet their doom ; 5 for he that
prepareth a pit for his neighbour shall himself
most justly fall into it.^

Chap. vi. — 20. Save yourself therefore, my
brother, while you have this present life, from
the wrath which is to come on the obstinate and
the proud. The formidable power of the au-
thorities of this world, when it assails the truth,
gives glorious opportunity of probation to the
strong, but puts dangerous temptation before
the weak who are righteous ; but when it assists
the proclamation of the truth, it is the means


* John X. 16.

^ Gen. xxvi. 4.

3 Ps 1. I.

* Ps. Ixxii. 8.

5 Dan. vi. 2^, 24.

* Prov. XXVI. 27.


of profitable admonition to the wise, and of un-
profitable vexation to the foolish among those
who have gone astray. " For there is no power
but of God : whosoever therefore resisteth the
power, resisteth the ordinance of God ; for rulers
are not a terror to good works, but to the evil.
Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? Do
that which is good, and thou shalt have praise
of the same." 7 For if the power be on the side
of the truth, and correct any one who was in
error, he that is put right by the correction has
praise from the power. If, on the other hand,
the power be unfriendly to the truth, and cruelly
persecute any one, he who is crowned victor in
this contest receives praise from the power which
he resists. But you do not that which is good,
so as to avoid being afraid of the power ; unless
perchance this is good, to sit and speak against
not one brother,^ but against all your brethren
that are found among all nations, to whom the
prophets, and Christ, and the apostles bear wit-
ness in the words of Scripture, " In thy seed shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed ; " ^ and
again, " From the rising of the sun even unto the
going down of the same, a pure offering shall
be offered unto My name ; for My name shall
be great among the heathen, saith the Lord.'"'
Mark this : " saith the Lord ; " not saith Dona-
tus, or Rogatus, or Vincentius, or Ambrose, or
Augustin, but " saith the Lord ; " and again,
" All tribes of the earth shall be blessed in Him,
and all nations shall call Him blessed. Blessed
be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only
doeth wondrous things ; and blessed be His
glorious name for ever, and the whole earth shall
be filled with His glory : so let it be, so let it
be." '° And you sit at Cartennae, and with a
remnant of half a score of Rogatists you say,
" Let it not be ! Let it not be ! "

21. You hear Christ speaking thus in the
Gospel: "All things must be fulfilled which
were written in the law of Moses, and in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning Me.
Then opened He their understanding, that they
might understand the Scriptures, and said unto
them. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day ; and that repentance and remission
of sins should be preached in His name among
all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." " You read
also in the Acts of the Apostles how this gospel
began at Jerusalem, where the Holy Spirit first
filled those hundred and twenty persons, and
went forth thence into Judaea and Samaria, and
to all nations, as He had said unto them when
He was about to ascend into heaven, " Ye shall

7 Rom. xiii. 1-3.

8 Ps. 1. 20.

9 Mai. i. II.

'° Ps. Ixxii. 17-19.
" Luke xxiv. 44-47.


390


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


be witnesses unto Me both in Jerusalem, and in
all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the utter-
most parts of the earth ; " ' for " their sound
went into all the earth, and their words unto
the ends of the world." ^ And you contradict
the Divine testimonies so firmly established and
so clearly revealed, and attempt to bring about
such an absolute confiscation of Christ's heritage,
that although repentance is preached, as He said,
in His name to all nations, whosoever may be in
any part of the earth moved by that preaching,
there is for him no possibility of remission of
sins, unless he seek and discover Vincentius of
Cartennae, or some one of his nine or ten asso-
ciates, in their obscurity in the imperial colony
of Mauritania. What will the arrogance of in-
significant mortals 3 not dare to do? To what
extremities will the presumption of flesh and
blood not hurry men? Is this your well-doing,
on account of which you are not afraid of the
power? You place this grievous stumbling-block
in the way of your own mother's son,'* for whom
Christ died,5 and who is yet in feeble infancy,
not ready to use strong meat, but requiring to be
nursed on a mother's milk ; ^ and you quote
against me the works of Hilary, in order that
you may deny the fact of the Church's increase
among all nations, even unto the end of the
world, according to the promise which God, in
order to subdue your unbelief, confirmed with
an oath ! And although you would by all means
be most miserable if you stood against this when
it was promised, you even now contradict it
when the promise is fulfilled.

Chap. VII. — 22. You, however, through your
profound erudition, have discovered something
which you think worthy to be alleged as a great
objection against the Divine testimonies. For
you say, " If we consider the parts compre-
hended in the whole world, it is a comparatively
small portion in which the Christian faith is
known : " either refusing to see, or pretending
not to know, to how many barbarous nations
the gospel has already penetrated, within a space
of time so short, that not even Christ's enemies
can doubt that in a little while that shall be
accomplished which our Lord foretold, when,
answering the question of His disciples concern-
ing the end of the world. He said, " This gospel
of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world for a witness unto all nations, and then
shall the end come." ^ Meanwhile do all you
can to proclaim and to maintain, that even
though the gospel be published in Persia and


1 Acts i. 15, 8, and ii.

2 Ps. xix. 4; Rom. X. i8.

3 Tyfikus morticing pelliculce.

4 Ps. 1. 20.

5 I Cor. viii. n.
'' I Cor. iii. 2.

' Matt. xxiv. 14.


India, as indeed it has been for a long time, no
one who hears it can be in any degree cleansed
from his sins, unless he come to Cartennae, or to
the neighbourhood of Cartennae ! If you have
not expressly said this, it is evidently through
fear lest men should laugh at you ; and yet when
you do say this, do you refuse that men should
weep for you ?

23. You think that you make a very acute
remark when you affirm the name Catholic to
mean universal, not in respect to the commun-
ion as embracing the whole world, but in re-
spect to the observance of all Divine precepts
and of all the sacraments, as if we (even accept-
ing the position that the Church is called Catho-
lic bec^ise it honestly holds the whole truth, of
which ^agments here and there are found in
some heresies) rested upon the testimony of
this word's signification, and not upon the prom-
ises of God, and so many indisputable testimo-
ies of the truth itself, our demonstration of the
existence of the Church of God in all nations.
In fact, however, this is the whole which you
attempt to make us believe, that the Rogatists
alone remain worthy of the name Catholics, on
the ground of their observing all the Divine pre-
cepts and all the sacraments ; and that you are
the only persons in whom the Son of man when
He cometh shall find faith. '^ You must excuse
me for saying we do not believe a word of this.
For although, in order to make it possible for
that faith to be found in you which the Lord
said that He would not find on the earth, you
may perhaps presume even to say that you are
to be regarded as in heaven, not on earth, we at
least have profited by the apostle's warning,
wherein he has taught us that even an angel
from heaven must be regarded as accursed if he
were to preach to us any other gospel than that
which we have received.^ But how can we be
sure that we have indisputable testimony to
Christ in the Divine ^\'ord, if we do not accept
as indisputable the testimony of the same Word
to the Church ? For as, however ingenious the
complex subtleties which one may contrive
against the simple truth, and however great the
mist of artful fallacies with which he may ob-
scure it, any one who shall proclaim that Christ
has not suffered, and has not risen from the dead
on the third day, must be accursed — because
we have learned in the truth of the gospel, " that
it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the
dead on the third day ; " '° — on the very same
grounds must that man be accursed who shall
proclaim that the Church is outside of" the com-
munion which embraces all nations : for in the


8 Luke xviii. 8.

9 Gal i. 8.

'° Luke xxiv. 46.
I' Prteter.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


391


next words of the same passage we learn also
that repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in His name among all nations, begin-
ning at Jerusalem ; ' and we are bound to hold
firmly this rule, " If any preach any other gos-
pel unto you than that ye have received, let him
be accursed." ^

Chap. viii. — 24. If, moreover, we do not
listen to the claims of the entire sect of Dona-
tists when they pretend to be the Church of
Christ, seeing that they do not allege in proof
of this anything from the Divine Books, how
much less, I ask, are we called upon to listen to
the Rogatists, who will not attempt to interpret
in the interest of their party the words of Scrip-
ture : " Where Thou feedest, where Thou dost
rest in the south " \^ For if by this the south-
ern part of Africa is to be understood, — the
district, namely, which is occupied by Donatists,
because it is under a more burning portion of
the heavens, — the Maximianists must excel all
the rest of your party, as the flame of their
schism broke forth in Byzantium ■♦ and in Trip-
oli. Let the Arzuges, if they please, dispute
this point with them, and contest that to them
more properly this text applies ; but how shall
the im])erial province of Mauritania, lying rather
to the west than to the south, since it refuses to
be called Africa, — how shall it, I say, find in the
word " the south " s a ground for boasting, I do
not say against the world, but against even that
sect of Donatus from which the sect of Ro-
gatus, a very small fragment of that other and
larger fragment, has been broken off? For what
else is it than superlative impudence for one to
interpret in his own favour any allegorical state-
ments, unless he has also plain testimonies, by
the light of which the obscure meaning of the
former may be made manifest.

25. With how much greater force, moreover,
may we say to you what we are accustomed
to say to all the Donatists : If any can have
good grounds (which indeed none can have) for
separating themselves from the communion of
the whole world, and calling their communion
the Church of Christ, because of their having
withdrawn warrantably from the communion of
all nations, — how do you know that in the
Christian society, which is spread so far and
wide, there may not have been some in a very
remote place, from which the fame of their right-
eousness could not reach you, who had already,
before the date of your separation, separated
themselves for some just cause from the com-
munion of the whole world? How could the
Church in that case be found in your sect, rather


47-


' Luke xxiv.

2 Gal. i. 9.

3 Meri'die ; at noon, E. V. Cant. i. 7.
< Now Tunis.

S Meridie.


than in those who were separated before you ?
Thus it comes to pass, that so long as you are
ignorant of this, you cannot make with certainty
any claim : which is necessarily the portion of
all who, in defending the cause of their party,
appeal to their own testimony instead of the
testimony of God. For you cannot say. If this
had happened, it could not have escaped our
knowledge ; for, not going beyond Africa itself,
you cannot tell, when the question is put to you,
how many subdivisions of the party of Donatus
have occurred : in connection with which we
must especially bear in mind that in your view
the smaller the number of those who separate
themselves, the greater is the justice of their
cause, and this paucity of numbers makes them
undoubtedly more likely to remain unnoticed.
Hence, also, you are by no means sure that there
may not be some righteous persons, few in num-
ber, and therefore unknown, dwelling in some
place far remote from the south of Africa, who,
long before the party of Donatus had withdrawn
their righteousness from fellowship with the un-
righteousness of all other men, had, in their
remote northern region, separated themselves in
the same way for some most satisfactory reason,
and now are, by a claim superior to yours, the
Church of God, as the spiritual Zion which pre-
ceded all your sects in the matter of warrantable
secession, and who interpret in their favour the
words of the Psalm, " Mount Zion, on the sides
of the north, the city of the Great King," ^ with
much more reason than the party of Donatus
interpret in their favour the words, " Where Thou
feedest, where Thou dost rest in the south." ^

26. You profess, nevertheless, to be afraid
lest, when you are compelled by imperial edicts
to consent to unity, the name of God be for a
longer time blasphemed by the Jews and the
heathen : as if the Jews were not aware how
, their own nation Israel, in the beginning of its
I history, wished to exterminate by war the two
: tribes and a half which had received possessions
: beyond Jordan, when they thought that these
I had separated themselves from the unity of their
j nation.*^ As to the Pagans, they may indeed
\ with greater reason reproach us for the laws
' which Christian emperors have enacted against
idolaters ; and yet many of these have thereby
been, and are now daily, turned from idols to
the living and true God. In fact, however, both
Jews and Pagans, if they thought the Christians
to be as insignificant in number as you are, —
who maintain, forsooth, that you alone are Chris-
tians, — would not condescend to say anything
against us, but would never cease to treat us
with ridicule and contempt. Are you not afraid


* Ps. xlviii. 2.

7 Cant. i. 7.

8 Josh. xxii. 9-12.


392


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


lest the Jews should say to you, " If your hand-
ful of men be the Church of Christ, what be-
comes of the statement of your Apostle Paul,
that your Church is described in the words,
' Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not ; break
forth and cry, thou that travailest not : for the
desolate hath many more children than she which
hath an husband ; ' ' in which he plainly declares
the multitude of Christians to surpass that of the
Jewish Church?" Will you say to them, " We
are the more righteous because our number is
not large ; " and do you expect them not to
reply, "Whoever^ you claim to be, you are not
those of whom it is said, * She that was desolate
hath many children,' if you are reduced to so
small a number " ?

27. Perhaps you will quote against this the
example of that righteous man, who along with
his family was alone found worthy of deliverance
when the flood came. Do you see then how far
you still are from being righteous? Most assur-
edly we do not affirm you to be righteous on the
ground of this instance until your associates be
reduced to seven, yourself being the eighth per-
son : provided always, however, that no other
has, as I was saying, anticipated the party of
Donatus in snatching up that righteousness, by
having, in some far distant spot, withdrawn him-
self along with seven more, under pressure of
some good reason, from communion with the
whole world, and so saved himself from the flood
by which it is overwhelmed. Seeing, therefore,
that you do not know whether this may not have
been done, and been as entirely unheard of by
you as the name of Donatus is unheard of by
many nations of Christians in remote countries,
you are unable to say with certainty where the
Church is to be found. For it must be in that
place in which what you have now done may
happen to have been at an earlier date done by
others, if there could possibly be any just reason
for your separating yourselves from the com-
munion of the whole world.

Chap. ix. — 28. W^e, however, are certain that
no one could ever have been warranted in sepa-
rating himself from the communion of all na-
tions, because every one of us looks for the
marks of the Church not in his own righteous-
ness, but in the Divine Scriptures, and beholds
it actually in existence, according to the prom-
ises. For it is of the Church that it is said,
" As the lily among thorns, so is my love among
the daughters ; " 3 which could be called on the
one hand " thorns " only by reason of the wick-
edness of their manners, and on the other hand
" daughters " by reason of their participation in
the same sacraments. Again, it is the Church

' Gal. iv. 27.

^ Quosltbet is obviously the true reading.

3 Cant, ii. 2.


which saith, " From the end of the earth have
I cried unto Thee when my heart was over-
whelmed ; " ■♦ and in another Psalm, " Horror
hath kept me back from s the wicked that for-
sake Thy law ; " and, " I beheld the transgress-
ors, and was grieved."^ It is the same which
says to her Spouse : " Tell me where Tliou feed-
est, where Thou dost rest at noon : for why
should I be as one veiled beside the flocks of
Thy companions? " ? This is the same as is said
in another place : " Make known to me Thy
right hand, and those who are in heart taught
in wisdom ; " ^ in whom, as they shine with light
and glow with love. Thou dost rest as in noon-
tide ; lest perchance, like one veiled, that is,
hidden and unknown, I should run, not to Thy
flock, but to the flocks of Thy companions, i.e.
of heretics, whom the bride here calls compan-
ions, just as He called the thorns ^ "daughters,"
because of common participation in the sacra-
ments : of which persons it is elsewhere said :
" Thou wast a man, mine equal, my guide, my
acquaintance, who didst take sweet food to-
gether with me ; we walked unto the house of
God in company. Let death seize upon them,
and let them go down quick into hell," ^ like
Dathan and Abiram, the authors of an impious
schism.

29. It is to the Church also that the answer
is given immediately after in the passage quoted
above : " If thou know not thyself,'° O thou fair-
est among women, go thy way forth by the foot-
steps of the flocks," and feed thy kids beside
the shepherds' tents." '^ Oh, matchless sweet-
ness of the Bridegroom, who thus replied to her
question : "If thou knowest not thyself," He
says ; as if He said, " Surely the city which is
set upon a mountain cannot be hid ; '^ and there-
fore, ' Thou art not as one veiled, that thou
shouldst run to the flocks of my companions.'
For I am the mountain established upon the top
of the mountains, unto which all nations shall
come.'-* ' If thou knowest not thyself,' by the
knowledge which thou mayest gain, not in the
words of false witnesses, but in the testimonies
of My book ; ' if thou knowest not thyself,'
from such testimony as this concerning thee :
' Lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes :
for thou shalt break forth on the right hand and
on the left ; and thy seed shall inherit the Gen-
tiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.


4 Ps. Ixi. 2.

5 In this and the other passages quoted, Augustin translates from
the LXX.

'' Ps. cxix. 53 and 158.

' Cant. i. 7.

' Ps. xc. 12.

9 Ps. Iv. 14, 15.

'° Nisi cognoveris iemetipsam.
" Greguni.
12 Cant. i. 8.
J3 Matt. V. 14.
'■♦ Isa. ii. 2.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


;93


Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed ; neither
be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put
to shame : for thou shalt forget the shame of
thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach
of thy widowhood any more : for thy Maker is
thine husband, the Lord of hosts is His name,
and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel ; the
God of the whole earth shall He be called.' ' If
thou knowest not thyself,' O thou fairest among
women, from this which hath been said of thee,

* The Ring hath greatly desired thy beauty,' and
'instead of thy fathers shall be thy children,
whom thou mayest make princes upon the
earth : ' ' if, therefore, ' thou know not thyself,'
go thy way forth : I do not cast thee forth, but

* go thy way forth,' that of thee it may be said,

* They went out from us, but they were not of
us.' ^ ' Go thy way forth' by the footsteps of the
flocks, not in My footsteps, but in the footsteps
of the flocks ; and not of the one flock, but of
flocks divided and going astray. ' And feed
thy kids,' not as Peter, to whom it is said,

* Feed My sheep ; ' ^ but, ' Feed thy kids beside
the shepherds' tents,' not beside the tent of the
Shepherd, where there is ' one fold and one
Shepherd.' " ■♦ But the Church knows herself,
and thereby escapes from that lot which has
befallen those who did not know themselves to
be in her.

30. The same [Church] is spoken of, when,
in regard to the fewness of her numbers as com-
pared with the multitude of the wicked, it is
said : " Strait is the gate and narrow is the way
which leadeth unto life, and few there be that
find it." 5 And again, it is of the same Church
that it is said with respect to the multitude of
her members : " I will multiply thy seed as the
stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon
the sea-shore."^ For the same Church of holy
and good believers is both small if compared
with the number of the wicked, which is greater,
and large if considered by itself ; " for the des-
olate hath more sons than she which hath an
ihusband," and " many shall come from the east
and from the west, and shall sit down with Abra-
ham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of

od." 7 God, moreover, presents unto Himself
|a " numerous people, zealous of good works." ^

nd in the Apocalypse, many thousands " which

o man can number," from every tribe and
tongue, are seen clothed in white rol^es, and with
palms of victory.'^ It is the same Church which
s occasionally obscured, and, as it were, be-

louded by the multitude of offences, when sin-

' Ps. xlv. 11-16.

* I John ii. 19.
3 John xxi. 17.

* John X. 16.

S Matt. vii. 14.
^ Gen. xxii. 14.
' Matt. viii. 11.

' Tit. ii. 14; Trepioucrio? being translated by Augustin " aiua-
ans," where our version has " peculiar."
9 Rev. vii. 9.


ners bend the bow that they may shoot under
the darkened moon'° at the upright in heart."
But even at such a time the Church shines in
those who are most firm in their attachment to
her. And if, in the Divine promise above quoted,
any distinct application of its two clauses should
be made, it is perhaps not without reason that
the seed of Abraham was compared both to the
" stars of heaven," and to " the sand which is
by the sea-shore : " that by " the stars " may be
understood those who, in number fewer, are
more fixed and more brilliant ; and that by '•' the
sand on the sea-shore " may be understood that
great multitude of weak and carnal persons
within the Church, who at one time are seen at
rest and free while the weather is calm, but are
at another time covered and troubled under the
waves of tribulation and temptation.

31. Now, such a troublous time was the time
at which Hilary wrote in the passage which you
have thought fit artfully to adduce against so
many Divine testimonies, as if by it you could
prove that the Church has perished from the
earth. '^ You may just as well say that the nu-
merous churches of Galatia had no existence at
the time when the apostle wrote to them : " O
foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you,"
that, " having begun in the Spirit, ye are now
made perfect in the flesh ?"'3 For thus you
would misrepresent that learned man, who (like
the apostle) was sternly rebuking the slow of
heart and the timid, for whom he was travailing
in birth a second time, until Christ should be
formed in them.'^ For who does not know that
many persons of weak judgment were at that
time deluded by ambiguous phrases, so that they
thought that the Arians believed the same doc-
trines as they themselves held ; and that others,
through fear, had yielded and feigned consent,
not walking uprightly according to the truth of
the gospel, to whom you would have denied that
forgiveness which, when they had been turned
from their error, was extended to them? But
in refusing such pardon, you prove yourselves
wholly ignorant of the word of God. For read
what Paul has recorded concerning Peter,'5 and
what Cyprian has expressed as his view on the
ground of that statement, and do not blame the
compassion of the Church, which does not scat-
ter the members of Christ when they are gath-
ered together, but labours to gather His scattered
members into one. It is true that those who
then stood most resolute, and were able to
understand the treacherous phrases used by the


" Ps. xi. 2.

'2 Vincentius had quoted from Hilary's work, De Sy7iodis adver-
su>n Arianos, a sentence to the effect that, with the exception of a
very small remnant, the ten provinces of Asia in which he was settled
were truly ignorant of God.

'^ Gal. iii. i, 3.

'■• Gal. iv. 19.

■5 Gal. ii. 11-21.


394


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


heretics, were few in number when compared
with the rest ; but some of them it is to be re-
membered were then bravely enduring sentence
of banishment, and others were hiding them-
selves for safety in all parts of the world. And
thus the Church, which is increasing throughout
all nations, has been preserved as the Lord's
wheat, and shall be preserved unto the end, yea,
until all nations, even the barbarous tribes, are
within its embrace. For it is the Church which
the Son of man has sown as good seed, and of
which He has foretold that it should grow among
the tares until the harvest. For the field is the
world, and the harvest is the end of time.'

32. Hilary, therefore, either was rebuking not
the wheat, but the tares, in those ten provinces
of Asia, or was addressing himself to the wheat,
because it was endangered through some unfaith-
fulness, and spoke as one who thought that the
rebuke would be useful in proportion to the vehe-
mence with which it was given. For the canon-
ical Scriptures contain examples of the same
manner of rebuke in which what is intended for
some is spoken as if it applied to all. Thus the
apostle, when he says to the Corinthians, " How
say some among you, that there is no resurrec-
tion of the dead ? " - proves clearly that all of
them were not such ; but he bears witness that
those Avho were such were not outside of their
communion, but among them. And shortly
after, lest those who were of a different opinion
should be led astray by them, he gave this warn-
ing : " Be not deceived : evil communications
corrupt good manners. Awake to righteousness,
and sin not ; for some have not the knowledge
of God : I speak this to your shame." ^ But
when he says, " Whereas there is among you en-
vying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal,
and walk as men?" ■♦ he speaks as if it applied
to all, and you see how grave a charge he makes.
Wherefore, if it were not that we read in the
same epistle, " I tliank my God always on your
behalf, for the grace of God which is given you
by Jesus Christ ; that in everything ye are en-
riched by Him, in all utterance, and in all knowl-
edge ; even as the testimony of Christ was con-
firmed in you : so that ye come behind in no
gift," 5 we would think that all the Corinthians
had been carnal and natural, not perceiving the
things of the spirit of God,^ fond of strife, and
full of envy, and "walking as men." In like
manner it is said, on the one hand, " the whole
world lieth in wickedness," ^ because of the tares
which are throughout the whole world ; and, on
the other hand, Christ *' is the propitiation for

' Matt. xiii. 24-39.

2 I Cor. XV. 12.

3 I Cor. xy 33, 34.
* I Cor. ill. 3.

5 I Cor. i. 4-7.
*> I Cor. ii. 14.
' I John V. 19.


our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world," ^ because of the wheat
which is throughout the whole world.

33. The love of many, however, waxes cold
because of offences, which abound increasingly
the more that, within the communion of the sacra-
ments of Christ, there are gathered to the glory
of His name even those who are wicked, and who
persist in the obstinacy of error ; whose separa-
tion, however, as chaff from the wheat, is to be
effected only in the final purging of the Lord's
threshing- floor .9 These do not destroy those who
are the Lord's wheat — (tw, indeed, when com-
pared with the others, but in themselves a great
multitude ; they do not destroy the elect of God,
who are to be gathered at the end of the world
from the four winds, from the one end of heaven
to the other. '° For it is from the elect that the
cry comes, " Help, Lord ! for the godly man
ceaseth, for the faithful fail from among the chil-
dren of men ; " " and it is of them that the Lord
saith, "He that shall endure to the end (when
iniquity shall abound), the same shall be saved." '^
Moreover, that the psalm quoted is the language
not of one man, but of many, is shown by the fol-
lowing context : " Thou shalt keep us, O Lord ;
Thou shalt preserve us from this generation for
ever." '^ On account of this abounding iniquity
which the Lord foretold, it is said in another
place : " When the Son of man cometh, shall He
find faith on the earth?" This doubt expressed
by Him who knoweth all things prefigured the
doubts which in Him we entertain, when the
Church, being often disappointed in many from
whom much was expected, but who have proved
very different from what they were supposed to
be, is so alarmed in regard to her own members,
that she is slow to believe good of any one.
Nevertheless it would be wrong to cherish doubt
that those whose faith He shall find on the earth
are growing along with the tares throughout the
whole field.

34. Therefore it is the same Church also
which within the Lord's net is swimming along
with the bad fishes, but is in heart and in fife !
separated from them, and departs from them, '
that she may be presented to her Lord a " glo-l
rious Church, not having spot or wrinkle." '■♦ But
the actual visible separation she looks for onlyl
on the sea-shore, i.e. at the end of the world,!
— meanwhile correcting as many as she can;!
and bearing with those whom she cannot cor-l
rect ; but she does not abandon the unity off
the good because of the wickedness of those]
whom she finds incorrigible.

8 I John ii. 2.

9 Matt. iii. 12.
'° Matt. xxiv. 31.
" Ps. xii. I.
'^ Matt. xxiv. 12, 13.
" Ps. xii. 7.
** Eph. V. 27.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


395


Chap. x. — 35. Wherefore, my brother, refrain
from gathering together against divine testimo-
nies so many, so perspicuous, and so unchal-
lenged, the calumnies which may be found in
the writings of bishops either of our communion,
as Hilary, or of the undivided Church itself in
the age preceding the schism of Donatus, as
Cyprian or Agrippinus ; ■ because, in the first
place, this class of writings must be, so far as
authority is concerned, distinguished from the
canon of Scripture. For they are not read by
us as if a testimony brought forward from them
was such that it would be unlawful to hold any
different opinion, for it may be that the opinions
iwhich they held were different from those to
which truth demands our assent. For we are
amongst those who do not reject what has been
taught us even by an apostle : " If in anything
\'e be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you ; nevertheless, whereto we have
already attained, let us walk by the same rule," ^
— in that way, namely, which Christ is ; of which
ivay the Psalmist thus speaks : " God be merci-
ful unto us, and bless us, and cause His face to
shine upon us : that Thy way may be known upon
;arth, Thy saving health among all nations." ^

36. In the next place, if you are charmed by
the authority of that bishop and illustrious mar-
tyr St. Cyprian, which we indeed regard, as I
have said, as quite distinct from the authority
3f canonical Scripture, why are you not charmed
by such things in him as these : that he main-
tained with loyalty, and defended in debate, the
anity of the Church in the world and in all na-
:ions ; that he censured, as full of self-sufficiency
md pride, those who wished to separate them-
'iselves as righteous from the Church, holding
;hem up to ridicule for assuming to themselves
;hat which the Lord did not concede even to
ipostles, — namely, the gathering of the tares
efore the harvest, — and for attempting to j
separate the chaff from the wheat, as if to them |
,iad been assigned the charge of removing the
phaff and cleansing the threshing-floor ; that he
)roved that no man can be stained with guilt by
he sins of others, thus sweeping away the only
,,Tound alleged by the authors of schism for their
separation ; that in the very matter in regard to
vhich he was of a different ojjinion from his
:olleagues, he did not decree that those who
ihought otherwise than he did should be con-
lemned or excommunicated ; that even in his
etter to Jubaianus-* (which was read for the first
ime in the Council,5 the authority of which you
ire wont to plead in defence of the practice of
ebaptizing), although he admits that in time

' Agrippinus, successor of Cjrprian in the see of Carthage.

^ Phil. iii. 15, 16.

' Ps. Ixvii. I, 2.

* See Aiite-Niccne Fathers, Am. eJ. vol. v. p. 379.

5 Held at Carthage, a.d. 256.


past persons who had been baptized in other
communions had been received into the Church
without being a second time baptized, on which
ground they were regarded by him as having had
no baptism, nevertheless he considers the use
and benefit of peace within the Church to be so
great, that for its sake he holds that these per-
sons (though in his judgment unbaptized) should
not be excluded from office in the Cluirch?

37. And by this you will very readily perceive
(for I know the acuteness of your mind) that
your cause is completely subverted and annihi-
lated. For if, as you suppose, the Church which
had been spread abroad throughout the world
perished through her admitting sinners to par-
take in her sacraments (and this is the ground
alleged for your separation), it had wholly per-
ished long before, — at the time, namely, when,
as Cyprian says, men were admitted into it with-
out baptism, — and thus Cyprian himself had
no Church within which to be born ; and if so,
how much more must this have been the case
with one who, like Donatus, the author of your
schism, and the father of your sect, belonged to
a later age ! But if at that time, although per-
sons were being admitted into the Church with-
out baptism, the Church nevertheless remained
in being, so as to give birth to Cyprian and after-
wards to Donatus, it is manifest that the right-
eous are not defiled by the sins of other men
when they participate with them in the sacra-
ments. And thus you have no excuse by which
you can wash away the guilt of the schism
whereby you have gone forth from the unity
of the Church ; and in you is fulfilled that say-
ing of Holy Writ : " There is a generation that
esteem themselves right, and have not cleansed
themselves from the guilt of their going forth." ^

38. The man who, out of regard to the same-
ness of the sacraments, does not presume to in-
sist on the second administration of baptism even
to heretics, is not, by thus avoiding Cyprian's
error, placed on a level with Cyprian in merit,
any more than the man who does not insist upon
the Gentiles conforming to Jewish ceremonies
is thereby placed on a level in merit with the
Apostle Peter. In Peter's case, however, the
record not only of his halting, but also of his
correction, is contained in the canonical Scrip-
tures ; whereas the statement that C) prian enter-
tained opinions at variance with those approved
by the constitution and practice of the Church
is found, not in canonical Scripture, but in his
own writings, and in those of a Council ; and
although it is not found in the same records
that he corrected that opinion, it is nevertheless
by no means an unreasonable supposition that
he did correct it, and that this fact may perhaps

* Prov. XXX. 12, (Kyovov ko.kqv hlKa.\,ov ka-vrov Kpicei, ti\v 6'


396


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


have been suppressed by those who were too
much pleased with the error into which he fell,
and were unwilling to lose the patronage of so
great a name. At the same time, there are not
wanting some who maintain that Cyprian never
held the view ascribed to him, but that this was
an unwarrantable forgery passed off by liars
under his name. For it was impossible for the
integrity and authenticity of the writings of any
one bishop, however illustrious, to be secured
and preserved as the canonical Scriptures are
through translation into so many languages, and
through the regular and continuous manner in
which the Church has used them in public wor-
ship. Even in the face of this, some have been
found forging many things under the names of
the apostles. It is true, indeed, that they made
such attempts in vain, because the text of canoni-
cal Scripture was so well attested, and so gener-
ally used and known ; but this effort of an unholy
boldness, which has not forborne to assail writ-
ings which are defended by the strength of such
notoriety, has proved what it is capable of essay-
ing against writings which are not established
upon canonical authority.

39. We, however, do not deny that Cyprian
held the views ascribed to him : first, because
his style has a certain peculiarity of expression
by which it may be recognised ; and secondly,
because in this case our cause rather than yours
is proved victorious, and the pretext alleged for
your schism — namely, that you might not be
defiled by the sins of other men — is in the
most simple manner exploded ; since it is mani-
fest from the letters of Cyprian that participa-
tion in the sacraments was allowed to sinful men,
when those who, in your judgment (and as you
will have it, in his judgment also), were unbap-
tized were as such admitted to the Church, and
that nevertheless the Church did not perish, but
remained in the dignity belonging to her nature
as the Lord's wheat scattered throughout the world.
And, therefore, if in your consternation you thus
betake yourselves to Cyprian's authority as to a
harbour of refuge, you see the rock against which
your error dashes itself in this course ; if, on the
other hand, you do not venture to flee thither,
you are wrecked without any struggle for escape.

40. Moreover, Cyprian either did not hold at
all the opinions which you ascribe to him, or did
subsequently correct his mistake by the rule of
truth, or covered this blemish, as we may call
it, upon his otherwise spotless mind by the abun-
dance of his love, in his most amply defending
the unity of the Church growing throughout the
whole world, and in his most stedfastly holding
the bond of peace ; for it is written, " Charity
[love] covereth a multitude of sins." ' To this

' I Pet. iv. 8.


was also added, that in him, as a most fruitful
branch, the Father removed by the pruning-
knife of suffering whatever may have remained
in him requiring correction : " For every branch
in me," saith the Lord, " that beareth fruit He
purgeth, that it may bring forth more fruit." »
And whence this care of him, if not because,
continuing as a branch in the far-spreading vine,
he did not forsake the root of unity? "For.
though he gave his body to be burned, if he had
not charity, it would profit him nothing." ^

41. Attend now a little while to the letters of
Cyprian, that you may see how he proves the
man to be inexcusable who desires ostensibly on
the ground of his own righteousness to withdraw
himself from the unity of the Church (which
God promised and has fulfilled in all nations),
and that you may more clearly apprehend the
truth of the text quoted by me shortly before :
" There is a generation that esteem themselves
righteous, and have not cleansed themselves
from the guilt of their going forth." In a letter
which he wrote to Antonianus •* he discusses a
matter very closely akin to that which we are
now debating ; but it is better for us to give his
very words : " Some of our predecessors," he
says, " in the episcopal office in this province
were of opinion that the peace of the Church
should not be given to fornicators, and finally
closed the door of repentance against those whol
had been guilty of adultery. They did not,j
however, withdraw themselves from fellowshij
with their colleagues in the episcopate ; nor di
they rend asunder the unity of the Catholi
Church, by such harshness and obstinate perse
verance in their censure as to separate theni'
selves from the Church because others grante
while they themselves refused to adulterers th
peace of the Church. The bond of concon
remaining unbroken, and the sacrament of th
Church continuing undivided, each bishop ar^
ranges and orders his own conduct as one whi
shall give account of his procedure to his Lord.'j
^^^^at say you to that, brother Vincentius ? Sure
ly you must see that this great man, this peace!
loving bishop and dauntless martyr, made nothij
more earnestly his care than to prevent the su;
dering of the bond of unity. You see h:
travailing in birth for the souls of men, not 01
that they might, when conceived, be born
Christ, but also that, when born, they might
perish through their being shaken out of th
mother's bosom.

42. Now give attention, I pray you, further
this thing which he has mentioned in protesl
ing against impious schismatics. If those wM
granted peace to adulterers, who repented c'


2 John XV. 2.

3 I Cor. xiii. 3.

•» Letter LI. 21. Ante-Nicene Fathers, Am. ed. vol. v. p. 33


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


397


their sin, shared the guilt of adulterers, were
those who did not so act defiled by fellowship
with them as colleagues in office? If, again, it
was a right thing, as truth asserts and the Church
maintains, that peace should be given to adul-
terers who repented of their sin, those who
utterly closed against adulterers the door of
reconciliation through repentance were unques-
tionably guilty of impiety in refusing healing to
the members of Christ, in taking away the keys
of the Church from those who knocked for ad-
mission, and in opposing with heartless cruelty
God's most compassionate forbearance, which
permitted them to live in order that, repenting,
they might be healed by the sacrifice of a con-
trite spirit and broken heart. Nevertheless this
their heartless error and impiety did not defile
the others, compassionate and peace-loving men,
when these shared with them in the Christian
sacraments, and tolerated them within the net
of unity, until the time when, brought to the
shore, they should be separated from each other ;
or if this error and impiety of others did defile
them, then the Church was already at that time
destroyed, and there was no Church to give
Cyprian birth. But if, as is beyond question,
tlie Church continued in existence, it is also
licyond question that no man in the unity of
Christ can be stained by the guilt of the sins of
, other men if he be not consenting to the deeds
of the wicked, and thus defiled by actual par-
ticipation in their crimes, but only, for the sake
I of the fellowship of the good, tolerating the
wicked, as the chaff which lies until the final
of the Lord's threshing-floor. These
being so, where is the pretext for your
schism ? Are ye not an " evil generation, es-
teeming yourselves righteous, yet not washed
from the guilt of your going forth " [from the
Church] ?

43. If, now, I were disposed to quote any-
thing against you from the writings of Tychonius,
a man of your communion, who has written
rather in defence of the Church and against you
than the reverse, in vain disowning the commun-
lion of African Christians as traditors (by which
one thing Parm.enianus silences him), what else
can you say in reply than what Tychonius him-
iself said of you as I have shortly before reminded
■you: "That which is according to our will is
< holy " ? ' For this Tychonius — a man, as I have
jSaid, of your communion — writes that a Council
was held at Carthage^ by two hundred and
seventy of your bishops ; in which Council, after
seventy-five days of deliberation, all past decis-
ions on the matter being set aside, a carefully
revised resolution was published, to the effect
that to those who were guilty of a heinous crime

' This Council at Carthage is not elsewhere memioHed.


purgmg
things


as traditors, the privilege of communion should
be granted as to blameless persons, if they re-
fused to be baptized. He says further, that
Deuterius of Macriana, a bishop of your party,
added to the Church a whole crowd of traditors,
without making any distinction between them
and others, making the unity of the Church open
to these traditors, in accordance with the decree
of the Council held by these two hundred and
seventy of your bishops, and that after that trans-
action Donatus continued unbroken his com-
munion with the said Deuterius, and not only
with him, but also with all the Mauritanian
bishops for forty years, who, according to the
statement of Tychonius, admitted the traditors
to communion without insisting on their being
rebaptized, up to the time of the persecution
made by Macarius.

44. You will say, "What has that Tychonius
to do with me?" It is true that Tychonius is
the man whom Parmenianus checked by his
reply, and effectually warned not to write such
things ; but he did not refute the statements
themselves, but, as I have said above, silenced
him by this one thing, that while saying such
things concerning the Church which is diffused
throughout the world, and while admitting that
the faults of other men within its unity cannot
defile one who is innocent, he nevertheless with-
drew himself from the contagion of communion
with African Christians because of their being
traditors, and was an adherent of the party of
Donatus. Parmenianus, indeed, might have said
that Tychonius had in all these things spoken
falsely ; but, as Tychonius himself observes,
many were still living at that time by whom these
things might be proved to be most unquestion-
ably true and generally known.

45. Of these things, however, I say no more :
maintain, if you choose, that Tychonius spoke
falsely ; I bring you back to Cyprian, the au-
thority which you yourself have quoted. If,
according to his writings, every one in the unity
of the Church is defiled by the sins of other
members, then the Church had utterly perished
before Cyprian's time, and all possibility of
Cyprian's own existence (as a member of the
Church) is taken away. If, however, the very
thought of this is impiety, and it be beyond
question that the Church continued in being, it
follows that no one is defiled by the guilt of the
sins of other men within the Catholic unity ; and
in vain do you, " an evil generation," maintain
that you are righteous, when you are " not
washed from the guilt of your going forth."

Chap. xt. — 46. You will say, "Why then do
you seek us? Why do you receive those whom
you call heretics? " Mark how simple and short
is my reply. We seek you because you are lost,
that we may rejoice over you when found, as


398


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


over you while lost we grieved. Again we call
you heretics ; but the name applies to you only
up to the time of your being turned to the peace
of tlie Catholic Church, and extricated from the
errors by wliich you have been ensnared. For
when you pass over to us, you entirely abandon
the position you formerly occupied, so that, as
heretics no longer, you pass over to us. You
will say, " Then baptize me." I would, if you
were not already baptized, or if you had received
the baptism of Donatus, or of Rogatus only, and
not of Christ. It is not the Christian sacraments,
but the crime of schism, which makes you a j
heretic. The evil which has proceeded from i
yourself is not a reason for our denying the good
that is permanent in you, but which you possess
to your own harm if you have it not in that
Church from which proceeds its power to do
good. For from the Catholic Church are all the
sacraments of the Lord, which you hold and ad-
minister in the same way as they were held and
administered even before you went forth from
her. The fact, however, that you are no longer
in that Church from which proceeded the sacra-
ments which you have, does not make it the less
true that you still have them. We therefore do
not change in you that wherein you are at one
with ourselves, for in many things you are at one
with us ; and of such it is said, " For in many
things they were with me : " ' but we correct
those things in which you are not with us, and
we wish you to receive those things which you
have not where you now are. You are at one
with us in baptism, in creed, and in the other
sacraments of the Lord. But in the spirit of
unity and bond of peace, in a word, in the
Catholic Church itself, you are not with us. If
you receive these things, the others which you
already have will then not begin to be yours, but
begin to be of use to you. We do not therefore,
as you think, receive your men of your party as
still belonging to you, but in the act of receiving
them we incorporate with ourselves those who
forsake you that they may be received by us ;
and in order that they may belong to us, their
first step is to renounce their connection with
you. Nor do we compel into union with us
those who industriously serve an error which we
abhor ; but our reason for wishing those men to
be united to us is, that they may no longer be
worthy of our abhorrence.

47. But you will say, "The Apostle Paul bap-
tized after John." 2 Did he then baptize after
a heretic ? If you do presume to call that friend
of the Bridegroom a heretic, and to say that he
was not in the unity of the Church, I beg that
you will put this in writing. But if you believe
that it would be the height of folly to think or

■ Ps. Iv. i8, Septuagint.
^ Acts xix. 5.


to say so, it remains for your own wisdom to
resolve the question why the Apostle Paul bap-
tized after John. For if he baptized after one
who was his equal, you ought all to baptize after
one another. If after one who was greater than
himself, you ought to baptize after Rogatus ; if
after one who was less than himself, Rogatus
ought to have baptized after you those whom
you, as a presbyter, had baptized. If, however,
the baptism which is now administered is in all
cases of equal value to those who receive it,
however unequal in merit the persons may be
by whom it is administered, because it is the
baptism of Christ, not of those who administer
the right, I think you must already perceive that
Paul administered the baptism of Christ to cer-
tain persons because they had received the bap-
tism of John only, and not of Christ ; for it is
expressly called the baptism of John, as the
Divine Scripture bears witness in many passages,
and as the Lord Himself calls it, saying : " The
baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven,
or of men.? "3 But the baptism which Peter
administered was the baptism, not of Peter, but
of Christ ; that which Paul administered was!
the baptism, not of Paul, but of Christ ; that]
which was administered by those who, in the]
apostle's time, preached Christ not sincerely,!
but of contention,'' was not their own, but the
baptism of Christ ; and that which was admin-
istered by those who, in Cyprian's time, either
by artful dishonesty obtained their possessions,
or by usury, at exorbitant interest, increased
them, was not their own baptism, but the bap-
tism of Christ. And because it was of Christ,
therefore, although there was very great disparity
in the persons by whom it was administered, it
was equally useful to those by whom it was re-
ceived. For if the excellency of baptism in each
case is according to the excellency of the per-
son by whom one is baptized, it was wrong ir
the apostle to give thanks that he had baptizec
none of the Corinthians, but Crispus, and Gaiu<
and the house of Stephanas ; 5 for the baptisn
of the converts in Corinth, if administered b}
himself, would have been so much more excel
lent as Paul himself was more excellent thai
other men. Lastly, when he says, " I hav(
planted, and Apollos watered," ^ he seems t(
intimate that he had preached the gospel, an(
that Apollos had baptized. Is Apollos bette
than John ? Why then did he, who baptize(
after John, not baptize after Apollos? Surel;
because, in the one case, the baptism, by whom
soever administered, was the baptism of Christ
and in the other case, by whomsoever admin


3 Matt. xxi. 25.
* Phil. i. 15, 17.
S I Cor. i. 14.
^ I Cor. iii. 6,


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


399


istered, it was, although preparing the way for
Christ, only the baptism of John.

48. It seems to you an odious thing to say
that baptism was given to some after John had
baptized them, and yet that baptism is not to be
given to men after heretics have baptized them ;
but it may be said with equal justice to be an
odious thing that baptism was given to some
after John had baptized them, and yet that bap-
tism is not to be given to men after intemperate
persons have baptized them. I name this sin of
intemperance rather than others, because those
in whom it reigns are not able to hide it : and
yet what man, even though he be blind, does
not know how many addicted to this vice are to
be found everywhere? And yet among the
works of the flesh, of which it is said that they
who do them shall not inherit the kingdom of
God, the apostle places this in an enumeration
in which heresies also are specified : " Now the
works of the flesh," he says, "are manifest,
which are these : adultery, fornication, unclean-
ness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revel-
lings, and such like ; of the which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past,
that they who do such things shall not inherit
the kingdom of God." ' Baptism, therefore,
although it was administered after John, is not
administered after a heretic, on the very same
principle according to which, though adminis-
tered after John, it is not administered after an
intemperate man : for both heresies and drunken-
ness are among the works which exclude those
who do them from inheriting the kingdom of
God. Does it not seem to you as if it were a
thing intolerably unseemly, that although bap-
tism was repeated after it had been administered
by him who, not even moderately drinking wine,
but wholly refraining from its use, prepared the
way for the kingdom of God, and yet that it
should not be repeated after being administered
by an intemperate man, who shall not inherit
the kingdom of God? What can be said in
answer to this, but that the one was the baptism
of John, after which the apostle administered the
baptism of Christ ; and that the other, adminis-
tered by an intemperate man, was the baptism
of Christ? Between John Baptist and an in-
temperate man there is a great difference, as of
opposites ; between the baptism of Christ and
the baptism of John there is no contrariety, but
a great difference. Between the apostle and
an intemperate man there is a great difference ;
but there is none between the baptism of Christ
administered by an apostle, and the baptism of
, Christ administered by an intemperate man. In


« Gal.


V. 19-21.


like manner, between John and a heretic there is
a great difference, as of opposites ; and between
the baptism of John and the baptism of Christ
which a heretic administers there is no contrari-
ety, but there is a great difference. But between
the baptism of Christ which an apostle adminis-
ters, and the baptism of Christ which a heretic
administers, there is no difference. For the
form of the sacrament is acknowledged to be
the same even when there is a great difference
in point of worth between the men by whom it
is administered.

49. But pardon me, for I have made a mis-
take in wishing to convince you by arguing from
the case of an intemperate man administering
baptism ; for I had forgotten that I am dealing
with a Rogatist, not with one bearing the wider
name of Donatist. For among your colleagues
who are so few, and in the whole number of your
clergy, perhaps you cannot find one addicted to
this vice. For you are persons who hold that
the name Catholic is given to the faith not be-
cause communion of those who hold it embraces
the whole world, but because they observe the
whole of the Divine precepts and the whole of
the sacraments ; you are the persons in whom
alone the Son of man when He cometh shall
find faith, when on the earth He shall find no
faith, forasmuch as you are not earth and on the
earth, but heavenly and dwelling in heaven ! Do
you not fear, or do you not observe that " God
resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the hum-
ble " ? ^ Does not that very passage in the Gos-
pel startle you, in which the Lord saith, " When
the Son of man cometh, shall He find faith in
the earth?" 3 Immediately thereafter, as if
foreseeing that some would proudly arrogate to
themselves the possession of this faith. He spake
to some who trusted in themselves that they
were righteous, and despised others, the parable
of the two men who went up to the temple to
pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other a publi-
can. The words which follow I leave for your-
self to consider and to answer. Nevertheless
examine more minutely your small sect, to see
whether not so much as one who administers
baptism is an intemperate man. For so wide-
spread is the havoc wrought among souls by this
plague, that I am greatly surprised if it has not
reached even your infinitesimal flock, although
it is your boast that already, before the coming
of Christ, the one good Shepherd, you have
separated between the sheep and the goats.

Chap. xii. — 50. Listen to the testimony
which through me is addressed to you by those
who are the Lord's wheat, suffering meanwhile
until the final winnowing,-* among the chaff in


2 Jas. iv. 6.

3 Luke xviii. 8.
* Matt. iii. 12.


400


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


the Lord's threshing-floor, i.e. throughout the
whole world, because " God hath called the earth
from the rising of the sun unto the going down
thereof," ' and throughout the same wide field
the " children praise Him." ^ We disapprove
of every one who, taking advantage of this im-
perial edict, persecutes you, not with loving con-
cern for your correction, but with the malice of
an enemy. Moreover, although, since every
earthly possession can be rightly retained only
on the ground either of divine right, according
to which all things belong to the righteous, or of
human right, which is in the jurisdiction of the
kings of the earth, you are mistaken in calling
those things yours which you do not possess as
righteous persons, and which you have forfeited
by the laws of earthly sovereigns, and plead in
vain, " We have laboured to gather them," see-
ing that you may read what is written, "The
wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just ; " ^
nevertheless we disapprove of any one who, avail-
ing himself of this law which the kings of the
earth, doing homage to Christ, have published
in order to correct your impiety, covetously
seeks to possess himself of your property. Also
we disapprove of any one who, on the ground
not of justice, but of avarice, seizes and retains
the provision pertaining to the poor, or the
chapels 4 in which you meet for worship, which
you once occupied in the name of the Church,
and which are by all means the rightful property
only of that Church which is the true Church of
Christ. We disapprove of any one who receives
a person that has been expelled by you for some
disgraceful action or crime, on the same terms
on which those are received who have lived
among you chargeable with no other crime be-
yond the error through which you are separated
from us. But these are things which you cannot
easily prove ; and although you can prove them,
we bear with some whom we are unable to cor-
rect or even to punish ; and we do not quit the
Lord's threshing-floor because of the chaff which
is there, nor break the Lord's net because of
bad fishes enclosed therein, nor desert the Lord's
flock because of goats which are to be in the end
separated from it, nor go forth from the Lord's
house because in it there are vessels destined to
dishonour.

Chap. xm. — 51. But, my brother, if you for-
bear seeking the empty honour which comes
from men, and despise the reproach of fools,
who will be ready to say, " Why do you now de-
stroy what you once laboured to build up ? " it
seems to me to be beyond doubt that you will
now pass over to the Church which I perceive


I Ps. 1. I.
^ Ps cxiii. 1-3.
3 Prov. xiii. 22.
* Basilicce.


that you acknowledge to be the true Church :
the proofs of which sentiment on your part I find
at hand. For in the beginning of your letter
which I am now answering you have these
words : " I knew you, my excellent friend, as a
man devoted to peace and uprightness, when
you were still far removed from the Christian
faith, and were in these earlier days occupied
with literary pursuits ; but since your conversion
at a more recent time to the Christian faith, you
give your time and labour, as I am informed by
the statements of many persons, to theological
controversies." s These words are undoubtedly
your own, if you were the person who sent me
that letter. Seeing, therefore, that you confess
that I have been converted to the Christian
faith, although I have not been converted to the
sect of the Donatists or of the Rogatists, you
unquestionably uphold the truth that beyond the
pale of Rogatists and Donatists the Christian
faith exists. This faith therefore is, as we say,
spread abroad throughout all nations, which are
according to God's testimony blessed in the seed
of Abraham.^ Why therefore do you still hesi-
tate to adopt what you perceive to be true,
unless it be that you are humbled because at
some former time you did not perceive what you
now see, or maintained some different view, and
so, while ashamed to correct an error, are not
ashamed (where shame would be much more
reasonable) of remaining wilfully in error?

52. Such conduct the Scripture has not passed
over in silence ; for we read, " There is a shame
which bringeth sin, and there is a shame which
is graceful and glorious." 7 Shame brings sin,
when through its influence any one forbears from
changing a wicked opinion, lest he be supposed
to be fickle, or be held as by his own judgment
convicted of having been long in error : such
persons descend into the pit alive, that is, con-
scious of their perdition ; whose future doom
the death of Dathan and Abiram and Korah,
swallowed up by the opening earth, long ago
prefigured.^ But shame is graceful and glorious
when one blushes for his own sin, and by repent-
ance is changed to something better, which you
are reluctant to do because overpowered by that
false and fatal shame, fearing lest by men who
know not whereof they affirm, that sentence of
the apostle may be quoted against you : " If I
build again the things which I destroyed, I make]
myself a transgressor." 9 if^ however, this sea
fence admitted of application to those who, afte
being corrected, preach the truth which in their
perversity they opposed, it might have been said
at first against Paul himself, in regard to whom


5 Dispiitaiionibus legalibus.
^ Gen. xxii. i8.
' Ecclus. iv. 21.
^ Num. xvi. 31-33.
9 Gal. ii. 18.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


401


the churches of Christ glorified God when they
heard that he now " preached the faith which
once he destroyed." '

53. Do not, however, imagine that one can
pass from error to truth, or from any sin, be it
great or small, to the correction of his sin, with-
out giving some proof of his repentance. It is,
however, an error of intolerable impertinence
for men to blame the Church, which is proved
by so many Divine testimonies to be the Church
of Christ, for dealing in one way with those who
forsake her, receiving them back on condition
of correcting this fault by some acknowledgment
of their repentance, and in another way with
those who never were within her pale, and are
receiving welcome to her peace for the first time ;
her method being to humble the former more
fully, and to receive the latter upon easier terms,
cherishing affection for both, and ministering
with a mother's love to the health of both.

You have here perhaps a longer letter than
you desired. It would have been much shorter
if in my reply I had been thinking of you alone ;
but as it is, even though it should be of no use
to yourself, 1 do not think that it can fail to be
of use to those who shall take pains to read
it in the fear of God, and without respect of
persons. Amen.

LETTER XCIV.
(a.d. 408.)

A letter to Augustin from Paulinus and Therasia,
the substance of which is sufficiently stated in the next
letter, which contains the reply of Augustin to his
friend's questions concerning the present life, the na-
ture of the bodies of the blessed in the life to come, and
the functions of the members of the body after the
resurrection.

LETTER XCV.

(a.d. 408.)

to brother paulinus and sister therasia,
most beloved and sincere, saints worthy
of affecnon and vener-^vtion, fellow-disci-
ples with himself under the lord jesus
as master, augustin sends greeting in the

LORD.

I. When brethren most closely united to us,
towards whom along with us you are accustomed
both to cherish and to express sentiments of
regard which we all cordially reciprocate, have
frequent occasions of visiting you, this benefit is
one by which we are comforted under evil rather
than made to rejoice in increase of good. For
we strive to the utmost of our power to avoid
the causes and emergencies which necessitate
their journeys, and yet, — I know not how, un-

' Gal. i. 23, 24.


less it be as just retribution, — they cannot be
dispensed with : but when they return to us and
see us, that word of Scripture is fulfilled in our
experience : " In the multitude of my thoughts
within me. Thy comforts delight my soul." ^
Accordingly, when you learn from our brother
Possidius himself how sad, is the occasion which
has compelled him to go to Italy,^ you will know
how true the remarks I have made are in regard
to the joy which he has in meeting you ; and
yet, if any of us should cross the sea for the one
purpose of enjoying a meeting with you, what
more cogent or worthy reason could be found ?
This, however, would not be compatible with
those obligations by which we are bound to
minister to those who are languid through in-
firmity, and not to withdraw our bodily presence
from them, unless their malady, assuming a dan-
gerous form, makes such departure imperative.
Whether in these things we are receiving chas-
tening or judgment I know not ; but this I know,
that He is not deahng with us according to our
sins, nor requiting us according to our iniqui-
ties,* who mingles so great comfort with our
tribulation, and who, by remedies which fill us
with wonder, secures that we shall not love the
world, and shall not by it be made to fall away.

2. I asked in a former letter your opinion as
to the nature of the future life of the saints ;
but you have said in your reply that we have
still much to study concerning our condition ini
this present life, and you do well, except in this,,
that you have expressed your desire to learn
from me that of which you are either equally
ignorant or equally well-informed with myself,,
or rather, of which you know much more per-
haps than I do ; for you have said with perfect-
truth, that before we meet the dissolution of
this mortal body, we must die, in a gospel sense,,
by a voluntary departure, withdrawing ourselves,,
not by death, but by deliberate resolution, fromi
the life of this world. This course is a simple-
one, and is beset with no waves of uncertainty,,
because we are of opinion that we ought so to-
live in this mortal life that we may be in some
measure fitted for immortality. The whole quesi-
tion, however, which, when discussed and inves-
tigated, perplexes men like myself, is this — how
we ought to live among or for the welfare of
those who have not yet learned to live by dying,
not in the dissolution of the body, but by turn-
ing: themselves with a certain mental resolution
away from the attractions of mere natural things.
For in most cases, it seems to us that unless we
in some small degree conform to them in regard
to those very things from which we desire to see

2 Ps. xciv. 19.

3 Possidius, bishop of Calama, was going to Rome to complain
of the outrage of the Pagans of Calama, described in Letter XCI.
sec. 8, p. 3^8.

* Ps. ciil. 10.


402


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


them delivered, we shall not succeed in doing !
them any good. And when we do thus conform,
a pleasure in such things steals upon ourselves,
so that often we are pleased to speak and to
listen to frivolous things, and not only to smile
at them, but even to be completely overcome
with laughter : thus burdening our souls with
feehngs which cleave to the dust, or even to the
mire of this world, we experience greater diffi-
culty and reluctance in raising ourselves to God
that by dying a gospel-death we may live a gos-
pel-life. And whensoever this state of mind is
reached, immediately thereupon will follow the
commendation, " AVell done ! well done ! " not
from men, for no man perceives in another the
mental act by which divine things are appre-
hended, but in a certain inward silence there
sounds I know not whence, " Well done ! well
done ! " Because of this kind of temptation,
the great a])ostle confesses that he was buffeted
by the angel.' Behold whence it comes that our
whole life on earth is a temptation ; for man is
tempted even in that thing in which he is being
conformed so far as he can be to the likeness of
the heavenly life.

3. What shall I say as to the infliction or
remission of punishment, in cases in which we
have no other desire than to forward the spiritual
welfare of those in regard to whom we judge
that they ouglit or ought not to be punished?
Also, if we consider not only the nature and
magnitude of faults, but also what each may be
able or unable to bear according to his strength
of mind, how deep and dark a question it is to
adjust the amount of punishment so as to pre-
vent the person who receives it not only from
getting no good, but also from suffering loss
thereby ! Besides, I know not whether a greater
number have been improved or made worse
when alarmed under threats of such punishment
at the hands of men as is an object of fear.
What, tlien, is the path of duty, seeing that it
often happens that if you inflict punishment on
one he goes to destruction ; whereas, if you
leave iiim unpunished, another is destroyed? I
confess that 1 make mistakes daily in regard to
this, and that I know not when and how to ob-
■serve the rule of Scripture : " Them that sin
.rebuke before all, that others may fear ; " ^ and
•that other rule, " Tell him his fault between thee
and him alone ; " ^ and the rule, " Judge nothing
before the time • " 4 " Judge not, that ye be not
judged " 5 (in which command the Lord has not
added the words, "before the time") ; and this
saying of Scripture, "Who art thou that judgest
another man's servant? to his own master he


' 2 Cor. xii. 7.

2 I Tim. V. 20.

3 Matt, xviii. 15.
* I Cor. iv. 5.

5 Matt. vii. I.


standeth or falleth : yea, he shall be holden up,
for God is able to make him stand ; " ^ by which
words he makes it plain that he is speaking of
those who are within the Church ; yet, on the
other hand, he commands them to be judged
when he says, " \Vhat have I to do to judge them
also that are without? do not ye judge them that
are within ? therefore put away from among }-our-
selves that wicked person." ^ But when this is
necessary, how much care and fear is occasioned
by the question to what extent it should be done,
lest that happen which, in his second episde to
them, the apostle is found admonishing these
persons to beware of in that very example, say-
ing, " lest, perhaps, such an one should be swal-
lowed up with overmuch sorrow ; " adding, in
order to prevent men from thinking this a thing
not calling for anxious care, " lest Satan should
get an advantage of us ; for we are not ignorant
of his devices."* What trembling we feel in all
these things, my brother Paulinus, O holy man
of God ! what trembling, what darkness ! May
we not think that with reference to these things
it was said, " Fearfulness and trembling are come
upon me, and horror hath overwlielmed me.
And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove !
for then would I fly away, and be at rest. Lo,
then would I wander far off, and remain in the
wilderness." And yet even in the wilderness
perchance he still experienced it ; for he adds,
" I waited for Him who should deliver me from
weakness and from tempest." ^ Truly, there-
fore, is the life of man upon the earth a life of
temptation. '°

4. Moreover, as to the oracles of God, is it
not true that they are lightly touched rather than
grasped and handled by us, seeing that in by
far the greater part of them we do not already
possess opinions definite and ascertained, but
are rather inquiring what our opinion ought to
be? And this caution, though attended with
abundant disquietude, is much better than the
rashness of dogmatic assertion. Also, if a mani
is not carnally minded (which the apostle says
is death), will he not be a great cause of offence
to those who are still carnally minded, in man
parts of Scripture in the exposition of whic
to say what you believe is most perilous, and t
refrain from saying it is most grievous, and to sa;
something else than what you believe is mosi
pernicious? Nay more, when in the discourse
or writings of those who are within the Churc
we find some things censurable, and do not coa
ceal our disapprobation (supposing such correo
tion to be according to the freedom of brotherl;
love), how great a sin is committed against ui


* Rom. xiv. 4.
7 1 Cor. V. 12, 13.
^ 2 Cor. ii. 7, II.

9 Ps. Iv. 5-8, as given in the LXX,
•o Job vii. I.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


40:


mil
sail
[eE«

0,


coi
■otlii


when we are suspected of being actuated in this
by envy and not by goodwill ! and how much
do we sin against others, when we in like man-
ner impute to those who find fault with our opin-
ions a desire rather to wound than to correct us !
Verily, there arise usually from this cause bitter
enmities even between persons bound to each
other by the greatest affection and intimacy,
when, " thinking of men above that which is
written, any one is puffed up for one against
another ; " ' and while they bite and devour one
another, " there is reason to fear lest they be
consumed one of another." ^ Therefore, " Oh
that I had wings like a dove ! for then would I
fly away, and be at rest."^ For whether it be
that the dangers by which one is beset seem to
him greater than those of which he has no ex-
perience, or that my impressions are correct, I
cannot help thinking that any amount of weak-
ness and of tempest in the wilderness would be
more easily borne than the things which we feel
or fear in the busy world.

5. I therefore greatly approve of your saying
that we should make the state in which men
stand, or rather the course which they run, in
this present life, the theme of our discussion.
I add as another reason for our giving this sub-
ject the preference, that the finding and follow-
ing of the course itself must come before our
finding and possessing that towards which it
leads. AVhen, therefore, I asked your views on
this, I acted as if, through holding and observing
carefuUv the right rule of this life, we were al-
ready free from disquietude concerning its course,
although I feel in so many things, and especially
in those which I have mentioned, that I toil in
the midst of very great dangers. Nevertheless,
forasmuch as the cause of all this ignorance and
embarrassment appears to me to be that, in the
midst of a great variety of manners and of minds
having inclinations and infirmities hidden alto-
gether from our sight, we seek the interest of
those who are citizens and subjects, not of Rome
which is on earth, but of Jerusalem which is in
heaven, it seemed to me more agreeable to con-
verse with you about what we shall be, than about
what we now are. For although we do not know
the blessings which are to be enjoyed yonder,
of one thing at least we are assured, and it is
not a small thing, that yonder the evils which
we experience here shall have no place.

6. Wherefore, as to the ordering of this pres-
ent life in the way which we must follow in order
to the attainment of eternal life, I know that our
carnal appetites must be held in check, only so
much concession being made to the gratification
of the bodily senses as suffices for the support


' I Cor. iv. 6.
^ Gal. V. IS.
3 Ps. Iv. 6.


of this life and the active discharge of its duties,
and that all the vexations of this life which come
upon us in connection with the truth of God,
and the eternal welfare of ourselves or of our
neighbours, must be borne with patience and
fortitude. I know also that with all the zeal of
love we should seek the good of our neighbour,
that he may rightly spend the present life so as
to obtain life eternal. I know also that we ought
to prefer spiritual to carnal, immutable to muta-
ble things, and that all this a man is so much
more or less enabled to do, according as he is
more or less helped by the grace of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. But I do not know the
reason why one or another is more or less helped
or not helped by that grace ; this only I know,
that God does this with perfect justice, and for
reasons which to Himself are known as sufficient.
In regard, however, to the things which I have
mentioned above, as to the way in which we
ought to live amongst men, if anything has be-
come known to you through experience or medi-
tation, I beseech you to give me instruction.
And if these things perplex you not less than
myself, make them the subject of conference
with some judicious spiritual physician, whom
you may find either where you reside, or in
Rome, when you make your annual visit to the
city, and thereafter write to me whatever the
Lord may reveal to you through his instructions,
or to you and him together when engaged in
conversation on the subject.

7. As to the resurrection of the body, and the
future offices of its members in the incorruptible
and immortal state, since you have, in return for
the questions which I put to you, inquired my
views on these matters, listen to a brief state-
ment which, if it be not sufficient, may after-
wards, with the Lord's help, be amplified by
fuller discussion. It is to be held most firmly,
as a doctrine in regard to which the testimony
of Holy Scripture is true and unmistakable, that
these visible and earthly bodies which are now
called natural,"* shall, in the resurrection of the
faithful and just, be spiritual bodies. At the
same time, I do not know how the quality of a
spiritual body can be comprehended or stated
by us, seeing that it lies beyond the range of our
experience. There shall be, assuredly, in such
bodies no corruption, and therefore they shall
not require the perishable nourishment which is
now necessary ; yet though unnecessary, it will
not be impossible for them at their pleasure to
take and actually consume food ; otherwise it
would not have been taken after His resurrection
by the Lord, who has given us such an example
of the resurrection of the body, that the apostle
argues from it : " If the dead rise not, then is

4 Animalia, i Cor. xv. 34.


404


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


not Christ raised." ' But He, when He ap-
peared to His disciples, having all His members,
and using them according to their functions,
also pointed out to them the places where His
wounds had been, regarding which I have always
supposed that they were the scars, not the
w'ounds themselves, and that they were there,
not of necessity, but according to His free ex-
ercise of power. He gave at that time the clear-
est evidence of the ease with which He exercised
this power, both by showing Himself in another
form to the two disciples, and by His appearing,
not as a spirit, but in His true body, to the dis-
ciples in the upper chamber, although the doors
were shut.^

8. From this arises the question as to angels,
whether they have bodies adapted to their duties
and their swift motions from place to place, or
are only spirits? For if we say that they have
bodies, we are met by the passage : " He maketh
His angels spirits ; " ^ and if we say that they
have not bodies, a still greater difficulty meets
us in explaining how, if they are without bodily
form, it is written that they appeared to the
bodily senses of men, accepted offers of hospi-
tality, permitted their feet to be washed, and
used the meat and drink which was provided for
them.4 For it seems to involve us in less diffi-
culty, if we suppose that the angels are there
called spirits in the same manner as men are
called souls, e.^i^. in the statement that so many
souls (not signifying that they had not bodies
also) went down with Jacob into Egypt, 5 than
if we suppose that, without bodily form, all these
things were done by angels. Again, a certain
definite height is named in the Apocalypse as
the stature of an angel, in dimensions which
could apply only to bodies, proving that that
which appeared to the eyes of men is to be ex-
plained, not as an illusion, but as resulting from
the power which we have spoken of as easily put
forth by spiritual bodies. But whether angels
have bodies or not, antl whether or not any one
be able to show how without bodies they could
do all these things, it is nevertheless certain, that
in that city of the holy in which those of our
race who have been redeemed by Christ shall be
united for ever to thousands of angels, voices
proceeding from organs of speech shall furnish
expression to the thoughts of minds in which
nothing is hidden ; for in that divine fellowship
it will not be possible for any thought in one to
remain concealed from another, but there shall
be complete harmony and oneness of heart in
the praise of God, and this shall find utterance
not only from the spirit, but through the spiritual

' I Cor. XV. i6.

2 Luke xxiv. 15-43; John xx. 14-29; Mark xvi. 12, 14.

3 Ps. civ. 4 and Heb. i. 7.

* Gen. xviii. 2-9 and xix. 1-3.
S Gen. xlvi. 27.


body as its instrument ; this, at least, is what
I believe.

9. Meanwhile, if you have already found or
can learn from other teachers anything more
fully agreeing with the truth than this, I am most
eagerly longing to be instructed therein by you.
Study carefully, if you please, my letter, in re-
gard to which, as you pled in excuse for your
very hurried reply the haste of the deacon who
brought it to me, I do not make any complaint,
but rather remind you of it, in order that what
was then omitted in your answer may now be
supplied. Look over it again, and observe what
I wished to learn from you, both regarding your
opinion concerning Christian retirement as a
means to the acquisition and discussion of the
truths of Christian wisdom, and regarding that
retirement in which I supposed that you had
found leisure, but in which it is reported to me
that you are engrossed with occupation to an
incredible extent.

May you, in whom the holy God has given us
great joy and consolation, live mindful of us, and
in true felicity. (^This sentence is added by an-
other hand.)

LETTER XCVI.

(a.d. 408.)

to olvmpius, my lord greatly beloved, and livi
son worthy of honour axp regard as a mem-
ber of christ, augustin sends greeting.

I. Whatever your rank may be in connection
with the course of this world, I have the greatest
confidence in addressing you as my much-loved,
true-hearted Christian fellow-servant Olympius.
For I know that this name, in your esteem, ex-
cels all other glorious and lofty titles. Reports
have indeed reached me that you have obtained
some promotion in worldly honour, but no infor-
mation confirming the truth of the rumour had
come to me up to the time when this opportu-
nity of writing to you occurred. Since, however,
I know that you have learned from the Lord not
to mind high things, but to condescend to those
who are lightly esteemed by men, whatever the
pinnacle to which you may have been raised, we
take for granted, my lord greatly beloved, and^
son worthy of honour and regard as a memberi
of Christ, that you will still make a letter froraj
me welcome, just as you were wont to do. An
as to your worldly prosperity, I do not doub
that you will wisely use it for your eternal gain i
so that the greater the influence which you ac-|
quire in the commonwealth on this earth, thei
more will you devote yourself to the interests ofj
the heavenly city to which you owe your birth iii;
Christ, forasmuch as this shall be more abun-'
dantly repaid to you in the land of the living.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


405


and in the true peace which yields sure and end-
less joys.'

2. I again commend to your kind considera-
tion the petition of my brother and colleague
Bonifice, in the hope that what could not be
done jefore may be in your power now. He
might perhaps, indeed, legally retain, without
any further difficulty, that which his predecessor
had acquired, though under another name than
his own, and which he had begun to possess in
name of the church ; but we do not wish, since
his predecessor was in debt to the public ex-
chequer, to have this burden upon our con-
science. For that act of fraud was none the
less truly fraud because perpetrated at the ex-
pense of the public revenue. The same Paul
(the predecessor of Boniface), when he was
made bishop, being about to surrender all his
effects because of the accumulated burden of
arrears due to the public exchequer, having se-
cured payment of a bond by which a certain sum
of money was due to him, bought with it, as if
for the church, in the name of a family then very
powerful, these few fields by the produce of
which he might support himself, in order that,
in respect to these also, after his old practice, he
might escape annoyance at the hands of the col-
lectors of the revenue, although he was paying
no tax. Boniface, however, when ordained over
the same church, on his death, hesitated to take
the fields which he had thus held ; and although
he might have contented himself with asking
from the emperor no more than a remission of
the fiscal arrears which his predecessor had in-

[curred on this small property, he preferred to

! confess without reserve that Paul had bought the
property at an auction with money of his own,

[ at a time when he was bankrupt as a debtor to
the public revenue, so that now the Church may,
if possible, obtain possession of this, not through
the secret fraud of her bishop, but by an open
act ol the Christian emperor's liberality. And
if this be impossible, the servants of God prefer}
to bear the hardship of want, rather than obtain
the supply of that which they require under re-
proaches of conscience for dishonourable dealing.
3. I beg you to condescend to give your sup-
port to this petition, because he has resolved
not to bring forward the decision in his favour
which was formeriy obtained, lest it should pre-
clude him from the liberty of making a second
application ; for the answer then given fell short
of what he desired. And now, since you are
of the same kindly disposition that you formerly

I were, but possessed of greater influence, I do
not despair of this being easily granted by the

i I This Olympius was appointed in 408 (a.d.) to the office of highest

] |".™'''*y "1 the court of Honorius (magister officiorum), in room of

3 Stilicho, who was put to death at Ravenna on account of suspected

i complicity with the authors of the sedition which threatened the life

( 01 the emperor at Pavia.


Lord's help, in consideration of your claims on
the emperor ; and if even you were to ask the
gift of the property in your own name, and pre-
sent it to the church of which I have spoken,
who would find fault with your request ; nay,
rather, who would not commend it, as dictated
not by personal covetousness, but by Christian
piety? May the mercy of the Lord our God
shield you, and make you more and more happy
in Christ, my lord and son.

LETTER XCVII.

(a.d. 408.)

to olympius, my excellent and justly distin-
guished lord, and my son worthy of much
honour in christ, augustin sends greeting
in the lord.

1. Although, when we heard recently of your
having obtained merited promotion to the high-
est rank, we felt persuaded, however uncertain
we still were in some degree as to the truth of
the report, that towards the Church of which we
rejoice to know that you are truly a son, there
was no other feeling in your mind than that which
you have now made patent to us in your letter,
nevertheless, having now read that letter in which
you have been pleased of your own accord to
send to us, when we were full of backwardness
and diffidence, a most gracious exhortation to
use our humble efforts in pointing out to you
how the Lord, by whose gift you are thus power-
ful, may from time to time, by means of your
pious obedience, bring assistance to His Church,
we write to you with the more abundant confi-
dence, my excellent and jusUy distinguished lord,
and my son worthy of much honour in Christ.

2. Many brethren, indeed, holy men who are
my colleagues, have, by reason of the troubles
of the church here, gone — I might almost say
as fugitives — to the emperor's most illustrious
court ; and these brethren you may have already
seen, or may have received from Rome their
letters, in connection with their respective occa-
sions of appeal. I have not had it in my power
to consult them before writing ; nevertheless, I
was unwilling to miss the opportunity of sending
a letter by the bearer, my brother and fellow-
presbyter, who has been compelled, though in
mid-winter, to make the best of his way into
those parts, under pressing necessity, in order to
save the life of a fellow-citizen. I write, there-
fore, to salute you, and to charge you by the
love which you have in Christ Jesus our Lord,
to see that your good work be hastened on with
the utmost diligence, in order that the enemies
of the Church may know that those laws con-
cerning the demolition of idols and the correc-
tion of heretics which were sent into Africa


4o6


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


while Stilicho yet lived, were framed by the
desire of our most pious and faithful emperor ;
for they either cunningly boast, or unwillingly
imagine, that this was done without his knowl-
edge, or against his will, and thus they render
the minds of the ignorant full of seditious vio-
lence, and excite them to dangerous and vehe-
ment enmity against us.

3. I do not doubt that, in submitting this in
the way of petition or respectful suggestion to
the consideration of your Excellency, I act
agreeably to the wishes of all my colleagues
throughout Africa ; and I think that it is your
duty to take measures, as could be easily done,
on whatever opportunity may first arise, to make
it understood by these vain men (whose salva-
tion we seek, although they resist us), that it was
to the care, not of Stilicho, but of the son of
Theodosius, that those laws which have been
sent into Africa for the defence of the Church
of Christ owed their promulgation. On account
of these things, then, the presbyter whom I have
mentioned already, the bearer of this letter, who
is from the district of Milevi, was ordered by his
bishop, the venerable Severus, who joins me in
cordial salutations to you, whose love we esteem
most genuine, to pass through Hippo-regius,
where 1 am ; because, when we happened to
meet together in time of serious tribulation and
distress to the Church, we sought an o]Dportunity
of writing to your Highness, but found none.
I had indeed already sent one letter in regard
to the business of our holy brother and colleague
Boniface, bishop of Cataqua ; but the heavier
calamities destined to cause us greater agitation
had not then befallen us, regarding which, and
the means whereby something may be done with
the best counsel for their prevention or punish-
ment, according to the method of Christ, the
bishops who have sailed hence on that errand
will be able more conveniently to confer with
you, in whose cordial goodwill towards us we
rejoice, inasmuch as they are able to report to
you something which has been, so far as limited
time permitted, the result of careful and united
consultation. But as to this other matter, namely,
that the province be made to know how the mind
of our most gracious and religious emperor stands
towards the Church, I recommend, nay, I beg,
beseech, and implore you, to take care that no
time be lost, but that its accomplishment be
hastened, even before you see the bishops who
have gone from us, so soon as shall be possible
for you, in the exercise of your most eminent
vigilance on behalf of the members of Christ
who are now in circumstances of the utmost
danger ; for the Lord has provided no small
consolation for us under these trials, seeing that
it has pleased Him to put much more now than
formerly in your power, although we were already


filled with joy by the number and the magnitude
of your good offices.

4. We rejoice much in the firm and stedfast
faith of some, and these not few in number, who
by means of these laws have been converted to
the Christian religion, or from schism to Catho-
lic peace, for whose eternal welfare we are glad
to run the risk of forfeiting temporal welfare.
For on this account especially we now have to
endure at the hands of men, exceedingly and
obdurately perverse, more grievous assaults of
enmity, which some of them, along with us,
bear most patiently ; but we are in very great
fear because of their weakness, until they learn,
and are enabled by the help of the Lord's most
compassionate grace, to despise w-ith more abun-
dant strength of spirit the present world and
man's short day. May it please your Highness
to deliver the letter of instructions which 1 have
sent to my brethren the bishops when they come,
if, as I suppose, they have not yet reached you.
For we have such confidence in the unfeigned
devotion of your heart, that with the Lord's
help we desire to have you not only giving us
your assistance, but also participating in our
consultations.

LETTER XCVHL

(a.d. 408.)

to boniface, his colleague in the episcopal
office, augustin sends greeting in the

LORD.

I . You ask me to state " whether parents do
harm to their baptized infant children, when they
attempt to heal them in time of sickness by
sacrifices to the false gods of the heathen."
Also, " if they do thereby no harm to their chil-
dren, how can any advantage come to these
children at their baptism, through the faith of
parents whose departure from the faith does
them no harm ? " To which I reply, that in the
holy union of the parts of the body of Christ,
so great is the virtue of that sacrament, namely,
of baptism, which brings salvation, that so soon
as he who owed his first birth to others, acting
under the impulse of natural instincts, has been
made partaker of the second birth by others,
acting under the impulse of spiritual desires, he
cannot be thenceforward held under the bond
of that sin in another to which he does not with
his own will consent. " Both the soul of the
father is mine," saith the Lord, " and the soul of
the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shalL
die ; " ■ but he does not sin on whose behalf his ;
parents or any other one resort, without his
knowledge, to the impiety of worshipping hea-
then deities. That bond of guilt which was to be


' Ezek. xviii. 4,


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


407


cancelled by the grace of this sacrament he de-
rived from Adam, for this reason, that at the time
of Adam's sin he was not yet a soul having a
separate life, i.e. another soul regarding which it
could be said, " both the soul of the father is
mine, and the soul of the son is mine." There-
fore now, when the man has a i>ersonal, separate
existence, being thereby made distinct from his
parents, he is not held responsible for that sin
in another which is performed without his con-
sent. In the former case, he derived guilt from
another, because, at the time when the guilt
which he has derived was incurred, he was one
with the person from whom he dervived it, and
was in him. But one man does not derive guilt
from another, when, tlirough the fact that each
has a separate life belonging to himself, the word
may apply ecjually to both — " The soul that sin-
neth, it shall die."

2. pjut the possibility of regeneration through
the office rendered by the will of another, when
the child is presented to receive the sacred rite,
is the work exclusively of the Spirit by whom
the child thus presented is regenerated. For it
is not written, " Except a man be born again by
the will of his parents, or by the faith of those
presenting the child, or of those administering
the ordinance," but, " Except a man be born
again of water and of the Spirit." • By the
water, therefore, which holds forth the sacra-
ment of grace in its outward form, and by the
Spirit who bestows the benefit of grace in its
inward power, cancelling the bond of guilt, and
restoring natural goodness [reconcilians bonum
naturae], the man deriving his first 1/irth origi-
nally from Adam alone, is regenerated in Christ
alone. Now the regenerating Spirit is possessed
in common both by the parents who present the
child, and by the infant that is presented and is
born again ; wherefore, in virtue of this partici-
pation in the same Spirit, the will of those who
present the infant is useful to the child. But
when the parents sin against the child by pre-
senting him to the false gods of the heathen,
and attempting to bring him under impious
bonds unto these false gods, there is not such
community of souls subsisting between the par-
ents and the child, that the guilt of one party
can be common to both alike. For we are not
made partakers of guilt along with others through
their will, in the same way as we are made par-
takers of grace along with others through the
unity of the Holy Spirit ; because the one Holy
Spirit can be in two different persons without their
knowing in respect to each other that by Him
grace is the common possession of both, but
the human spirit cannot so belong to two indi-
viduals as to make the blame common to both

' John iii. 5.


in a case in which one of the two sins, and the
other does not sin. Therefore a child, having
once received natural birth through his parents,
can be made partaker of the second (or spirit-
ual) birth by the Spirit of God, so that the bond
of guilt which he inherited from his parents is
cancelled ; but he that has once received this
second birth by the Spirit of God cannot be
made again partaker of natural birth through his
parents, so that the bond once cancelled should
again bind him. And thus, when the grace of
Christ has been once received, the child does
not lose it otherwise than by his own impiety,
if, when he becomes older, he turn out so ill.
For by that time he will begin to have sins of
his own, which cannot be removed by regenera-
tion, but must be healed by other remedial
measures.

3. Nevertheless, persons of more advanced
years, whether they be parents bringing their
children, or others bringing any little ones, who
attempt to place those who have been baptized
under obligation to profane worship of heathen
gods, are guilty of spiritual homicide. True,
they do not actually kill the children's souls, but
they go as far towards killing them as is in their
power. The warning, " Do not kill your little
ones," may be with all propriety addressed to
them ; for the apostle says, " Quench not the
Spirit ; " ^ not that He can be quenched, but
that those who so act as if they wished to have
Him quenched are deservedly spoken of as
quenchers of the Spirit. In this sense also may
be rightly understood the words which most
blessed Cyprian wrote in his letter concerning
the lapsed, when, rebuking those who in the
time of persecution had sacrificed to idols, he
says, " And that nothing might be wanting to
fill up the measure of their crime, their infant
children, carried in arms, or led thither by the
hands of their parents, lost, while yet in their
infancy, that which they had received as soon as
life began." ^ They lost it, he meant, so far at
least as pertained to the guilt of the crime of
those by whom they were compelled to incur
the loss : they lost it, that is to say, in the pur-
pose and wish of those who perpetrated on them
such a wrong. For had they actually in their
own persons lost it, they must have remained
under the divine sentence of condemnation
without any plea ; but if holy Cyprian had been
of this opinion, he would not have added in the
immediate context a plea in their defence, say-
ing, " Shall not these say, when the judgment-
day has come : ' We have done nothing ; we
have not of our own accord hastened to partici-
pate in profane rites, forsaking the bread and

^ I Thess. V. 19.

3 Cyprian, de Lapsis. See Ante-Nicene Fathers, Am. ed. vol.
V. p. 439.


4o8


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


the cup of the Lord ; the apostasy of others
caused our destruction ; we found our parents
murderers, for they deprived us of our Mother
the Church and of our Father the Lord, so that, !
through the wrong done by others, we were en-
snared, because, while yet young and unable to
think for ourselves, we were by the deed of
others, and while wholly ignorant of such a
crime, made partners in their sin '? " This plea '
in their defence he would not have subjoined
had he not believed it to be perfectly just, and
one which would be of service to these infants
at the bar of divine judgment. For if it is said
by them with truth, " We have done nothing," !
then " the soul that sinneth, it shall die ; " and ,
in the just dispensation of judgment by God,
those shall not be doomed to perish whose souls
their parents did, so far at least as concerns their j
own guilt in the transaction, bring to ruin. j

4. As to the incident mentioned in the same
letter, that a girl who was left as an infant in .
charge of her nurse, when her parents had es- j
caped by sudden flight, and was made by that '
nurse to take part in the profane rites of idola- '
trous worship, had afterwards in the Church '.
expelled from her mouth, by wonderful motions,
the Eucharist when it was given to her, this ;
seems to me to have been caused by divine in-
terposition, in order that persons of riper years |
might not imagine that in this sin they do no ;
wrong to the children, but rather might under-
stand, by means of a bodily action of obvious
significance on the part of those who were unable
to speak, that a miraculous warning was given to
themselves as to the course which would have
been becoming in persons who, after so great a
crime, rushed heedlessly to those sacraments
from which they ought by all means, in proof of
penitence, to have abstained. ^V'hen Divine
Providence does anything of this kind by means
of infant children, we must not believe that they
are acting under the guidance of knowledge and
reason ; just as we are not called upon to admire
the wisdom of asses, because once God was
pleased to rebuke the madness of a prophet by
the voice of an ass.' If, therefore, a sound ex-
actly like the human voice was uttered by an
irrational animal, and this was to be ascribed to
a divine miracle, not to faculties belonging to the
ass, the Almighty could, in like manner, through
the spirit of an infant (in which reason was not
absent, but only slumbering undeveloped), make
manifest by a motion of its body something to
Avhich those who had sinned against both their
own souls and their children behoved to give
heed. But since a child cannot return to be-
come again a part of the author of his natural
life, so as to be one with him and in him, but is

' Num. xxii. 28.


a wholly distinct individual, having a body and a
soul of his own, " the soul that sinneth, it shall
die."

5. Some, indeed, bring their little ones for
baptism, not in the believing expectation that
they shall be regenerated unto life eternal by
spiritual grace, but because they think that by
this as a remedy the children may recover or
retain bodily health ; but let not this disquiet
your mind, because their regeneration is not pre-
vented by the fact that this blessing has no place
in the intention of those by whom they are pre-
sented for baptism. For by these persons the
ministerial actions which are necessary are per-
formed, and the sacramental words are pro-
nounced, without which the infant cannot be
consecrated to God. But the Holy Spirit who
dwells in the saints, in those, namely, whom the
glowing flame of love has fused together into the
one Dove whose wings are covered with silver,^
accomplishes His work even by the ministry of
bond-servants, of persons who are sometimes not
only ignorant through simplicity, but even culpa-
bly unworthy to be employed by Him. The
presentation of the little ones to receive the
spiritual grace is the act not so much of those
by whose hands they are borne up (although it
is theirs also in part, if they themselves are good
believers) as of the whole society of saints and
believers. For it is proper to regard the infants
as presented by all who take pleasure in their
baptism, and through whose holy and perfectly-
united love they are assisted in receiving the
communion of the Holy Spirit. Therefore this
is done by the whole mother Church, which is
in the saints, because the whole Church is the
parent of all the saints, and the whole Church is
the parent of each one of them. For if the
sacrament of Christian baptism, being always
one and the same, is of value even when admin-
istered by heretics, and though not in that case
sufficing to secure to the baptized person partici-
pation in eternal life, does suffice to seal his
consecration to God ; and if this consecration
makes him who, having the mark of the Lord,
remains outside of the Lord's flock, guilty as a
heretic, but reminds us at the same time that he
is to be corrected by sound doctrine, but not to
be a second time consecrated by repetition of
the ordinance ; — if this be the case even in the
baptism of heretics, how much more credible is
it that within the Catholic Church that which
is only straw should be of service in bearing the
gram to the floor in which it is to be winnowed,
and by means of which it is to be prepared for
being added to the heap of good grain !

6. I would, moreover, wish you not to remain
under the mistake of supposing that the bond

2 Ps. Ixviii. 13.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


409


of guilt which is inherited from Adam cannot be
cancelled in any other way than by the parents
themselves presenting their Httle ones to receive
the grace of Christ ; for you write : " As the
parents have been the authors of the Hfe which
makes them hable to condemnation, the children
should receive justification through the same
channel, through the faith of the same parents ; "
whereas you see that many are not presented by
parents, but also by any strangers whatever, as
sometimes the infant children of slaves are pre-
sented by their masters. Sometimes also, when
their parents are deceased, little orphans are
baptized, being presented by those who had it
in their power to manifest their compassion in
this way. Again, sometimes foundlings which
heartless parents have exposed in order to their
being cared for by any passer-by, are picked up
by holy virgins, and are presented for baptism
by these persons, who neither have nor desire to
have children of their own : and in this you be-
hold precisely what was done in the case men-
tioned in the Gospel of the man wounded by
thieves, and left half dead on the way, regarding
whom the Lord asked who was neighbour to
him, and received for answer : " He that showed
mercy on him." '

7. That which you have placed at the end of
your series of questions you have judged to be
the most difficult, because of the jealous care
with which you are wont to avoid whatever is
false. You state it thus : " If I place before you
an infant, and ask, * Will this child when he grows
up be chaste ? ' or ' Will he not be a thief? ' you
will reply, ' 1 know not.' If I ask, ' Is he in his
present infantile condition thinking what is good
or thinking what is evil?' you will reply, *I
know not.' If, therefore, you do not venture to
take the responsibility of making any positive
statement concerning either his conduct in after
life or his thoughts at the time, what is that
which parents do, when, in presenting their chil-
dren for baptism, they as sureties (or sponsors)
answer for the children, and say that they do
that which at that age they are incapable even
of understanding, or, at least, in regard to which
their thoughts (if they can think) are hidden
from us ? For we ask those by whom the child
is presented, ' Does he believe in God ? ' and
though at that age the child does not so much
as know that there is a God, the sponsors reply,
' He believes ; ' and in like manner answer is
returned by them to each of the other questions.
Now I am surprised that parents can in these
things answer so confidently on the child's be-
half as to say, at the time when they are answer-
ing the questions of the persons administering
baptism, that the infant is doing what is so re-


' Luke X. 37.


markable and so excellent ; and yet if at the
same hour 1 were to add such questions as, ' Will
the child who is now being baptized be chaste
when he grows up? Will he not be a thief?'
probably no one would presume to answer, ' He
will ' or ' He will not,' although there is no hesi-
tation in giving the answer that the child believes
in God, and turns himself to God." Thereafter
you add this sentence in conclusion : " To these
questions I pray you to condescend to give me
a short reply, not silencing me by the traditional
authority of custom, but satisfying me by argu-
ments addressed to my reason."

8. While reading this letter of yours over and
over again, and pondering its contents so far as
my limited time permitted, memory recalled to
me my friend Nebridius, who, while he was a
most diligent and eager student of difficult prob-
lems, especially in the department of Christian
doctrine, had an extreme aversion to the giving
of a short answer to a great question. If any
one insisted upon this, he was exceedingly dis-
pleased ; and if he was not prevented by respect
for the age or rank of the person, he indignantly
rebuked such a questioner by stern looks and
words ; for he considered him unworthy to be
investigating matters such as these, who did not
know how much both might be said and behoved
to be said on a subject of great importance. But
I do not lose patience with you, as he was wont
to do when one asked a brief reply ; for you are,
as I am, a bishop engrossed with many cares, and
therefore have not leisure for reading any more
than I have leisure for writing any prolix com-
munication. He was then a young man, who
was not satisfied with short statements on sub-
jects of this kind, and being then himself at
leisure, addressed his questions concerning the
many topics discussed in our conversations to
one who was also at leisure ; whereas you, hav-
mg regard to the circumstances both of yourself
the questioner, and of me from whom you de-
mand the reply, insist upon my giving you a
short answer to the weighty question which you
propound. Well, I shall do my best to satisfy
you ; the Lord help me to accomplish what you
require.

9. You know that in ordinary parlance we
often say, when Easter is approaching, "To-
morrow or the day after is the Lord's Passion,"
although He suffered so many years ago, and
His passion was endured once for all time. In
like manner, on Easter Sunday, we say, " This
day the Lord rose from the dead," although so
many years have passed since His resurrection.
But no one is so foolish as to accuse us of false-
hood when we use these phrases, for this reason,
that we give such names to these days on the
ground of a likeness between them and the days
on which the events referred to actually tran-


4IO


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


spired, the day being called the day of that
event, although it is not the very day on which
the event took place, but one corresponding to
it by the revolution of the same time of the
year, and the event itself being said to take place
on that day, because, although it really took place
long before, it is on that day sacramentally cele-
brated. Was not Christ once for all offered up
in His own person as a sacrifice? and yet, is He
not likewise offered up in the sacrament as a sac-
rifice, not only in the special solemnities of Eas-
ter, but also daily among our congregations ; so
that the man who, being questioned, answers
that He is offered as a sacrifice in that ordinance,
declares what is strictly true? For if sacraments
had not some points of real resemblance to the
things of which they are the sacraments, they
would not be sacraments at all. In most cases,
moreover, they do in virtue of this likeness bear
the names of the realities which they resemble.
As, therefore, in a certain manner the sacrament
of Christ's body is Christ's body, and the sacra-
ment of Christ's blood is Christ's blood,' in the
same manner the sacrament of faith is faith.
Now believing is nothing else than having faith ;
and accordingly, when, on behalf of an infant as
yet incapable of exercising faith, the answer is
given that he believes, this answer means that
he has faith because of the sacrament of faith,
and in like manner the answer is made that he
turns himself to God because of the sacrament
of conversion, since the answer itself belongs to
the celebration of the sacrament. Thus the
apostle says, in regard to this sacrament of Bap-
tism : " We are buried with Christ by baptism
into death." ^ He does not say, "We have sig-
nified our being buried with Him," but "We
have been buried with Him." He has therefore
given to the sacrament pertaining to so great a
transaction no other name than the word de-
scribing the transaction itself.

10. Therefore an infant, although he is not yet
a believer in the sense of having that faith which
includes the consenting will of those who exer- I
cise it, nevertheless becomes a believer through |
the sacrament of that faith. For as it is answered i
that he believes, so also he is called a believer, i
not because he assents to the truth by an act of
his own judgment, but because he receives the I
sacrament of that truth. W'hen, however, he be- j
gins to have the discretion of manhood, he will i
not repeat the sncrament, but understand its |
meaning, and become conformed to the truth 1
which it contains, with his will also consenting. \
During the time in which he is by reason, of
youth unable to do this, the sacrament will avail

' As this is an important sentence, we give the original words:
Sicut ergo secundum quemdam i/toduin sacraineiitiiin corporis \
Christi corpus Chriiti est, sncrnmentutn sattguittis Chrisli
sanguis Chrisli est, ita sacramentumjidcijidts est.

2 Rom, vi. 4.


for his protection against adverse powers, and
will avail so much on his behalf, that if before
he arrives at the use of reason he depart from
this life, he is delivered by Christian help,
namely, by the love of the Church commending
him through this sacrament unto God, from that
condemnation which by one man entered into
the world. 3 He who does not believe this, and
thinks that it is impossible, is assuredly an un-
believer, although he may have received the sac-
rament of faith ; and far before him in merit is
the infant which, though not yet possessing a
faith helped by the understanding, is not ob-
structing faith by any antagonism of the under-
standing, and therefore receives with profit the
sacrament of faith.

I have answered your questions, as it seems to
me, in a manner which, if I were dealing with
persons of weaker capacity and disposed to
gainsaying, would be inadecjuate, but which is
perhaps more than sufficient to satisfy peaceable
and sensible persons. Moreover, I have not
urged in my defence the mere fact that the cus-
tom is thoroughly established, but have to the
best of my ability advanced reasons in support
of it as fraught with very abundant blessing.

LETTER XCIX.

(a.D. 408 OR BEGINNING OF 4O9.)

TO THE VERY DEVOUT ITALICA, AN HANDMAID OF
GOD, PRAISED JUSTLY AND PIOUSLY BY THE
MEMBERS OF CHRIST, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREET-
ING IN THE LORD.

I. Up to the time of my writing this reply, {
had received three letters from your Grace, of
which the first asked urgently a letter from me,
the second intimated that what I wrote in answer
had reached you, and the third, which conveyed
the assurance of your most benevolent solicitude
for our interest in the matter of the house be-
longing to that most illustrious and distinguished
young man Juhan, which is in immediate contact
with the walls of our Church. To this last letter,
just now received, I lose no time in promptly
replying, because your Excellency's agent has i
written to me that he can send my letter without i
delay to Rome. By his letter we have been
greatly distressed, because he has taken pains
to acquaint us '» with the things which are taking
place in the city (Rome) or around its walls, so
as to give us reliable information concerning that |
which we were reluctant to believe on the au- 1
thority of vague rumours. Li the letters which ;


3 Rom. V. 12.

< Tillemont (vol. xiii. note 44) conjectures that the word " non
before " iiohis itisiiiun re ciirai'it " should not be in the text, — a con-
jecture which commends itself to our judgment, though it is unsup- 1
ported by mss.

The calamities referred to are the events connected with the siege il
of Rome by Alaric in the end of 408.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


411


were sent to us previously by our brethren, tid-
ings were given to us of events, vexatious and
grievous, it is true, but much less calamitous
than those of which we now hear. I am sur-
prised beyond expression that my brethren the
holy l)ishops did not write to me when so favour-
able an opportunity of sending a letter by your
messengers occurred, and that your own letter
conveyed to us no information concerning such
painful tribulation as has befallen you, — tribu-
lation which, by reason of the tender sym])athies
of Christian charity, is ours as well as yours. I
suppose, however, that you deemed it better not
to mention these sorrows, because you consid-
ered that this could do no good, or because you
did not wish to make us sad by your letter.
But in my opinion, it does some good to acquaint
us even with such events as these : in the first
place, because it is not right to be ready to
'• rejoice with them that rejoice," but refuse to
" weep with them that weep ; " and in the second
place, because " tribulation worketh patience,
and patience experience, and experience hope ;
and hope maketh not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost which is given unto us." '

2. Far be it, therefore, from us to refuse to
hear even of the bitter and sorrowful things
which befall those who are very dear to us !
For in some way which 1 cannot explain, the
pain suffered by one member is mitigated when
all the other members suffer with it.^ And this
mitigation is effected not by actual participation
in the calamity, but by the solacing power of
love ; for although only some suffer the actual
burden of the affliction, and the others share
their suffering through knowing what these have
to bear, nevertheless the tribulation is borne
in common by them all, seeing that they have in
common the same experience, hope, and love,
and the same Divine Spirit. Moreover, the Lord
provides consolation for us all, inasmuch as He
hath both forewarned us of these temporal afflic-
tions, and promised to us after them eternal
blessings ; and the soldier who desires to receive
a crown when the conflict is over, ought not to
lose courage while the conflict lasts, since He
who is preparing rewards ineffable for those who
overcome, does Himself minister strength to
them while they are on the field to battle.

3. Let not what I have now written take away
your confidence in writing to me, especially since
the reason which may be pled for your endeav-
ouring to lessen our fears is one which cannot
be condemned. We salute in return your little
children, and we desire that they may be spared
to you, and may grow up in Christ, since they
discern even in their present tender age how

' Rom. xii. 15 and v. 3-5.
^ I Cor. xii. 26.


dangerous and baneful is the love of this world.
God grant that the plants which are small and
still flexible may be bent in the right direction
in a time in which the great and hardy are being
shaken. As to the house of which you speak,
what can I say beyond expressing my gratitude
for your very kind solicitude? For the house
which we can give they do not wish ; and the
house which they wish we cannot give, for it was
not left to the church by my predecessor, as they
have been falsely informed, but is one of the
ancient properties of the church, and it is at-
tached to the one ancient church in the same
way as the house about which this question has
been raised is attached to the other.^


LETTER C.

(a.d. 409.) ^

to donatus, his noble and deservedly hon-
our.able lord, and eminently praiseworthy
son, augustin sends greeting in the lord.

I. I would indeed that the African Church
were not placed in such trying circumstances as
to need the aid of any earthly power. But since,
as the apostle says, " there is no power but of
God," -t it is unquestionable that, when by you
the sincere sons of your Catholic Mother help
is given to her, our help is in the name of the
Lord, " who made heaven and earth." 5 For oh,
noble and deservedly honourable lord, and emi-
nently praiseworthy son, who does not perceive
that in the midst of so great calamities no small
consolation has been bestowed upon us by God,
in that you, such a man, and so devoted to the
name of Christ, have been raised to the dignity
of proconsul, so that power allied with your good-
will may restrain the enemies of the Church from
their wicked and sacrilegious attempts ? In fact,
there is only one thing of which we are much
afraid in your administration of justice, viz., lest
perchance, seeing that every injury done by im-
pious and ungrateful men against the Christian
society is a more serious and heinous crime than
if it had been done against others, you should
on this ground consider that it ought to be pun-
ished with a severity corresponding to the enor-
mity of the crime, and not with the moderation
which is suitable to Christian forbearance. We
beseech you, in the name of Jesus Christ, not
to act in this manner. For we do not seek to
revenge ourselves in this world ; nor ought the
things which we suffer to reduce us to such dis-
tress of mind as to leave no room in our memory
for the precepts in regard to this which we have

3 We have no further information regarding this affair. The
prospect of an amicable settlement seems remote.
■» Rom. xiii. i.
i Ps. cxxiv. 8.


412


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


received from Him for whose truth and in whose
name we suffer ; we " love our enemies," and
we " pray fur them." ' It is not their death, but
their deliverance from error, that we seek to
accomplish by tlie help of the terror of judges
and of laws, wiiereby they may be preser\ed
from falling under the penalty of eternal judg-
ment ; we do not wish either to see the exercise
of discipline towards them neglected, or, on the
other hand, to see them subjected to the severer
punishments which they deserve. Do you, there-
fore, check their sins in such a way, that the
sinners may be spared to repent of their sins.

2. We beg you, therefore, when you are pro-
nouncing judgment in cases affecting the Church,
how wicked soever the injuries may be which you
shall ascertain to have been attempted or inflicted
on the Church, to forget that you have the power
of capital punishment, and not to forget our re-
quest. Nor let it appear to you an unimportant
matter and beneath your notice, my most beloved
and honoured son, that we ask you to spare the
lives of the men on whose behalf we ask God to
grant them repentance. For even granting that
we ought never to deviate from a fixed purpose
of overcoming evil with good, let your own wis-
dom take this also into consideration, that no
person beyond those who belong to the Church
is at pains to bring before you cases pertaining
to her interests. If, therefore, your opinion be,
that death must be the punishment of men con-
victed of these crimes, you will deter us from
endeavouring to bring anything of this kind be-
fore your tribunal ; and this being discovered,
they will proceed with more unrestrained bold-
ness to accomplish speedily our destruction,
when upon us is imposed and enjoined the ne-
cessity of choosing rather to sufler death at their
hands, than to bring them to death by accusmg
them at your bar. Disdain not, I beseech you,
to accept this suggestion, petition, and entreaty
from me. For I do not think that you are un-
mindful that I might have great boldness in ad-
dressing you, even were I not a bishop, and even
though your rank were much above what you
now hold. Meanwhile, let the Donatist heretics
learn at once through the edict of your Excel-
lency that the laws passed against their error,
which they suppose and boastfully declare to be
repealed, are still in force, although even when
they know this they may not be able to refrain
in the least degree from injuring us. You will,
however, most effectively help us to secure the
fruit of our labours and dangers, if you take care
that the imperial laws for the restraining of their
sect, which is full of conceit and of impious pride,
be so used that they may not appear either to
themselves or to others to be s'lflering hardship

' Malt. V. 44.


in any form for the sake of truth and righteous-
ness ; but suffer them, when this is requested at
your hands, to be convinced and instructed by
incontrovertible proofs of things which are most
certain, in public proceedings in the presence
of your Excellency or of inferior judges, in
order that those who are arrested by your com-
mand may themselves incline their stubborn will
to the better part, and may read these things
prolitably to others of their party. For the
pains bestowed are burdensome rather than
really useful, when men are only compelled, not
persuaded by instruction, to forsake a great evil
and lay hold upon a great benefit.

LETTER CI.

(a.d. 409.)

to memor,^ my lord most blessed, and wtth
all veneration most beloved, mv brother
and colleague sln'cerely longed for, augus-
tin sends greeting in the lord,

1. I ought not to wTite any letter to your holy
Charity, without sending at the same time those
books which by the irresistible plea of holy love
you have demanded from me, that at least by
this act of obedience I might reply to those let-
ters by which you have put on me a high honour
indeed, but also a heavy load. Albeit, while I
bend because of the load, I am raised up be-
cause of your love. For it is not by an ordinary
man that I am loved and raised up and made to
stand erect, but by a man who is a priest of the
Lord, and whom I know to be so accepted before
Him, that when you raise to the Lord your good
heart, having me in your heart, you raise me
with yourself to Him. I ought, therefore, to
have sent at this time those books which I had
promised to revise. The reason why I have not
sent them is that I have not revised them, and
this not because I was unwilling, but because I
was unable, having been occupied with many
very urgent cares. But it would have shown in-
excusable ingratitude and hardness of heart to
have permitted the bearer, my holy colleague
and brother Possidius, in whom you will find one
who is very much the same as myself, either to
miss becoming acquainted with you, who love
me so much, or to come to know you without
any letter from me. For he is one who has been
by my labours nourished, not in those studies
which men who are the slaves of every kind of
passion call liberal, but with the Lord's bread,
in so far as this could be supplied to him from
my scanty store.

2. For to men who, though they ai*e unjust
and impious, imagine that they are well educated

2 We regard Metnori, not Meraorio, as the true reading.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN,


4^3


in the liberal arts, what else ought we to say than
what we read in those writings which truly merit
the name of liberal, — " if the Son shall make
vou free, ye shall be free indeed." ' For it is
through Him that men come to know, even in
those studies which are termed liberal by those
who have not been called to this true liberty,
anything in them which deserves the name.
For they have nothing which is consonant with
liberty, except that which in them is consonant
with truth ; for which reason the Son Himself
hath said: "The truth shall make you free." ^
The freedom which is our privilege has therefore
nothing in common with the innumerable and
impious fables with which the verses of silly
poets are full, nor with the fulsome and highly-
polished falsehoods of their orators, nor, in fine,
with the rambling subtleties of philosophers
themselves, who either did not know an\thing
of God, or when they knew God, did not glorify
Him as God, neither were thankful, but became
vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened ; so that, professing them-
selves to be wise, they became fools, and
changed the glory of the incorruptible Gotl into
an image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds and four-footed beasts, and to creeping
things, or who, though not wholly or at all de-
voted to the worship of images, nevertheless
worshipped and served the creature more than
the Creator.^ Far be it, therefore, from us to
admit that the epithet liberal is justly bestowed
on the lying vanities and hallucinations, or empty
trifles and conceited errors of those men — un-
happy men, who knew not the grace of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord, by which alone we are
" deli\ ered from the body of this death," ■* and
who did not even perceive the measure of truth
which was in the things which they knew. Their
historical works, the writers of which profess to
be chiefly concerned to be accurate in narrating
events, may perhaps, I grant, contain some
things worthy of being known by " free " men,
since the narration is true, whether the subject
described in it be the good or the evil in human
experience. At the same time, I can by no
means see how men who were not aided in their
knowledge by the Holy Spirit, and who were


obliged to gather


floating


rumours under the


limitations of human infirmity, could avoid being
misled in regard to very many things ; neverthe-
less, if they have no intention of deceiving, and
do not mislead other men otherwise than so far
as they have themselves, through human infirm-
ity, fallen into a mistake, there is in such writings
an approach to liberty.


' John viii. 36.
^ John viii. 38.
^ Rom. i. 21-25.
* Rom. vii. 24, 25.


3. Forasmuch, however, as the powers belong-
ing to numbers 5 in all kinds of movements are
most easily studied as they are presented in
sounds, and this study furnishes a way of rising
to the higher secrets of truth, by paths gradually
ascending, so to speak, in which Wisdom pleas-
antly reveals herself, and in every step of provi-
dence meets tho.se who love her,^ I desired, when
I began to have leisure for study, and my mind
was not engaged by greater and more important
cares, to exercise myself by writing those books
which you have requested me to send. I then
wrote six books on rhythm alone, and proposed,
I may add, to write other six on music,^ as I at
that time expected to have leisure. But from
the time that the burden of ecclesiastical cares
was laid upon me, all these recreations have
passed from my hand so completely, that now,
when I cannot but respect your wish and com-
mand, — for it is more than a request, — I have
difficulty in even finding what I had written.
If, however, I had it in my power to send you that
treatise, it would occasion regret, not to me
that I had obeyed your command, but to }0u
that you had so urgently insisted upon its being
sent. For five books of it are all but unintelligi-
ble, unless one be at hand who can in reading
not only distinguish the part belonging to each
of those between whom the discussion is main-
tained, but also mark by enunciation the time
vv'hich the syllables should occupy, so that their
distinctive measures may be expressed and strike
the ear, especially because in some places there
occur pauses of measured length, which of course
must escape notice, unless the reader inform the
hearer of them by intervals of silence where they
occur.

The sixth book, however, which I have found
already revised, and in which the product of the
other five is contained, I have not delayed to
send to your Charity ; it may, perhaps, be not
wholly unsuited to one of your venerable age.^
As to the other five books, they seem to me
scarcely worthy of being known and read by
Julian,'' our son, and now our colleague, for, as
a deacon, he is engaged in the same warfare with
ourselves. Of him 1 dare not say, for it would
not be true, that I love him more than I love
you ; yet this I may say, that I long for him
more than for you. It may seem strange, that
when I love both equally, I long more ardently
for the one than the other ; but the cause of the
difference is, that I have greater hope of seeing
him ; for I think that if ordered or sent by you
he come to us, he will both be doing what is


5 Quid mivteri valeant.
^ Wisd. vi. 17.
' De jnelp.
* Gravitntent iiintn.

9 Julian, son of Memor, afterwards a leading supporter of the
Pelagian heresy.


414


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


suitable to one of his years, especially as he is
not yet hindered by weightier responsibilities,
and he will more speedily bring yourself to me.

I have not stated in this treatise the kinds of
metre in which the lines of David's Psalms are
composed, because I do not know them. For
it was not possible for any one, in translating
these from the Hebrew (of which language I
know nothing), to preserve the metre at the
same time, lest by the exigencies of the meas-
ure he should be compelled to depart from accu-
rate translation further than was consistent with
the meaning of the sentences. Nevertheless, I
believe, on the testimony of those who are ac-
quainted with that language, that they are com-
posed in certain varieties of metre ; for that holy
man loved sacred music, and has more than any
other kindled in me a passion for its study.

May the shadow of the wings of the Most
High be for ever the dwelling-place ' of you all,
who with oneness of heart occupy one home,^
father and mother, bound in the same brother-
hood with your sons, being all the children of
the one Father. Remember us.


LETTER CIL

(a.d. 409.)

to deogratias, my brother in all sincerity,
and my fellow-presbyter, augustin sends
greeting in the lord.

I. In choosing to refer to me questions which
were submitted to yourself for solution, you have
not done so, I suppose, from indolence, but be-
cause, loving me more than I deserve, you pre-
fer to hear through me even those things which
you already know quite well. I would rather,
however, that the answers were given by your-
self, because the friend who proposed the ques-
tions seems to be shy of following advice from
me, if I may judge from the fact that he has
written no reply to a letter of mine, for what
reason he knows best. I suspect this, however,
and there is neither ill-will nor absurdity in the
suspicion ; for you also know very well how
much I love him, and how great is my grief that
he is not yet a Christian ; and it is not unrea-
sonable to think that one whom I see unwill-
ing to answer my letters is not willing to have
anything written by me to him. I therefore im-
plore you to comply with a request of mine,
that I have been obedient to you, and.


seemg

notwithstanding most engrossing duties, have
feared to disappoint the wish of one so dear to
me by declining to comply with your request.
What I ask is this, that you do not refuse your-
self to give an answer to all his questions, see-

• Ps. xci. I.

* Ps. Lxviii. 6, Septuagint.


ing that, as you have told me, he begged this
from you ; and it is a task to which, even before
receiving this letter, you were competent ; for
when you have read this letter, you will see that
scarcely anything has been said by me which
you did not already know, or which you could
not have come to know though I had been si-
lent. This work of mine, therefore, I beg you
to keep for the use of yourself and of all other
persons whose desire for instruction you deem
it suited to satisfy. But as for the treatise of
your own composition which I demand from you,
give it to him to whom this treatise is most spe-
cially adapted, and not to him only, but also all
others who find exceedingly acceptable such
statements concerning these things as you are
able to make, among whom I number myself.
May you live always in Christ, and remember
me.

2. Question i. Concerning the resurrection.
This question perplexes some, and they ask.
Which of two kinds of resurrection corresponds
to that which is promised to us? is it that of
Christ, or that of Lazarus ? They say, " If the
former, how can this correspond with the resur-
rection of those who have been born by ordinary
generations, seeing that He was not thus born?^
If, on the other hand, the resurrection of Lazarus
is said to correspond to ours, here also there seems
to be a discrepancy, since the resurrection of
Lazarus was accomplished in the case of a body
not yet dissolved, but the same body in which he
was known by the name ot Lazarus ; whereas
ours is to be rescued after many centuries from
the mass in which it has ceased to be distinguish-
able from other things. Again, if our state after
the resurrection is one of blessedness, in which
the body shall be exempt from every kind of
wound, and from the pain of hunger, what is
meant by the statement that Christ took food,
and showed his wounds after His resurrection?
For if He did it to convince the doubting, when
the wounds were not real. He practised on them
a deception ; whereas, if He showed them what
was real, it follows that wounds received by the
body shall remain in the state which is to ensue
after resurrection."

3. To this I answer, that the resurrection of
Christ and not of Lazarus corresponds to that
which is promised, because Lazarus was so raised
that he died a second time, whereas of Christ it
is written : " Christ, being raised from the dead,
dieth no more ; death hath no more dominion
over Him."'' The same is promised to those
who shall rise at the end of the world, and shall
reign for ever with Christ. As to the difference
in the manner of Christ's generation and that of
other men, this has no bearing upon the nature

3 Qitz millA seiniiiis condiiioite natus est.
* Rom. vi. 9.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


415


of His resurrection, just as it had none upon the
nature of His death, so as to make it different
from ours. His death was not the less real be-
cause of His not having been begotten by an
earthly father ; just as the difference between the
mode of the origination of the body of the first
man, who was formed immediately from the dust
of the earth, and of our bodies, which we derive
from our parents, made no such difl'erence as
that his death should be of another kind than
ours. As, therefore, difference in the mode of
birth does not make any difference in the nature
of death, neither does it make any difference in
the nature of resurrection.

4. But lest the men who doubt this should,
with similar scepticism, refuse to accept as true
what is written concerning the first man's cre-
ation, let them inquire or observe, if they can at
least believe this, how numerous are the species
of animals which are born from the earth with-
out deriving their life from parents, but which
by ordinary procreation reproduce offspring like
themselves, and in which, notwithstanding the
different mode of origination, the nature of the
parents born from the earth and of the offspring
born from them is the same ; for they live alike
and they die alike, although born in different
ways. There is therefore no absurdity in the
statement tliat bodies dissimilar in their origina-
tion are alike in their resurrection. But men of
this kind, not being competent to discern in what
respect any diversity between things affects or
does not affect them, so soon as they discover
any unlikeness between things in their original
formation, contend that in all that follows the
same unlikeness must still exist. Such men may
as reasonably suppose that oil made from fat
should not float on the surface in water as olive
oil does, because the origin of the two oils
different, the one being from the fruit of a
the other from the flesh of an animal.

5. Again, as to the alleged difference in regard
to the resurrection of Christ's body and of ours,
that His was raised on the third day not dis-
solved by decay and corruption, whereas ours
shall be fashioned again after a long time, and
out of the mass into which undistinguished they
shall have been resolved, — both of these things
are impossible for man to do, but to divine
power both are most easy. For as the glance
of the eye does not come more quickly to objects
which are at hand, and more slowly to objects
more remote, but darts to either distance with
equal swiftness, so, when the resurrection of the
dead is accomplished "in the twinkling of an
eye," > it is as easy for the omnipotence of God
and for the ineffable expression of His will ^ to
raise again bodies which have by long lapse of

' I Cor. XV. 52.
* Incffabili nutui.


IS so
tree,


time been dissolved, as to raise those which have
recently fallen under the stroke of death. These
things are to some men incredible because they
transcend their experience, although all nature
is full of wonders so numerous, that they do not
seem to us to be wonderful, and are therefore
accounted unworthy of attentive study or inves-
tigation, not because our faculties can easily com-
prehend them, but because we are so accustomed
to see them. For myself, and for all who along
with me labour to understand the invisible things
of God by means of the things which are made,^
I may say that we are filled not less, perhaps
even more, with wonder by the fact, that in one
grain of seed, so insignificant, there lies bound
up as it were all that we praise in the stately
tree, than by the fact that the bosom of this
earth, so vast, shall restore entire and perfect
to the future resurrection all those elements of
human bodies which it is now receiving when
they are dissolved.

6. Again, what contradiction is there between
the fact that Christ partook of food after His res-
urrection, and the doctrine that in the promised
resurrection-state there shall be no need of food,
when we read that angels also have partaken of
food of the same kind and in the same way, not
in empty and illusive simulation, but in unques-
tionable reality ; not, however, under the pressure
of necessity, but in the free exercise of their
power ? For water is absorbed in one way by
the thirsting earth, in another way by the glowing
sunbeams ; in the former we see the effect of
poverty, in the latter of power. Now the body of
that future resurrection-state shall be imperfect
in its felicity if it be incapable of taking food ;
imperfect, also, if, on the other hand, it be de-
pendent on food. I might here enter on a fuller
discussion concerning the changes possible in the
qualities of bodies, and the dominion which be-
longs to higher bodies over those which are of
inferior nature ; but I have resolved to make
my reply short, and I write this for minds so
endowed that the simple suggestion of the truth
is enough for them.

7. Let him who proposed these questions
know by all means that Christ did, after His res-
urrection, show the scars of His wounds, not the
wounds themselves, to disciples who doubted ;
for whose sake, also, it pleased Him to take food
and drink more than once, lest they should sup-
pose that His body was not real, but that He
was a spirit, appearing to them as a phantom,
and not a substantial form. These scars would
indeed have been mere illusive appearances if
no wounds had gone before ; yet even the scars
would not have remained if He had willed it
otherwise. But it pleased Him to retain them

3 Rom. i. 20.


4i6


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


with a definite purpose, namely, that to those
wliom He was building up in faith unfeigned He
might show that one l)ody had not been substi-
tuted for another, but that the body which they
had seen nailed to the cross had risen again.
What reason is there, then, for saying, " If He
did this to convince the doubting. He practised
a deception " ? Suppose that a bra\-e man, who
had received many wounds in confronting the
enemy when fighting for his country, were to say
to a physician of extraordinary skill, who was
able so to heal these wounds as to leave not a
scar visible, that he would prefer to be healed in
such a way that the traces of the wounds should
remain on his body as tokens of the honours he
had won, would you, in such a case, say that the
physician practised deception, because, though
he might by his art make the scars wholly dis-
appear, he did by the same art, for a definite
reason, rather cause them to continue as they
were ? The only ground upon which the scars
could be proved to be a deception would be, as I
have already said, if no wounds had been healed
in the places where they were seen.

8. Question ii. Concerning the epoch of the
Christian religion, they have advanced, more-
over, some other things, which they might call a
selection of the more weighty arguments of Por-
phyry against the Christians : '' If Christ," they
say, " declares Himself to be the Way of salva-
tion, the Grace and the Truth, and affirms that
in Him alone, and only to souls believing in
Him, is the way of return to God,' what has be-
come of men who lived in the many centuries
before Christ came ? To pass over the time,"
he adds, " which preceded the founding of the
kingdom of Lalium, let us take the beginning
of that power as if it were the beginning of the
human race. In Latium itself gods were wor-
shipped before Alba was built ; in Alba, also,
religious rites and forms of worship in the tem-
ples were maintained. Rome itself w^as for a
period of not less duration, even for a long suc-
cession of centuries, unacquainted with Christian
doctrine. What, then, has become of such an
innumerable multitude of souls, who were in no
wise blameworthy, seeing that He in whom alone
saving faith can be exercised had not yet favoured
men with His advent? The whole world, more-
over, was not less zealous than Rome itself in
the worship practised in the temples of the gods.
Why, then," he asks, " did He who is called the
Saviour withhold Himself for so many centuries
of the world? And let it not be said," he adds,
" that provision had been made for the human
race by the old Jewish law. It was only after
a long time that the Jewish law appeared and
flourished within the narrow limits of Syria, and

' John xiv. 6.


after that, it gradually crept onwards to the
coasts of Italy ; but this was not earlier than
the end of the reign of Caius, or, at the earliest,
while he was on the throne. What, then, be-
came of the souls of men in Rome and Latium
who lived before the time of the Caesars, and
were destitute of the grace of Christ, because
He had not then come?"

9. To these statements we answer by requir-
ing those who make them to tell us, in the first
place, whether the sacred rites, which we know
to have been introduced into the worship of
their gods at times which can be ascertained,
were or were not profitable to men. If they say
that these were of no service for the salvation
of men, they unite with us in putting them
down, and confess that they were useless. We
indeed prove that they were baneful ; but it is
an important concession that by them it is at
least admitted that they were useless. If, on
the other hand, they defend these rites, and
maintain that they were wise and profitable in-
stitutions, what, I ask, has become of those who
died before these were instituted? for they were
defrauded of the saving and profitable efficacy
which these possessed. If, however, it be said
that they could be cleansed from guilt equally
well in another way, why did not the same way
continue in force for their posterity? What use
was there for instituting novelties in worship.

10. If, in answer to this, they say that the
gods themselves have indeed always existed, and
were in all places alike powerful to give liberty
to their worshippers, but were pleased to regu-
late the circumstances of time, place, and man-
ner in which they were to be served, according
to the variety found among things temporal and
terrestrial, in such a way as they knew to be

I most suitable to certain ages and countries, why
do they urge against the Christian religion this
question, which, if it be asked in regard to their
own gods, they either cannot themselves answer,
or, if they can, must do so in such a way as to
answer for our religion not less than their own?
For what could they say but that the difference
between sacraments which are adapted to differ-
ent times and places is of no importance, if only
that which is worshipped in them all be holy,
just as the difference between sounds of words
belonging to different languages and adapted to
different hearers is of no importance, if only
that which is spoken be true ; although in this
respect there is a difference, that men can, by
agreement among themselves, arrange as to the
sounds of language by which they may com-

I municate their thoughts to one another, but that

I those who have discerned what is right have
been guided only by the will of God in regard

I to the sacred rites which were agreeable to the
This divine will has never been


Divine Being.


r


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


417


wanting to the justice and piety of mortals for
their salvation ; and whatever varieties of wor-
ship there may have been in different nations
bound together by one and the same religion,
the most important thing to observe was this :
how far, on the one hand, human infirmity was
thereby encouraged to effort, or borne with,
while, on the other hand, the divine authority
was not assailed.

11. Wherefore, since we affirm that Christ is
the Word of God, by whom all things were made,
and is the Son, because He is the Word, not a
word uttered and belonging to the past but abides
unchangeably with the unchangeable Father,
Himself unchangeable, under whose rule the
whole universe, spiritual and material, is ordered
in the way best adapted to different times and
places, and that He has perfect wisdom and
knowledge as to what should be done, and when
and where everything should be done in the con-
trolling and ordering of the universe, — most
certainly, both before He gave being to the He-
brew nation, by which He was pleased, through
sacraments suited to the time, to prefigure the
manifestation of Himself in His advent, and dur-
ing the time of the Jewish commonwealth, and,
after that, when He manifested Himself in the
likeness of mortals to mortal men in the body
which He received from the Virgin, and thence-
forward even to our day, in which He is fulfilling
all which He predicted of old by the prophets,
and from this present time on to the end of the
world, when He shall separate the holy from
the wicked, and give to every man his due recom-
pense, — in all these successive ages He is the
same Son of God, co- eternal with the Father,
and the unchangeable Wisdom by whom univer-
sal nature was called into existence, and by par-
ticipation in whom every rational soul is made
blessed.

12. Therefore, from the beginning of the hu-
man race, whosoever believed in Him, and in
any way knew Him, and lived in a pious and just
manner according to His precepts, was undoubt-
edly saved by Him, in whatever time and place
he may have lived. For as we believe in Him
both as dwelling with the Father and as having
come in the flesh, so the men of the former ages
believed in Him both as dwelling with the Father
and as destined to come in the flesh. And the
nature of faith is not changed, nor is the salva-
tion made different, in our age, by the fact that,
n consequence of the difference between the two
epochs, that which was then foietold as future is
low proclaimed as past. Moreover, we are not
mder necessity to suppose different things and
lifferent kinds of salvation to be signified, when
|he self-same thing is by different sacred words
ind rites of worship announced in the one case
IS fulfilled, in the other as future. As to the


manner and time, however, in which anything
that pertains to the one salvation common to all
believers and pious persons is brought to pass,
let us ascribe wisdom to God, and for our part
exercise submission to His will. Wherefore the
true religion, although formerly set forth and
practised under other names and with other
symbolical rites than it now has, and formerly
more obscurely revealed and known to fewer
persons than now in the time of clearer light
and wider diffusion, is one and the same in both
periods.

13. Moreover, we do not raise any objection
to their religion on the ground of the difference
between the institutions appointed by Numa
Pompilius for the worship of the gods by the
Romans, and those which were up till that time
practised in Rome or in other parts of Italy ;
nor on the fact that in the age of Pythagoras
that system of philosophy became generally
adopted which up to that time had no exist-
ence, or lay concealed, perhaps, among a very
small number whose views were the same, but
whose religious practice and worship was differ-
ent : the question upon which we join issue with
them is, whether these gods were true gods, or
worthy of worship, and whether that philosophy
was fitted to promote the salvation of the souls
of men. This is what we insist upon discussing ;
and in discussing it we pluck up their sophistries
by the root. Let them, therefore, desist from
bringing against us objections which are of equal
force against every sect, and against religion of
every name. For since, as they admit, the ages
of the world do not roll on under the dominion
of chance, but are controlled by divine Provi-
dence, what may be fitting and expedient in
each successive age transcends the range of hu-
man understanding, and is determined by the
same wisdom by which Providence cares for the
universe.

14. For if they assert that the reason why the
doctrine of Pythagoras has not prevailed always
and universally is, that Pythagoras was but a man,
and had not power to secure this, can they also
affirm that in the age and in the countries in
which his philosophy flourished, all who had the
opportunity of hearing him were found willing
to believe and follow him ? And therefore it is
the more certain that, if Pythagoras had pos-
sessed the power of publishing his doctrines
where he pleased and when he pleased, and if
he had also possessed along with that power a
perfect foreknowledge of events, he would have
presented himself only at those places and times
in which he foreknew that men would believe his
teaching. Wherefore, since they do not object
to Christ on the ground of His doctrine not
being universally embraced, — for they feel that
this would be a futile objection if alleged either


4i8


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


against the teaching of philosophers or against
the majesty of their own gotls, — what answer, I
ask, could they make, if, leaving out of view that
depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God
within which it may be that some other divine
purpose lies much more deeply hidden, and
without prejudging the other reasons possibly
existing, which are fit subjects for patient study
by the wise, we confine ourselves, for the sake of
brevity in this discussion, to the statement of this
one position, that it pleased Christ to appoint
the time in which He would appear and the per-
sons among whom His doctrine was to be pro-
claimed, according to His knowledge of the
times and places in which men would believe on
Him?' For He foreknew, regarding those ages
and places in which His gospel has not been
preached, that in them the gospel, if preached,
would meet with such treatment from all, with-
out exception, as it met with, not indeed from
all, but from many, at the time of His personal
presence on earth, who would not believe in
Him, even though men were raised from the
dead by Him ; and such as we see it meet with
in our day from many who, although the predic-
tions of the prophets concerning Him are so
manifestly fulfilled, still refuse to believe, and,
misguided by the perverse subtlety of the human
heart, rather resist than yield to divine authority,
even when this is so clear and manifest, so glo-
rious and so gloriously published abroad. So
long as the mind of man is limited in capacity
and in strength, it is his duty to yield to divine
truth. Why, then, should we wonder if Christ
knew that the world was so full of unbelievers in
the former ages, that He righteously refused to
manifest Himself or to be preached to those of
whom He foreknew that they would not believe
either His words or His miracles? For it is not
incredible that all may have been then such as,
to our amazement, so many have been from the
time of His advent to the present time, and even
now are.

15. And yet, from the beginning of the hu-
man race, He never ceased to speak by His


' Augustin, having been informed by Hilary {E/>. 219) that
this passage was quoted by Semipelagians in defence of their error,
made the following remark on it in his work De Pnedestitiatione
Sanctorum, c. ix.: " Do you not observe that my design in this sen-
tence was, without excluding the secret counsel of God and any other
causes, to say, in reference to Christ's foreknowledge, what seemed
sufficient to reduce to silence the unbelief of the Pagans by whom the
objection had been raised? For what is more certain than this, that
Christ foreknew who would believe in Him, and in what time and
place they would live? But I did not deem it necessary, in that con-
nection, to investigate and discuss the question as to this faith in
Christ preached to them, whether they would have it of themselves
or would receive it from God — in other words, whether God merely
foreknew, or also predestinated them. The sentence, therefore, ' that
it pleased Christ to appoint the time in which He would appear, and
the persons among whom His doctrine was to be proclaimed, accord-
ing to His knowledge of the times and places in which men would
believe in Him,' might have been put thus: that it pleased Christ to
appoint the time in which He would appear, and the persons among
whom His doctrine was to be proclaimed, according to H is knowledge
of the times and places in which those would be found who had been
chosen in Him before the foundation of the world."


prophets, at one time more obscurely, at another
time more plainly, as seemed to divine wisdom
best adapted to the time ; nor were there ever
wanting men who believed in Him, from Adam
to Moses, and among the people of Israel itself,
which was by a special mysterious appointment
a prophetic nation, and among other nations
before He came in the flesh. For seeing that
in the sacred Hebrew books some are mentioned,
even from Abraham's time, not belonging to his
natural posterity nor to the people of Israel, and
not proselytes added to that people, who were
nevertheless partakers of this holy mystery,^ why
may we not believe that in other nations also,
here and there, some more were found, although
we do not read their names in these authoritative
records? Thus the salvation provided by this
religion, by which alone, as alone true, true sal-
vation is truly promised, was never wanting to
any one who was worthy of it, and he to whom
it was wanting was not worthy of it.^ And from
the beginning of the human family, even to the
end of time, it is preached, to some for their
advantage, to some for their condemnation. Ac-
cordingly, those to whom it has not been preached
at all are those who were foreknown as persons
who would not believe ; those to whom, notwith-
standing the certainty that they would not be-
lieve, the salvation has been proclaimed are set
forth as an example of the class of unbelievers ;
and those to whom, as persons who would be-
lieve, the truth is proclaimed are being prepared
for the kingdom of heaven and for the society of
the holy angels.

16. Question hi. Let us now look to the
question which comes next in order. " They
find fault," he says, " with the sacred ceremo-
nies, the sacrificial victims, the burning of incense,
and all the other parts of worship in our temples ;
and yet the same kind of worship had its origin
in antiquity with themselves, or fi-om the God
whom they worship, for He is represented by
them as having been in need of the first-fruits."

17. This question is obviously founded upon
the passage in our Scriptures in which it is writ-
ten that Cain brought to God a gift from the
fruits of the earth, but Abel brought a gift from
the firstlings of the flock.^ Our reply, therefore,
is, that from this passage the more suitable in
ference to be drawn is, how ancient is the ordi
nance of sacrifice which the infallible and sacred|

2 Sacratnenti.

3 On these words Augustin remarks in his Retractations, Bookl
n. ch. xxxi.: "This I said, not meaning that any one could bei
worthy through his own merit, but in the same sense as the apostlejij
said, ' Not of works, but of Him that calleth; it was said unto herJJ
" The elder shall serve the younger " ' (Rom. ix. 11,12), — a callmgjl
which he affirms to pertain to the purpose of God. For which reasoml
he says, ' Not according to our works, but according to His own pur-jj
pose and grace' (2 Tim. i. 0) ; and again, ' We know that all things'
work together for good to them that love God, to them that are called]
according to His purpose' (Rom. viii. 28;. Of which calling he says.jl
' ThatourGod would count you worthy of this callmg ' (2Thess. i. ii).',;!

•* Gen. iv. 3, 4.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


419


writings declare to be due to no other than to the
one true God ; not because God needs our offer-
ings, seeing that, in the same Scriptures, it is ,
most clearly written, " I said unto the Lord, |
Thou art my Lord, for Thou hast no need of my
good," ' but because, even in the acceptance or
rejection or appropriation of these offerings, He
considers the ad\antage of men, and of them
alone. For in worshipping God we do good to
ourselves, not to Him. When, therefore, He
gives an inspired revelation, and teaches how He
is to be worshipped, He does this not only from ]
no sense of need on His part, but from a regard
to our highest advantage. For all such sacrifices
are significant, being symbols of certain things by
which we ought to be roused to search or know
or recollect the things which they symbolize. To
discuss this subject satisfactorily would demand
of us something more than the short discourse in
which we have resolved to give our reply at this
time, more particularly because in other treatises
we have spoken of it fuUy.^ Those also who
have before us expounded the divine oracles,
have spoken largely of the symbols of the sac-
rifices of the Old Testament as shadows and
figures of things then future.

18. With all our desire, however, to be brief, this
one thing we must by.no means omit to remark,
that the false gods, that is to say, the demons,
which are lying angels, would never have required
a temple, priesthood, sacrifice, and the other
things connected with these from their worship-
pers, whom they deceive, had they not known
that these things were due to the one true God.
When, therefore, these things are presented to
God according to His inspiration and teaching, it
is true religion ; but when they are given to de-
mons in compliance with their impious pride, it
is baneful superstition. Accordingly, those who
know the Christian Scriptures of both the Old and
the New Testaments do not blame the profane
rites of Pagans on the mere ground of their build-
ing temples, appointing priests, and offering sac-
rifices, but on the ground of their doing all this
for idols and demons. As to idols, indeed, who
entertains a doubt as to their being wholly de-
void of perception? And yet, when they are
placed in these temples and set on high upon
thrones of honour, that they may be waited upon
by suppliants and worshippers praying and offer-
ing sacrifices, even these idols, though devoid
both of feeling and of life, do, by the mere
image of the members and senses of beings en-
dowed with life, so affect weak minds, that they
appear to live and breathe, especially under the
added influence of the profound veneration with
which the multitude freely renders such costly
service.


Ps. XVI. 2: OTt Tujv ayaOuiv ftov ov ^^p^iav €;^€t9, LXX.
* £.^., La the reply to Faustus, Book xxii.


19. To these morbid and pernicious affections
of the mind divine Scripture applies a remedy,
by repeating, with the impressiveness of whole-
some admonition, a familiar fact, in the words,
" Eyes have they, but they see not ; they have
ears, but they hear not," ^ etc. For these
words, by reason of their being so plain, and
commending themselves to all people as true,
are the more effective in striking salutary shame
into those who, when they present divine wor-
ship before such images with religious fear, and
look upon their likeness to living beings while
they are venerating and worshipping them, and
utter petitions, offer sacrifices, and perform vows
betbre them as if present, are so completely
overcome, that they do not presume to think of
them as devoid of perception. Lest, moreover,
these worshippers should think that our Scrip-
tures intend only to declare that such affections
of the human heart spring naturally from the
worship of idols, it is written in the plainest
terms, " All the gods of the nations are devils." ■♦
And therefore, also, the teaching of the apostles
not only declares, as we read in John, " Little
children, keep yourselves from idols," 5 but also,
in the words of Paul, " What say I then ? that
the idol is anything, or that which is offered in
sacrifice to idols is anything? But I say, that
the things which the Gentiles sacrifice they sac-
rifice to devils, and not to God; and I would
not that ye should have fellowship with devils." ^
From which it may be clearly understood, that
what is condemned in heathen superstitions by
the true religion is not the mere offering of sac-
rifices (for the ancient saints offered these to the
tme God), but the offering of sacrifices to false
gods and to impious demons. For as the truth
counsels men to seek the fellowship of the holy
angels, in like manner impiety turns men aside
to the fellowship of the wicked angels, for whose
associates everlasting fire is prepared, as the eter-
nal kingdom is prepared for the associates of
the holy angels.

20. The heathen find a plea for their profane
rites and their idols in the fact that they inter-
pret with ingenuity what is signified by each of
them, but the plea is of no avail. For all this
interpretation relates to the creature, not to the
Creator, to whom alone is due that religious ser-
vice which is in the Greek language distinguished
by the word Xarpda. Neither do we say that the
earth, the seas, the heaven, the sun, the moon,
the stars, and any other celestial influences which
may be beyond our ken are demons ; but since
all created things are divided into material and
immaterial, the latter of which we also call spir-


3 Ps. cxv. s, 6.

* Ps. xcvi. 5: Saiixovia, LXX.

5 I John V. 21.

^ I Cor. X. 19, 20.


420


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


itual, it is manifest that what is done by us under
the power of piety and rehgion proceeds from
the faculty of our souls known as the will, which
belongs to the spiritual creation, and is therefore
to be preferred to all that is material. Whence
it is inferred that sacrifice must not be offered
to anything material. There remains, therefore,
the spiritual part of creation, which is either
pious or impious, — the pious consisting of men
and angels who are righteous, and who duly
serve God ; the impious consisting of wicked
men and angels, whom we also call devils. Now,
that sacrifice must not be offered to a spiritual
creature, though righteous, is obvious from this
consideration, that the more pious and submis-
sive to God any creature is, the less does he
presume to aspire to that honour which he knows
to be due to God alone. How much worse,
therefore, is it to sacrifice to devils, that is, to a
wicked spiritual creature, which, dwelling in this
comparatively dark heaven nearest to earth, as
in the prison assigned to him in the air, is
doomed to eternal punishment. Wherefore,
even when men say that they are offering sac-
rifices to the higher celestial powers, which are
not devils, and imagine that the only difference
between us and them is in a name, because they
call them gods and we call them angels, the
only beings which really present themselves to
these men, who are given over to be the sport of
manifold deceptions, are the devils who find de-
light and, in a sense, nourisliment in the errors
of mankind. For the holy angels do not ap-
prove of any sacrifice except what is offered,
agreeably to the teaching of true wisdom and
true religion, unto the one true God, whom in
holy fellowship they serve. Therefore, as impi-
ous presumption, whether in men or m angels,
commands or covets the rendering to itself of
those honours which belong to God, so, on the
other hand, pious humility, whether in men or
in holy angels, declines these honours when of-
fered, and declares to whom alone they are due,
of which most notable examples are conspicu-
ously set forth in our sacred books.

21. In the sacrifices appointed by the divine
oracles there has been a diversity of institution
corresponding to the age in which they were
observed. Some sacrifices were offered before
the actual manifestation of that new covenant,
the benefits of which are provided by the one
true offering of the one Priest, namely, by the
shed blood of Christ ; and another sacrifice,
adapted to this manifestation, and offered in the
present age by us who are called Christians after
the name of Him who has been revealed, is set
before us not only in the gospels, but also in the
prophetic books. For a change, not of the God
who is worshipped, nor of the religion itself, but
of sacrifices and of sacraments, would seem to


be proclaimed without warrant now, if it had not
been foretold in the earlier dispensation. For
just as when the same man brings to God in the
morning one kind of offering, and in the evening
another, according to the time of day, he does
not thereby change either his God or his reli-
gion, any more than he changes the nature of a
salutation who uses one form of salutation in the
morning and another in the evening : so, in the
complete cycle of the ages, when one kind of
offering is known to have been made by the
ancient saints, and another is presented by the
saints in our time, this only shows that these
sacred mysteries are celebrated not according to
human presumption, but by divine authority, in
the manner best adapted to the times. There is
here no change either in the Deity or in the
religion.

2 2. Question iv. Let us, in the next place,
consider what he has laid down concerning the
proportion between sin and punishment when,
misrepresenting the gospel, he says : " Christ
threatens eternal punishment to those who do
not believe in Him ; " ' and yet He says in
another place, " With what measure ye mete, it
shall be measured to you again." ^ " Here," he
remarks, " is something sufficiently absurd and
contradictory ; for if He is to award punishment
according to measure, and all measure is limited
by the end of time, what mean these threats of
eternal punishment ? "

23. It is difficult to believe that this question
has been put in the form of objection by one
claiming to be in any sense a philosopher ; for
he says, "All measure is limited by time," as if
men were accustomed to no other measures than
measures of time, such as hours and days and
years, or such as are referred to when we say
that the time of a short syllable is one-half of
that of a long syllable.^ For I suppose that
bushels and firkins, urns and amphorse, are not
measures of time. How, then, is all measure
limited by time? Do not the heathen them-
selves affirm that the sun is eternal? And yet
they presume to calculate and pronounce on the
basis of geometrical measurements what is the
proportion between it and the earth, ^^'hether
this calculation be within or beyond their power,
it is certain, notwithstanding, that it has a disc
of definite dimensions. For if they do ascertain
how large it is, they know its dimensions, and
if they do not succeed in their investigation, they
do not know these ; but the fact that men can-
not discover them is no proof that they do not
exist. It is possible, therefore, for something to
be eternal, and nevertheless to have a definite


' John iii. 18.

2 ^iatt. vii. 2.

3 " Longam syllabam esse diiorum temporum brevem unius etiam
piieri sciunt." — Quiniil. ix. 4, 47.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


421


measure of its proportions. In this I have been
speaking upon the assumption of their own view
as to the eternal duration of the sun, in order
that they may be convinced by one of their own
tenets, and obh'ged to admit that something may
be eternal and at the same time measurable.
And therefore let them not think that the threat-
ening of Christ concerning eternal punishment j
is not to be believed because of His also saying,
" In what measure ye mete, it shall be measured
unto you."

24. For if He had said, " That which you
have measured shall be measured unto you,"
even in that case it would not have been neces-
sary to take the clauses as referring to something
which was in all respects the same. For we
may correctly say, That which you have planted
you shall reap, although men plant not fruit but
trees, and reap not trees but fruit. We say it,
however, with reference to the kind of tree ; for
a man dojs not plant a fig-tree, and expect to
gather nuts from it. In like manner it might be
said, ^Vhat you have done you shall suffer ; not
meaning that if one has committed adultery, for
example, he shall suffer the same, but that what
he has in that crime done to the law, the law
shall do unto him, i.e. forasmuch as he has re-
moved from his life the law which prohibits such
things, the law shall requite him by removing
him from that human life over which it pre-
sides.

Again, if He had said, " As much as ye shall
have measured, so much shall be measured unto
you," even from this statement it would not
necessarily follow that we must understand pun-
ishments to be in every particular equal to the
sins punished. Barley and wheat, for example,
are not equal in quality, and yet it might be said,
" As much as ye shall have measured, so much
shall be measured unto you," meaning for so
much wheat so much barley. Or if the matter
in question were pain, it might be said, " As
great pain shall be inflicted on you as you have
inflicted on others ; " this might mean that the
pain should be in severity equal, but in time
more protracted, and therefore by its continu-
ance greater. For suppose I were to say of two
lamps, " The flame of this one was as hot as the
flame of the other," this would not be false,
although, perchance, one of them was earlier
extinguished than the other. Wherefore, if
things be equally great in one respect, but not
in another, the fact that tliey are not alike in
all respects does not invalidate the statement
that in one respect, as admitted, they are equally
great.

25. Seeing, however, that the words of Christ
were these, " In what measure ye mete, it shall
be measured unto you," and that beyond all
question the measure in which anything is meas-


ured is one thing, and that which is measured in
it is another, it is obviously possible that with
the same measure with which men have meas-
ured, say, a bushel of wheat, there may be meas-
ured to them thousands of bushels, so that with
no difference in the measure there may be all
that difference in the quantity, not to speak of
the difference of quality which might be in the
things measured ; for it is not only possible that
with the same measure with which one has meas-
ured barley to others, wheat may be measured
to him, but, moreover, with the same measure
with which he has measured grain, gold may be
measured to him, and of the grain there may
have been one bushel, while there may be very
many of the gold. Thus, although there is a
difference both in kind and quantity, it may be
nevertheless truly said in reference to things
which are thus unlike : " In the measure in which
he measured to others it is measured unto him."

The reason, moreover, why Christ uttered this
saying is sufficiently plain from the immediately
preceding context. " Judge not," He said, " that
ye be not judged ; for in the judgment in which
ye judge ye shall be judged." Does this mean
that if they have judged any one with injustice
they shall themselves be unjustly judged? Of
course not ; for there is no unrighteousness with
God. But it is thus expressed, " In the judg-
ment in which ye judge ye shall be judged," as
if it were said. In the will in which ye have dealt
kindly with others ye shall be set at liberty, or
in the will in which ye have done evil to others
ye shall be punished. As if any one, for exam-
ple, using his eyes for the gratification of base
desires, were ordered to be made blind, this
would be a just sentence for him to hear, " In
those eyes by which thou hast sinned, in them
hast thou deserved to be punished." For every
one uses the judgment of his own mind, accord-
ing as it is good or evil, for doing good or for
doing evil. Wherefore it is not unjust that he be
judged in that in which he judges, that is to say,
that he sufi'er the penalty in the mind's faculty
of judgment when he is made to endure those
evils which are the consequences of the sinful
judgment of his mind.

26. For while other torments which are pre-
pared to be hereafter inflicted are visible, —
torments occasioned by the same central cause,
namely, a depraved will, — it is also the fact that
within the mind itself, in which the appetite of
the will is the measure of all human actions, sin
is followed immediately by punishment, which is
for the most part increased in proportion to the
greater blindness of one by whom it is not felt.
Therefore when He had said, " With [or rather,
as Augustin renders it. In] what judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged," He went on to add,
" And in what measure ye mete, it shall be meas-


422


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


ured unto you." A good man, that is to say, will
measure out good actions in his own will, and in
the same shall blessedness be measured unto him ;
and in like manner, a bad man will measure out
bad actions in his own will, and in the same
shall misery be meted out to him ; for in what-
soever any one is good when his will aims at
what is good, in the same he is evil when his
will aims at what is evil. And therefore it is
also in this that he is made to experience bliss
or misery, viz. in the feeling experienced by his
own will, which is the measure both of all ac-
tions and of the recompenses of actions. For
we measure actions, whether good or bad, by the
quality of the volitions which produce them, not
by the length of time which they occupy. Were
it otherwise, it would be regarded a greater crime
to fell a tree than to kill a man. For the former
takes a long time and many strokes, the latter
may be done with one blow in a moment of
time ; and yet, if a man were punished with no
more than transportation for life for this great
crime committed in a moment, it would be said
that he had been treated with more clemency
than he deserved, although, in regard to the
duration of time, the protracted punishment is
not in any way to be compared with the sudden
act of murder. Where, then, is anything con-
tradictory in the sentence objected to, if the
punishments shall be equally protracted or even
alike eternal, but differing in comparative gentle-
ness and severity? The duration is the same;
the pain inflicted is different in degree, because
that which constitutes the measure of the sins
themselves is found not in the length of time
which they occupy, but in the will of those who
commit them.

27. Certainly the will itself endures the pun-
ishment, whether pain be inflicted on the mind
or on the body ; so that the same thing which is
gratified by the sin is smitten by the penalty,
and so that he who judgeth without mercy is
judged without mercy ; for in this sentence
also the standard of measure is the same only
in this point, that what he did not give to
others is denied to him, and therefore the judg-
ment passed on him shall be eternal, although
the judgment pronounced by him cannot be
eternal. It is therefore in the sinner's own
measure that punishments which are eternal are
measured out to him, though the sins thus pun-
ished were not eternal ; for as his wish was to
have an eternal enjoyment of sin, so the award
which he finds is an eternal endurance of suffer-
ing.

The brevity which I study in this reply pre-
cludes me from collecting all, or at least as many
as I could, of the statements contained in our
sacred books as to sin and the punishment of
sin, and deducing from these one indisputable


proposition on the subject ; and perhaps, even
if I obtained the necessary leisure, I might not
possess abilities competent to the task. Never-
theless, I think that in the meantime I have
proved that there is no contradiction between
the eternity of punishment and the principle that
sins shall be recompensed in the same measure
in which men have committed them.

28. Question v. The objector who has
brought forward these questions from Porphyry
has added this one in the next place : Will you
have the goodness to instruct me as to whether
Solomon said truly or not that God has no Son ?

29. The answer is brief: Solomon not only
did not say this, but, on the contrary, expressly
said that God hath a Son. For in one of his
writings Wisdom saith : " Before the mountains
were settled, before the hills was I brought
forth." ' And what is Christ but the Wisdom
of God? Again, in another place in the book
of Proverbs, he says : " God hath taught me
wisdom, and I have learned the knowledge of
the holy.^ Who hath ascended up into heaven
and descended ? who hath gathered the winds in
His fists ? who hath bound the waters in a gar-
ment? who hath estabhshed all the ends of the
earth? What is His name, and what is His Son's
name? "3 Of the two questions concluding this
quotation, the one referred to the Father, namely,
"What is His name?" — with allusion to the
foregoing words, " God hath taught me wisdom,"

— the other evidently to the Son, since he says,
"or what is His Son's name?" — with allusion
to the other statements, which are more properly
understood as pertaining to the Son, viz. " Who
hath ascended up into heaven and descended?"

— a question brought to remembrance by the
words of Paul : " He that descended is the same L
also that ascended up far above all heavens ; " *

— "Who hath gathered the winds in His fists?"
i.e. the souls of believers in a hidden and secret
place, to whom, accordingly, it is said, " Ye are
dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God ; " s

— " Who hath bound the waters in a garment ? " ^
whence it could be said, "As many of you as have
been baptized into Christ have put on Christ ; " '

— "Who hath established all the ends of the I
earth?" the same who said to His disciples,
" Ye shall be witnesses unto Me, both in Jeru-
salem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and untO;
the uttermost part of the earth." ^

30. Question vi. The last question proposed
is concerning Jonah, and it is put as if it were


' Prov. viii. 25: np'o Se navTuiv j3ov»'(ii' yevvd ;u.e, LXX.

2 According to LXX.

3 Prov. XXX. 3, 4.
■* Eph. iv. 10.

5 Col. iii. 3.

* Augustin's words are : quis convertit aquam in vestimentb
from the LXX. : tis trvyta-Tpupev vdoip iv ifianu).

7 Gal. iii. 27.

8 Acts i. 8. 'I


i


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


423


not from Porphyry, but as being a standing
subject of ridicule among tlie Pagans ; for his
words are : " In the next place, what are we to
believe concerning Jonah, who is said to have
been three days in a whale's belly? The thing
is utterly improbable and incredible, that a man
swallowed with his clothes on should have ex-
isted in the inside of a fish. If, however, the
story is figurative, be pleased to explain it.
Again, what is meant by the story that a gourd
sprang up above the head of Jonah after he was
vomited by the fish ? What was the cause of
this gourd's growth? " Questions such as these
I have seen discussed by Pagans amidst loud
laughter, and with great scorn.

31. To this I reply, that either all the miracles
wrought by divine power may be treated as in-
credible, or there is no reason why the story of
this miracle should not be believed. The resur-
rection of Christ Himself upon the third day
would not be believed by us, if the Christian
faith was afraid to encounter Pagan ridicule.
Since, however, our friend did not on this ground
ask whether it is to be believed that Lazarus was
raised on the fourth day, or that Christ rose on
the third day, I am much surprised that he reck-
oned what was done with Jonah to be incredi-
ble ; unless, perchance, he thinks it easier for a
dead man to be raised in life from his sepulchre,
than for a living man to be kept in life in the
spacious belly of a sea monster. For without
mentioning the great size of sea monsters which
is reported to us by those who have knowledge
of them, let me ask how many men could be
contained in the belly which was fenced round
with those huge ribs which are fixed in a public
place in Carthage, and are well known to all
men there ? Who can be at a loss to conjecture
how wide an entrance must have been given by
the opening of the mouth which was the gate-
way of that vast cavern? unless, perchance, as
our friend stated it, the clothing of Jonah stood
in the way of his being swallowed without in-
jury, as if he had required to squeeze himself
through a narrow passage, instead of being, as
was the case, thrown headlong through the air,
and so caught by the sea monster as to be re-
ceived into its belly before he was wounded by
its teeth. At the same time, the Scripture does
not say whether he had his clothes on or not
when he was cast down into that cavern, so that
it may without contradiction be understood that
he made that swift descent unclothed, if per-
chance it was necessary that his garment should
be taken from him, as the shell is taken from an
egg, to make him more easily swallowed. For
men are as much concerned about the rai-
ment of this prophet as would be reasonable if
it were stated that he had crept through a very
small window, or had been going into a bath ;


and yet, even though it were necessary in such
circumstances to enter without parting with one's
clothes, this would be only inconvenient, not
miraculous.

32. But perhaps our objectors find it impossi-
ble to believe in- regard to this divine miracle
that the heated moist air of the belly, whereby
food is dissolved, could be so moderated in
temperature as to preserve the life of a man.
If so, with how much greater force might they
pronounce it incredible that the three young men
cast into the furnace by the impious king walked
unharmed in the midst of the flames ! If, there-
fore, these objectors refuse to believe any nar-
rative of a divine miracle, they must be refuted
by another line of argument. For it is incum-
bent on them in that case not to single out some
one to be objected to, and called in question as
incredible, but to denounce as incredible all nar-
ratives in which miracles of the same kind or
more remarkable are recorded. And yet, if this
which is written concerning Jonah were said to
have been done by Apuleius of Madaura or
Apollonius of Tyana, by whom they boast,
though unsupported by reliable testimony, that
many wonders were performed (albeit even the
devils do some works like those done by the
holy angels, not in truth, but in appearance, not
by wisdom, but manifestly by subtlety), — if, I
say, any such event were narrated in connection
with these men to whom they give the flattering
name of magicians or philosophers, we should
hear from their mouths sounds not of derision,
but of triumph. Be it so, then ; let them laugh
at our Scriptures ; let them laugh as much as
they can, when they see themselves daily becom-
ing fewer in number, while some are removed by
death, and others by their embracing the Chris-
tian faith, and when all those things are being
fulfilled which were predicted by the prophets
who long ago laughed at them, and said that
they would fight and bark against the truth in
vain, and would gradually come over to our side ;
and who not only transmitted these statements
to us, their descendants, for our learning, but
promised that they should be fulfilled in our
experience.

33. It is neither unreasonable nor unprofitable
to inquire what these miracles signify, so that,
after their significance has been explained, men
may believe not only that they really occurred,
but also that they have been recorded, because
of their possessing symbolical meaning. Let
him, therefore, who proposes to inquire why the
prophet Jonah was three days in the capacious
belly of a sea monster, begin by dismissing
doubts as to the fact itself; for this did actually
occur, and did not occur in vain. For if figures
which are expressed in words only, and not in
actions, aid our faith, how much more should our


424


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


faith be helped by figures expressed not only in
words, but also in actions ! Now men are wont
to speak by words ; but divine power speaks by
actions as well as by words. And as words which
are new or somewhat unfamiliar lend brilliancy
to a human discourse when they are scattered
through it in a moderate and judicious manner,
so the elocjuence of divine revelation receives, so
to speak, additional lustre from actions which
are at once marvellous in themselves and skil-
fully designed to impart spiritual instruction.

34. As to the question. What was prefigured
by the sea monster restoring alive on the third
day the prophet whom it swallowed ? why is this
asked of us, when Christ Himself has given the
answer, saying, " An evil and adulterous genera-
tion seeketh after a sign, and there shall no sign
be given it but the sign of the prophet Jonas :
for as Jonas was three days and three nights in
the whale's belly, so must the Son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth " ' ? In regard to the three days in which
the Lord Christ was under the power of death,
it would take long to explain how they are reck-
oned to be three whole days, that is, days along
with their nights, because of the whole of the
first day and of the third day being understood
as represented on the part of each ; moreover,
this has been already stated very often in other
discourses. As, therefore, Jonah passed from
the ship to the belly of the whale, so Christ
passed from the cross to the sepulclire, or into
the abyss of death. And as Jonah suffered this
for the sake of those who were endangered by
the storm, so Christ suffered for the sake of
those who are tossed on the waves of this world.
And as the command was given at first that the
word of God should be preached to the Nine-
vites by Jonah, but the preaching of Jonah did
not come to them until after the whale had
vomited him forth, so prophetic teaching was
addressed early to the Gentiles, but did not
actually come to the Gentiles until after the
resurrection of Christ from the grave.

35. In the next place, as to Jonah's building
for himself a booth, and sitting down over against
Nineveh, waiting to see what would befall the
city, the prophet was here in his own person the
symbol of another fact. He prefigured the car-
nal people of Israel. For he also was grieved at
the salvation of the Ninevites, that is, at the re-
demption and deliverance of the Gentiles, from
among whom Christ came to call, not righteous
men, but sinners to repentance.^ Wherefore
the shadow of that gourd over his head pre-
figured the promises of the Old Testament, or
rather the privileges already enjoyed in it, in
which there was, as the apostle says, " a shadow

' Matt. xii. 39, 40.
^ Luke V. 32.


of things to come," ^ furnishing, as it were, a
refuge from the heat of temporal calamities in
the land of promise. Moreover, in that morning-
worm,'* which by its gnawing tooth made the
gourd wither away, Christ Himself is again pre-
figured, forasmuch as, by the publication of the
gospel from His mouth, all those things which
flourished among the Israelites for a time, or
with a shadowy symbolical meaning in that
earlier dispensation, are now deprived of their
significance, and have withered away. And now
that nation, having lost the kingdom, the priest-
hood, and the sacrifices formerly established in
Jerusalem, all which privileges were a shadow
of things to come, is burned with grievous heat of
tribulation in its condition of dispersion and cap-
tivity, as Jonah was, according to the history,
scorched with the heat of the sun, and is over-
whelmed with sorrow ; and notwithstanding, the
salvation of the Gentiles and of the penitent is
of more importance in the sight of God than
this sorrow of Israel and the "shadow" of which
the Jewish nation was so glad.

36. Again, let the Pagans laugh, and let them
treat with proud and senseless ridicule Christ the
Worm and this interpretation of the prophetic
symbol, provided that He gradually and surely,
nevertheless, consume them. For concerning
all such Isaiah prophesies, when by him God
says to us, " Hearken unto me, ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my
law ; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither
be ye afraid of their revilings : for the moth shall
eat them up as a garment, and the worm shall eat
them like wool ; but my righteousness shall be
for ever." s Let us therefore acknowledge Christ
to be the morning-worm, because, moreover,
in that psalm which bears the title, "Upon the
hind of the morning," ^ He has been pleased to
call Himself by this very name : " I am," He
says, " a worm, and no man, a reproach of men,
and despised of the people." This reproach is
one of those reproaches which we are com-
manded not to fear in the words of Isaiah,
" Fear ye not the reproach of men." By that
Worm, as by a moth, they are being consumed
who under the tooth of His gospel are made to
wonder daily at the diminution of their numbers,
which is caused by desertion from their party.
Let us therefore acknowledge this symbol of
Christ ; and because of the salvation of God, let
us bear patiently the reproaches of men. He is
a Worm because of the lowliness of the flesh
which He assumed — perhaps, also, because of
His being born of a virgin ; for the worm is
generally not begotten, but spontaneously origi-

3 Col. ii. 17. ,

* Vermis matutinus.
5 Isa. li. 7, 8.

*> Ps. x.vii. 'I'he title in the LXX. is, " inrep Trj? avTLX-nxlieia^ t^j
iui6ivr)i," which Augustin translates, " pro susceptione matutina."


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


425


nated in flesh or any vegetable product [sine
concubitu nascitur]. He is the 7?iorning-\\or\n,
because He rose from the grave before the dawn
of day. That gourd might, of course, have with-
ered without any worm at its root ; and finally,
if God regarded the worm as necessary for this
work, what need was there to add the epithet
mo rnt 1 1 g-\\orm, if not to secure that He should
be recognised as the Worm who in the psalm,
" pro susceptione matutina," sings, " I am a
worm, and no man"?

37. What, then, could be more palpable than
the fulfilment of this prophecy in the accom-
plishment of the things foretold? That Worm
was indeed despised when He hung upon the
cross, as is written in the same psalm: "They
shoot out the lip, they shake the head, saying.
He trusted in the Lord that he would deliver
him ; let him deliver him, seeing he delighted
in him ; " • and again, when this was fulfilled
which the psalm foretold, "They pierced my
hands and my feet. They have told all my
bones : they look and stare upon me. They
part my garments among them, and cast lots
upon my vesture," ^ — circumstances which are
in that ancient book described when future by

^he prophet with as great plainness as they are
now recorded in the gospel history after their
occurrence. But if in His humiliation that
Worm was despised, is He to be still despised
when we behold the accomplishment of those
things which are predicted in the latter part of
the same psalm : "All the ends of the world
shall remember, and turn unto the Lord ; and
all the kindreds of the nations shall worship in
His presence. For the kingdom is the Lord's ;
and He shall govern among the nations" ?3
Thus the Ninevites " remembered, and turned
unto the Lord." The salvation granted to the
Gentiles on their repentance, which was thus so
long before prefigured, Israel then, as repre-
sented by Jonah, regarded with grief, as now
their nation grieves, bereft of their shadow, and
vexed with the heat of their tribulations. Any
one is at liberty to open up with a different in-
terpretation, if only it be in harmony with the
rule of faith, all the other particulars which are
hidden in the symbolical history of the prophet
Jonah ; but it is obvious that it is not lawful to
interpret the three days which he passed in the
belly of the whale otherwise than as it has been
revealed by the heavenly Master Himself in the
gospel, as quoted above.

38. I have answered to the best of my power
the questions proposed ; but let him who pro-
posed them become now a Christian at once,
lest, if he delay until he has finished the dis-


' Ps. xxii. 7, 8.
* Ps. xxii. 16-18.
3 Ps. xxii. 27, 28.


cussion of all difficulties connected with the
sacred books, he come to the end of this life
before he pass from death to life. For it is rea-
sonable that he inquire as to the resurrection of
the dead before he is admitted to the Christian
sacraments. Perhaps he ought also to be allowed
to insist on preliminary discussion of the question
proposed concerning Christ — why He came so
late in the world's history, and of a few great
questions besides, to which all others are subor-
dinate. But to think of finishing all such ques-
tions as those concerning the words, " In what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto
you," and concerning Jonah, before he becomes
a Christian, is to betray great unmindfulness of
man's hmited capacities, and of the shortness
of the life which remains to him. For there are
innumerable questions the solution of which is
not to be demanded before we believe, lest life
be finished by us in unbelief. When, however,
the Christian faith has been thoroughly received,
these questions behove to be studied with the
utmost diligence for the pious satisfaction of the
minds of believers. Whatever is discovered by
such study ought to be imparted to others with-
out vain self-complacency ; if anything still re-
main hidden, we must bear with patience an
imperfection of knowledge which is not prejudi-
cial to salvation.

LETTER cm.

(a.d. 409.)

to my lord and brother, augustin, rightly
and justly worthy of esteem and of all
possible honour, nectarius sends greeting
in the lord.

I. In reading the letter of your Excellency,
in which you have overthrown the worship of
idols and the ritual of their temples,"* I seemed
to myself to hear the voice of a philosopher, —
not of such a philosopher as the academician
of whom they say, that having neither new doc-
trine to propound nor earlier statements of his
own to defend, he was wont to sit in gloomy
corners on the ground absorbed in some deep
reverie, with his knees drawn back to his fore-
head, and his head buried between them, con-
triving how he might as a detractor assail the
discoveries or cavil at the statements by which
others had earned renown ; nay, the form which
rose under the spell of your eloquence and stood
before my eyes was rather that of the great
statesman Cicero, who, having been crowned
with laurels for saving the lives of many of his
countrymen, carried the trophies won in his
forensic victories into the wondering schools of
Greek philosophy, when, as one pausing for

* Letter XCI. p. 376.


426


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


breath, he laid down the trumpet of sonorous
voice and language which he had blown with
blast of just indignation against those who had
broken the laws and conspired against the life
of the republic, and, adopting the fashion of the
Grecian mantle, unfastened and threw back over
his shoulders the toga's ample folds.

2. I therefore listened with pleasure when you
urged us to the worship and religion of the only
supreme God ; and when you counselled us to
look to our heavenly fatherland, I received the
exhortation with joy. For you were obviously
speaking to me not of any city confined by en-
circling ramparts, nor of that commonwealth on
this earth which the writings of philosophers
have mentioned and declared to have all man-
kind as its citizens, but of that City which is
inhabited and possessed by the great God, and
by the spirits which have earned this recom-
pense from Him, to which, by diverse roads and
pathways, all religions aspire, — the City which
we are not able in language to describe, but
which perhaps we might by thinking apprehend.
But while this City ought therefore to be, above
all others, desired and loved, I am nevertheless
of opinion that we are bound not to prove un-
faithful to our own native land, — the land which
first imparted to us the enjoyment of the light
of day, in which we were nursed and educated,
and (to pass to what is specially relevant in this
case) the land by rendering services to which
men obtain a home prepared for them in heaven
after the death of the body ; for, in the opinion
of the most learned, promotion to that celestial
City is granted to those men who have deserved
well of the cities which gave them birth, and a
higher experience of fellowship with God is the
portion of those who are proved to have con-
tributed by their counsels or by their labours to
the welfare of their native land.

As to the remark which you were pleased wit-
tily to make regarding our town, that it has been
made conspicuous not so much by the achieve-
ments of warriors as by the conflagrations of
incendiaries, and that it has produced thorns
rather than flowers, this is not the severest re-
proof that might have been given, for we know
that flowers are for the most part borne on
thorny bushes. For who does not know that
even roses grow on briars, and that in the
bearded heads of grain the ears are guarded by
spikes, and that, in general, pleasant and pain-
ful things are found blended together?

3. The last statement in your Excellency's
letter was, that neither capital punishment nor
bloodshed is demanded in order to compensate
for the wrong done to the Church, but that the
offenders must be deprived of the possessions
which they most fear to lose. But in my de-
liberate judgment, though, of course, I may be


mistaken, it is a more grievous thing to be de-
prived of one's property than to be deprived of
life. For, as you know, it is an observation fre-
quently recurring, in the whole range of litera-
ture, that death terminates the experience of all
evils, but that a life of indigence only confers
upon us an eternity of wretchedness ; for it is
worse to live miserably than to put an end to
our miseries by death. This fact, also, is de-
clared by the whole nature and method of your
work, in which you support the poor, minister
healing to the diseased, and apply remedies to
the bodies of those who are in pain, and, in
short, make it your business to prevent the
afflicted from feeling the protracted continuance
of their sufferings.


Again, as


to the


degree of demerit in the


faults of some as compared with others, it is of
no importance what the quality of the fault may
seem to be in a case in which forgiveness is
craved. For, in the first place, if penitence
procures forgiveness and expiates the crime —
and surely he is penitent who begs pardon and
humbly embraces the feet of the party whom he
has offended — and if, moreover, as is the opinion
of some philosophers, all faults are alike, pardon
ought to be bestowed upon all without distinction.
One of our citizens may have spoken somewhat
rudely : this was a fault ; another may have per-
petrated an insult or an injury : this was equally
a fault ; another may have violently taken what
was not his own : this is reckoned a crime ;
another may have attacked buildings devoted to
secular or to sacred purposes : he ought not to be
for this crime placed beyond the reach of par-
don. Finally, there would be no occasion for
pardon if there were no foregoing faults.

4. Having now replied to your letter, not as
the letter deserved, but to the best of my ability,
such as it is, I beg and implore you (oh that I
were in your presence, that you might also see
my tears !) to consider again and again who you
are, what is your professed character, and what
is the business to which your life is devoted.
Reflect upon the appearance presented by a '
town from which men doomed to torture are
dragged forth ; think of the lamentations of
mothers and wives, of sons and of fathers ; think
of the shame felt by those who may return, set
at liberty indeed, but having undergone the tor-
ture ; think what sorrow and groaning the sight
of their wounds and scars must renew. And
when you have pondered all these things, first
think of God, and think of your good name
among men ; or rather think of what friendly
charity and the bonds of common humanity re-
quire at your hands, and seek to be praised not
by punishing but by pardoning the offenders.
And such things may indeed be said regarding
your treatment of those whom actual guilt con-


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


427


demns on their own confession : to these persons
you have, out of regard to your religion, granted
pardon ; and for this I shall always praise you.
But now it is scarcely possible to express the
greatness of that cruelty which pursues the inno-
cent, and summons those to stand trial on a
capital charge of whom it is certain that they
had no share in the crimes alleged. If it so
happen that they are acquitted, consider, I be-
seech you, with what ill-will their acquittal must
be regarded by their accusers who of their own
accord dismissed the guilty from the bar, but let
the innocent go only when they were defeated
in their attempts against them.

May the supreme God be your keeper, and
preserve you as a bulwark of His religion and
an ornament to our country.

LETTER CIV.
(A.D. 409.)

TO NECTARIUS, MY NOBLE LORD AND BROTHER,
JUSTLY WORTHY OF ALL HONOUR AND ESTEEM,
AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING IN THE LORD.

Chap. i. — i . I have read the letter which you
kindly sent in answer to mine. Your reply comes


the infliction, either by ourselves or by any one,
of such hardships upon any of our enemies !
But, as I have said, if report has brought any
such measures of severity to your ears, give us a
more clear and particular account of the things
reported, that we may know either what to do in
order to prevent these things from being done,
or what answer we must make in order to dis-
abuse the minds of those who believe the rumour.
2. Examine more carefully my letter, to which
you have so reluctantly sent a reply, for I have
in it made my views sufficiently plain ; but through
not remembering, as I suppose, what I had writ-
ten, you have in your reply made reference to
sentiments widely differing from mine, and wholly
unlike them. For, as if quoting from memory
what I had written, you have inserted in your
letter what I never said at all in mine. You say
that the concluding sentence of my letter was,
" that neither capital punishment nor bloodshed
is demanded in order to compensate for the
wrong done to the Church, but that the offenders
must be deprived of that which they most fear
to lose ; " and then, in showing how great a ca-
lamity this imports, you add and connect with my
words that you " deliberately judge — though
you may perhaps be mistaken — that it is a more


at a very long interval after the time when I de- grievous thing to be deprived of one's possessions
spatched my letter to you. For I had written an than to be deprived of life." And in order to
answer to you' when my holy brother and col- expound more clearly the kind of possessions
league Possidius was still with us, before he had to which you refer, you go on to say that it must
entered on his voyage ; but the letter which you be known to me, " as an observation frequently


but the letter which you
have been pleased to entrust to him for me I
received on March 27th, about eight months
after I had written to you. The reason why
my communication was so late in reaching you,
or yours so late in being sent to me, I do
not know. Perhaps your prudence has only
now dictated the reply which your pride for-
merly disdained. If this be the explanation, I
wonder what has occasioned the change. Have
you perchance heard some report, which is as yet
unknown to us, that my brother Possidius had
obtained authority for proceedings of greater se-
verity against your citizens, whom — you must
excuse me for saying this — he loves in a way
more likely to promote their welfare than you do
yourself ? For your letter shows that you appre-
hended something of this kind when you charge
me to set before my eyes " the appearance pre-
sented by a town from which men doomed to
torture are dragged forth," and to "think of the
lamentations of mothers and wives, of sons and
of fathers ; of the shame felt by those who may
return, set at liberty indeed, but having under-
gone the torture ; and of the sorrow and groan-
ing which the sight of their wounds and scars
must renew." ^ Far be it from us to demand

1 Letter XCI. p. 376.

2 Letter CIII. p. 426.


recurring in the whole range of literature, that
death terminates the experience of all evils, but
that a life of indigence only confers upon us an
eternity of wretchedness." From which you
have drawn the conclusion that it is " worse to
live miserably than to put an end to our miseries
by death."

3. Now I for my part do not recollect reading
anywhere — either in our [Christian] literature,
to which I confess that I was later of applying my
mind than I could now wish that I had been, or
in your [Pagan] literature, which I studied from
my childhood — that " a life of indigence only
confers upon us an eternity of wretchedness."
For the poverty of the industrious is never in
itself a crime ; nay, it is to some extent a means
of withdrawing and restraining men from sin.
And therefore the circumstance that a man has
lived in poverty here is no ground for apprehend-
ing that this shall procure for him after this brief
life "an eternity of wretchedness ;" and in this
Ufe which we spend on earth it is utterly impos-
sible for any misery to be eternal, seeing that
this life cannot be eternal, nay, is not of long
duration even in those who attain to the most
advanced old age. In the writings referred to,
I for my part have read, not that in this life —
as you think, and as you allege that these writ-


428


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


ings frequently affirm — there can be an eternity
of wretchedness, but rather that this life itself
which we here enjoy is short. Some, indeed,
but not all, of your authors have said that death
is the end of all evils : that is indeed the opinion
of the Epicureans, and of such others as believe
the soul to be mortal. But those philosophers
whom Cicero designates " consulares " in a cer-
tain sense, because he attaches great weight to
their authority, are of opinion that when our last
hour on earth comes the soul is not annihilated,
but removes from its tenement, and continues in
existence for a state of blessedness or of misery,
according to that which a man's actions, whether
good or bad, claim as their due recompense.
This agrees with the teaching of our sacred writ-
ings, with which I wish that I were more fully
conversant. Death is therefore the end of all
evils — but only in the case of those whose lite
is pure, religious, upright, and blameless ; not in
the case of those who, inflamed with passionate
desire for the trifles and vanities of time, are
proved to be miserable by the utter perversion
of their desires, though meanwhile they esteem
themselves happy, and are after death compelled
not only to accept as their lot, but to realize in
their experience far greater miseries.

4. These sentiments, therefore, being fre-
quently expressed both in some of your own
authors, whom you deem worthy of greater es-
teem, and in all our Scriptures, be it yours, O
worthy lover of the country which is on earth
your fatherland, to dread on behalf of your coun-
trymen a life of luxurious indulgence rather than
a life of indigence ; or if you fear a life of indi-
gence, warn them that the poverty which is to
be more studiously shunned is that of the man
who, though surrounded with abundance of
worldly possessions, is, through the insatiable
eagerness wherewith he covets these, kept alwaj's
in a state of want, which, to use the words of
your own authors, neither plenty nor scarcity
can relieve. In the letter, however, to which
you reply, I did not say that those of your citi-
zens who are enemies to the Church were to be
corrected by being reduced to that extremity of
indigence in which the necessaries of life are
wanting, and to which succour is brought by that
compassion of which you have thought it incum-
bent on you to point out to me that it is pro-
fessed by us in the whole plan of those labours
wherein we " support the poor, minister healing
to the diseased, and apply remedies to the bodies
of those who are in pain ; " albeit, even such ex-
tremity of want as this would be more profitable
than abundance of all things, if abused to the
gratification of evil passions. But far be it from
me to think that those about whom we are treat-
ing should be reduced to such destitution by the
measures of coercion proposed.


Chap. ii. — 5. Though you did not consider it
worth while to read my letter over when it was
to be answered, perhaps you have at least so far
esteemed it as to preserve it, in order to its being
brought to you when you at any time might
desire it and call for it ; if this be the case, look
over it again, and mark carefully my words : you
will assuredly find in it one thing to which, m
my opinion, you must admit that you have made
no reply. For in that letter occur the words
which I now quote : "We do not desire to gratify
our anger by vindictive retribution for the past,
but we are concerned to make provision in a
truly merciful spirit for the future. Now wicked
men have something in respect to which they
may be punished, and that by Christians, in a
merciful way, and so as to promote their own
profit and well-being. For they have these three
things — life and health of the body, the means
of supporting that life, and the means and op-
portunities of living a wicked life. Let the two
former remain untouched in the possession of
those who repent of their crime ; this we desire,
and this we spare no pains to secure. But as to
the third, if it please God to deal with it as a de-
caying or diseased part, which must be removed
with the pruning-knife. He wiU in such punish-
ment prove the greatness of his compassion." '
If you had read over these words of mine again,
when you were pleased to write your reply, you
would have looked upon it rather as an unkind
insinuation than as a necessary duty to address
to me a petition not only for deliverance from
death, but also for exemption from torture, on
behalf of those regarding whom I said that we
wished to leave unimpaired their possession of
bodily life and health. Neither was there any
ground for your apprehending our inflicting a
life of indigence and of dependence upon oth-
ers for daily bread on those regarding whom I
had said that we desired to secure to them the
second of the possessions named above, viz. the
means of supporting life. But as to their third
possession, viz. the means and opportunities of
living wickedly, that is to say — passing over
other things — their silver with which they con-
structed those images of their false gods, in
whose protection or adoration or unhallowed
worship an attempt was made even to destroy
the church of God by fire, and the provision
made for relieving the poverty of very pious
persons was given up to become the spoil of a
wretched mob, and blood was freely shed — why,
I ask, does your patriotic heart dread the stroke
which shall cut this away, in order to prevent a
fatal boldness from being in everything fostered
and confirmed by impunity? This I beg you to
discuss fully, and to show me in well-considered

' Letter CXI. g, p, 379.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


429


arguments what wrong there is in this ; mark
carefully what I say, lest under the form of a
petition in regard to what I am saying you ap-
pear to bring against us an indirect accusation.

6. Let your countrymen be well reported of
for their virtuous manners, not for their super-
fluous wealth ; we do not wish them to be re-
duced through coercive measures on our account
to the plough of Quintius [Cincinnatus], or to
the hearth of Fabricius. Yet by such extreme
poverty these statesmen of the Roman republic
not only did not incur the contempt of their
fellow-citizens, but were on that very account
peculiarly dear to them, and esteemed the more
qualified to administer the resources of their
country. We neither desire nor endeavour to
reduce the estates of your rich men, so that in
their possession should remain no more than ten
pounds of silver, as was the case with Ruffinus,
who twice held the consulship, which amount
the stern censorship of that time laudably re-
quired to be still further reduced as culpably
large. So much are we influenced by the pre-
vailing sentiments of a degenerate age in dealing
more tenderly with minds that are very feeble, |
that to Christian clemency the measure which 1
seemed just to the censors of that time appears
unduly severe ; yet you see how great is the
difference between the two cases, the question
being in the one, whether the mere fact of pos-
sessing ten pounds of silver should be dealt with
as a punishable crime, and in the other, whether i
any one, after committing other very great !
crimes, should be permitted to retain the sum '
aforesaid in his possession ; we only ask that ;
what in those days was itself a crime be in our
days made the punishment of crime. There is,
however, one thing which can be done, and
ought to be done, in order that, on the one hand,
severity may not be pushed even so far as I have
mentioned, and that, on the other, men may not,
presuming on impunity, run into excess of ex-
ultation and rioting, and thus furnish to other
unhappy men an example by following which
they would become liable to the severest and
most unheard of punishments. Let this at least
be granted by you, that those who attempt with
fire and sword to destroy what are necessaries to
us be made afraid of losing those luxuries of
which they have a pernicious abundance. Per-
mit us also to confer upon our enemies this
benefit, that we prevent them, by their fears
about that which it would do them no harm to
forfeit, from attempting to that which would bring
harm to themselves. For this is to be termed
prudent prevention, not punishment of crime ;
this is not to impose penalties, but to protect
men from becoming liable to penalties.

7. When any one uses measures involving the
infliction of some pain, in order to prevent an


inconsiderate person from incurring the most
dreadful punishments by becoming accustomed
to crimes which yield him no advantage, he is
like one who pulls a boy's hair in order to pre-
vent him from provoking serpents by clapping
his hands at them ; in both cases, while the act-
ing of love is vexatious to its object, no member
of the body is injured, whereas safety and life
are endangered by that from which the person
is deterred. We confer a benefit upon others,
not in every case in which we do what is re-
quested, but when we do that which is not hurt-
ful to our petitioners. For in most cases we
serve others best by not giving, and would in-
jure them by giving, what they desire. Hence
the proverb, " Do not put a sword in a child's
hand." " Nay," says Cicero, " refuse it even to
your only son. For the more we love any one,
the more are we bound to avoid entrusting to
him things which are the occasion of very danger-
ous faults." He was referring to riches, if I am
not mistaken, when he made these observations.
Wherefore it is for the most part an advantage
to themselves when certain things are removed
from persons in whose keeping it is hazardous
to leave them, lest they abuse them. When sur-
geons see that a gangrene must be cut away or
cauterized, they often, out of compassion, turn a
deaf ear to many cries. If we had been indul-
gently forgiven by our parents and teachers in
our tender years on every occasion on which,
being found in a fault, we begged to be let off,
which of us would not have grown up intolera-
ble ? which of us would have learned any useful
thing? Such punishments are administered by
wise care, not by wanton cruelty. Do not, I be-
seech you, in this matter think only how to ac-
complish that which you are requested by your
countrymen to do, but carefully consider the
matter in all its bearings. If you overlook the
past, which cannot now be undone, consider
the future ; wisely give heed, not to the desire,
but to the real interests of the petitioners who
have applied to you. We are convicted of un-
faithfulness towards those whom we profess to
love, if our only care is lest, by refusing to do
what they ask of us, their love towards us be di-
minished. And what becomes of that virtue
which even your own literature commends, in
the ruler of his country who studies not so much
the wishes as the welfare of his people ?

Chap. 3. — 8. You say "it is of no impor-
tance what the quality of the fault may be in
any case in which forgiveness is craved." In
this you would state the truth if the matter
in question were the punishment and not the
correction of men. Far be it from a Christian
heart to be carried away by the lust of revenge
to inflict punishment on any one. Far be it
from a Christian, when forgiving any one his


430


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


fault, to do otherwise than either anticipate or
at least promptly answer the petition of him
who asks forgiveness ; but let his purpose in do-
ing this be, that he may overcome the tempta-
tion to hate the man who has offended him, and
to render evil for evil, and to be inflamed with
rage prompting him, if not to do an injury, at
least to desire to see the infliction of the penal-
ties appointed by law ; let it not be that he may
relieve himself from considering the offender's
interest, exercising foresight on his behalf, and
restraining him from evil actions. For it is possi-
ble, on the one hand, that, moved by more vehe-
ment hostility, one may neglect the correction
of a man whom he hates bitterly, and, on the
other hand, that by correction involving the in-
fliction of some pain one may secure the im-
provement of another whom he dearly loves.

9. I grant that, as you write, " penitence pro-
cures forgiveness, and blots out the offence,"
but it is that penitence which is practised under
the influence of the true religion, and which has
regard to the future judgment of God ; not that
penitence which is for the time professed or pre-
tended before men, not to secure the cleansing
of the soul for ever from the fault, but only to
deliver from present apprehension of pain the
life which is so soon to perish. This is the rea-
son why in the case of some Christians who
confessed their fault, and asked forgiveness for
having been involved in the guilt of that crime,
— either by their not protecting the church when
in danger of being burned, or by their appro-
priating a portion of the property which the
miscreants carried off, — we believed that the
pain of repentance had borne fruit, and consid-
ered it sufficient for their correction, because in
their hearts is found that faith by which they
could realize what they ought to fear from the
judgment of God for their sin. But how can
there be any healing virtue in the repentance
of those who not only fail to acknowledge, but
even persist in mocking and blaspheming Him
who is the fountain of forgiveness ? At the same
time, towards these men we do not cherish any
feeling of enmity in our hearts, which are naked
and opened unto the eyes of Him whose judg-
ment both in this life and in the life to come we
dread, and in whose help we place our hope.


But we think that we are even taking measures
for the benefit of these men, if, seeing that they
do not fear God, we inspire fear in them by do-
ing something whereby their folly is chastened,
while their real interests suffer no wrong. ^Ve
thus prevent that God whom they despise from
being more grievously provoked by their greater
crimes, to which they would be emboldened by
a disastrous assurance of impunity, and we pre-
vent their assurance of impunity from being set
forth with even more mischievous effect as an


encouragement to others to imitate their exam-
ple. In fine, on behalf of those for whom you
make intercession to us, we intercede before
God, beseeching Him to turn them to Himself,
and to teach them the exercise of genuine and
salutary repentance, purifying their hearts by
faith.

10. Behold, then, how we love those men
against whom you suppose us to be full of anger,
— loving them, you must permit me to say, with
a love more prudent and profitable than you
yourself cherish towards them ; for we plead on
their behalf that they may escape much greater
afflictions, and obtain much greater blessings.
If you also loved these men, not in the mere
earthly affections of men, but with that love
which is the heavenly gift of God, and if you
were sincere in writing to me that you gave ear
with pleasure to me when I was recommending
to you the worship and religion of the Supreme
God, you would not only wish for your country-
men the blessings which we seek on their behalf,
but you would yourself by your example lead
them to their possession. Thus would the whole
business of your interceding with us be concluded
with abundant and most reasonable joy. Thus
would your title to that heavenly fatherland, in
regard to which you say that you welcomed my
counsel that you should fix your eye upon it, be
earned by a true and pious exercise of your love
for the country which gave you birth, when seek-
ing to make sure to your fellow-citizens, not the
vain dream of temporal happiness, nor a most
perilous exemption from the due punishment
of their faults, but the gracious gift of eternal
blessedness.

11. You have here a frank avowal of the
thoughts and desires of my heart in this matter.
As to what lies concealed in the counsels of God,
I confess it is unknown to me ; I am but a man ;
but whatever it be, His counsel stands most sure,
and incomparably excels in equity and in wisdom
all that can be conceived by the minds of men.
With truth is it said in our books, " There are
many devices in a man's heart ; but the counsel
of the Lord, that shall stand." ' Wherefore, as
to what time may bring forth, as to what may
arise to simplify or complicate our procedure,
in short, as to what desire may suddenly be
awakened by the fear of losing or the hope of
retaining present possessions ; whether God shall
show Himself so displeased by what they have
done that they shall be punished with the more
weighty and severe sentence of a disastrous im-
punity, or shall appoint that they shall be com-
passionately corrected in the manner which we
propose, or shall avert whatever terrible doom
was being prepared for them, and convert it into


i


' Prov. xix. 21.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


431


joy by some more stern but more salutary cor-
rection, leading to their turning unfeignedly to
seek mercy not from men but from Himself, —
all this He knoweth ; we know not. ^^'hy, then,
should your Excellency and I be spending toil
in vain over this matter before the time ? Let
us for a little while lay aside a care the hour of
which has not yet come, and, if you please, let
us occupy ourselves with that which is always
pressing. For there is no time at which it is
not both suitable and necessary for us to con-
sider in what way we can please God ; because
for a man to attain completely in this life to
such perfection that no sin whatever shall re-
main in him is either impossible or (if perchance
any attain to it) extremely difficult : wherefore
without delay we ought to flee at once to the
grace of Him to whom we may address with
perfect truth the words which were addressed to
some illustrious man by a poet, who declared
that he had borrowed the lines from a Cumaean
oracle, or ode of prophetic inspiration : " With
thee as our leader, the obliteration of all remain-
ing traces of our sin shall deliver the earth from
perpetual alarm." ' For with Him as our leader,
all sins are blotted out and forgiven ; and by His
way we are brought to that heavenly fatherland,
the thought of which as a dwelling-place pleased
you greatly when I was to the utmost of my
power commending it to your affection and
desire.

Chap. iv. — 12. But since you said that all
religions by diverse roads and pathways aspire
to that one dwelling-place, I fear lest, perchance,
while supposing that the way in which you are
now found tends thither, you should be some-
what reluctant to embrace the way which alone
leads men to heaven. Observing, however, more
carefully the word which you used, I think that
it is not presumptuous for me to expound its
meaning somewhat differently ; for you did not
say that all religions by diverse roads and path-
ways reach heaven, or reveal, or find, or enter,
or secure that blessed land, but by saying in a
phrase deliberately weighed and chosen that all
religions aspire to it, you have indicated, not the
fruition, but the desire of heaven as common to
all religions. You have in these words neither
shut out the one religion which is true, nor ad-
mitted other religions which are false ; for cer-
tainly the way which brings us to the goal aspires
thitherward, but not every way which aspires
thitherward brings us to the place wherein all
who are brought thither are unquestionably blest.
Now we all wish, that is, we aspire, to be blest ;
but we cannot all achieve what we wish, that is,
we do not all obtain what we aspire to. That
man, therefore, obtains heaven who walks in the


' Virgil, £cl. iv. 5.


way which not only aspires thitherward, but ac-
tually brings him thither, separating himself from
others who keep to the ways which aspire heaven-
ward without finally reaching heaven. For there
would be no wandering if men were content to
aspire to nothing, or if the truth which men
aspire to were obtained. If, however, in using
the expression " diverse ways," you meant me
not to understand contrary ways, but different
ways, in the sense in which we speak of diverse
precepts, which all tend to build up a holy Hfe,
— one enjoining chastity, another patience or
faith or mercy, and the like, — in roads and path-
ways which are only in this sense diverse, that
country is not only aspired unto but actually
found. For in Holy Scripture we read both of
ways and of a way, — of ways, e.g. in the words,
" I will teach transgressors Thy ways, and sinners
shall be converted unto Thee ;"^ of a way, e.g.
in the prayer, " Teach me Thy way, O Lord ; I
will walk in Thy truth." ^ Those ways and this
way are not different ; but in one way are com-
prehended all those of which in another place
the Holy Scripture saith, " All the ways of the
Lord are mercy and truth." ■♦ The careful study
of these ways furnishes theme for a long dis-
course, and for most delightful meditation ; but
this I shall defer to another time if it be required.

13. In the meantime, however, — and this, I
think, may suffice in the present reply to your
Excellency, — seeing that Christ has said, 'T am
the way," 5 it is in Him that mercy and truth are
to be sought : if we seek these in any other way,
we must go astray, following a path which as-
pires to the true goal, but does not lead men
thither. For example, if we resolved to follow
the way indicated in the maxim which you men-
tioned, "All sins are alike," ^ would it not lead
us into hopeless exile from that fatherland of truth
and blessedness ? For could anything more ab-
surd and senseless be said, than that the man who
has laughed too rudely, and the man who has
furiously set his city on fire, should be judged as
having committed equal crimes? This opinion,
which is not one of many diverse ways leading
to the heavenly dwelling-place, but a perverse
way leading inevitably to most fatal error, you
have judged it necessary to quote from certain
philosophers, not because you concurred in the
sentiment, but because it might help your plea
for your fellow-citizens — that we might forgive
those whose rage set our church in flames on the
same terms as we would forgive those who may
have assailed us with some insolent reproach.

14. But reconsider with me the reasoning by
which you supported your position. You say,

2 Ps. li. 13.

3 Ps. Ixxxvi. II.
* Ps. XXV. 10.

5 John xiv. 6.

6 Letter CIII. § 3, p. 426.


432


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


" If, as is the opinion of some philosophers, all
faults are alike, pardon ought to be bestowed upon
all without distinction." Thereafter, labouring
apparently to prove that all faults are alike, you
go on to say, " One of our citizens may have
spoken somewhat rudely : this was a fault ;
another may have perpetrated an insult or an
injury : this was equally a fault." This is not
teaching truth, but advancing, without any evi-
dence in its support, a perversion of truth. For
to your statement, " this was equally a fault," we
at once give direct contradiction. You demand,
perhaps, proof; but I reply, What proof have
you given of your statement? Are we to hear
as evidence your next sentence, " Another may
have violently taken away what was not his own :
this is reckoned a misdemeanour " ? Here you
own yourself to be ashamed of the maxim which
you quoted ; you had not the assurance to say
that this was equally a fault, but you say " it is
reckoned a misdemeanour." But the question
here is not whether this also is reckoned a mis-
demeanour, but whether this offence and the
others which you mentioned are faults equal in
demerit, unless, of course, they are to be pro-
nounced equal because they are both offences ;
in which case the mouse and the elephant must
be pronounced equal because they are both an-
imals, and the fly and the eagle because they
both have wings.

15. You go still further, and make this propo-
sition : " Another may have attacked buildings
devoted to secular or to sacred purposes : he
ought not for this crime to be placed beyond the
reach of pardon." In this sentence you have in-
deed come to the most flagrant crime of your fel-
low-citizens, in speaking of injury done to sacred
buildings ; but even you have not affirmed that
this is a crime equal only to the utterance of an
insolent word. You have contented yourself
with asking, on behalf of those who were guilty
of this, tliat forgiveness which is rightly asked
from Christians on the ground of their overflow-
ing compassion, not on the ground of an alleged
equality of all offences. I have already quoted
a sentence of Scripture, "All the ways of the
Lord are mercy and truth." They shall therefore
find mercy if they do not hate truth. This mercy
is granted, not as if it were due on the ground
of the faults of all being only equal to the fault of
those who have uttered rude words, but because
the law of Christ claims pardon for those who
are penitent, however inhuman and impious their
crime may have been. I beg you, esteemed sir,
not to propound these paradoxes of the Stoics
as rules of conduct for your son Paradoxus,
whom we wish to see grow up in piety and in
prosperity, to your satisfaction. For what could
1>e worse for himself, yea, what more dangerous
for yourself, than that your ingenuous boy should j


imbibe an error which would make the guilt, I
shall not say of parricide, but of insolence to
his father, equal only to that of some rude word
inconsiderately spoken to a stranger?

16. You are wise, therefore, to insist, when
pleading with us for your countrymen on the com-
passion of Christians, not on the stern doctrines of
the Stoical philosophy, which in no wise help, but
much rather hinder, the cause which you have un-
dertaken to support. For a merciful disposition,
which we must have if it be possible for us to be
moved either by your intercession or by their
entreaties, is pronounced by the Stoics to be an
unworthy weakness, and they expel it utterly from
the mind of the wise man, whose perfection, in
their opinion, is to be as impassive and inflexible
as iron. With more reason, therefore, might it
have occurred to you to quote from your own
Cicero that sentence in which, praising Csesar,
he says, " Of all your virtues, none is more wor-
thy of admiration, none more graceful, than your
clemency." ' How much more ought this mer-
ciful disposition to prevail in the churches which
follow Him who said, " I am the way," and which
learn from His word, " All the ways of the Lord
are mercy and trutlr " ! Fear not, then, that we
will try to bring innocent persons to death, when
in truth we do not even wish the guilty to expe-
rience the punishment which they deserve, being
moved by that mercy which, joined with truth,
we love in Christ. But the man who, from fear
of painfully crossing the will of the guilty, spares
and indulges vices which must thereby gather
more strength, is less merciful than the man who,
lest he should hear his little boy crying, will not
take from him a dangerous knife, and is unmoved
by fear of the wounds or death which he may
have to bewail as the consequence of his weak-
ness. Reserve, therefore, until the proper time
the work of interceding with us for those men, in
loving whom (excuse my saying so) you not only
do not go beyond us, but are even hitherto re-
fusing to follow our steps ; and write rather in
your reply what influences you to shun the way
which we follow, and in which we beseech you
to go along with us towards that fatherland
above, in which we rejoice to know that you take
great delight.

17. As to those who are by birth your fellow-
citizens, you have said indeed that some of them,
though not all, were innocent ; but, as you must
see if you read over again my other letter, you
have not made out a defence for them. When,
in answer to your remark that you wished to
leave your country flourishing, I said that we
had felt thorns rather than found flowers in your
countrymen, you thought that I wrote in jest.
As if, forsooth, in the midst of evils of such

* O ratio pro Q. Li^ario. ;.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


433


iiiii


len,


i'^:


magnitude we were in a mood for mirth. Cer-
tainly not. Wliile the smoke was ascending
from the ruins of our church consumed by fire,
were we hkely to joke on the subject ? Al-
though, indeed, none in your city appeared in
my opinion innocent, but those who were ab-
sent, or were sufferers, or were destitute both of
strength and of authority to prevent the tumult,
I nevertheless distinguished in my reply those
whose guilt was greater from those who were less
to blame, and stated that there was a difference
between the cases of those who were moved by
fear of offending powerful enemies of the Church,
and of those who desired these outrages to be
committed ; also between those who committed
them and those who instigated others to their
commission ; resolving, however, not to institute
inquiry in regard to the instigators, because
these, perhaps, could not be ascertained without ^
recourse to the use of tortures, from which we
shrink with abhorrence, as utterly inconsistent
with our aims. Your friends the Stoics, who
hold that all faults are alike, must, however, if
they were the judges, pronounce them all equally |
guilty ; and if to this opinion they join that
inflexible sternness wherewith they disparage
clemency as a vice, their sentence would neces-
sarily be, not that all should be pardoned alike,
but that all should be punished alike. Dismiss,
therefore, these philosophers altogether from the
position of advocates in this case, and rather de-
sire that we may act as Christians, so that, as we
desire, we may gain in Christ those whom we
forgive, and may not spare them by such indul-
gence as would be ruinous to themselves. May
God, whose ways are mercy and truth, be
pleased to enrich you with true felicity 1


LETTER CXI.

(November, a.d. 409.)

to victorianus, his beloved lord and most
longed-for brother and fellow-presbyter,
augustin sends greeting in the lord.

I. My heart has been filled with great sorrow
by your letter. You asked me to discuss certain
things at great length in my reply ; but such
calamities as you narrate claim rather many
groans and tears than prolix treatises. The
whole world, indeed, is afflicted with such por-
tentous misfortunes, that there is scarcely any
place where such things as you describe are not
being committed and complained of. A short
time ago some brethren were massacred by the
barbarians even in those deserts of Egypt in


sw which, in order to perfect security, they had
chosen places remote from all disturbance as the
sites of their monasteries. I suppose, moreover,


that the outrages which they have perpetrated
in the regions of Italy and Gaul are known to
you also ; and now similar events begin to be
announced to us from many provinces of Spain,
which for long seemed exempt from these evils.
But why go to a distance for examples ? Be-
hold ! in our own county of Hippo, which
the barbarians have not yet touched, the rav-
ages of the Donatist clergy and Circumcelliones
make such havoc in our churches, that perhaps
the cruelties of barbarians would be light in
comparison. For what barbarian could ever
have devised what these have done, viz. casting
lime and vinegar into the eyes of our clergymen,
besides atrociously beating and wounding every
part of their bodies ? They also sometimes plun-
der and burn houses, rob granaries, and pour out
oil and wine ; and by threatening to do this to
aU others in the district, they compel many even
to be re-baptized. Only yesterday, tidings came
to me of forty-eight souls in one place having
submitted, under fear of such things, to be re-
baptized.

2. These things should make us weep, but not
wonder ; and we ought to cry unto God that not
for our merit, but according to His mercy. He
may deliver us from so great evils. For what
else was to be expected by the human race, see-
ing that these things were so long ago foretold
both by the prophets and in the Gospels ? We
ought not, therefore, to be so inconsistent as to-
believe these Scriptures when they are read hy
us, and to complain when they are fulfilled ;.
rather, surely, ought even those who had refused
to beheve when they read or heard these things,
in Scripture to become believers now when they
behold the word fulfilled ; so that under thisi
great pressure, as it were, in the olive-press of
the Lord our God, although there be the dregs,
of unbelieving murmurs and blasphemies, there
is also a steady outflowing of pure oil in the
confessions and prayers of believers. For unta
those men who incessandy reproach the Chris-
tian faith, impiously saying that the human race
did not suffer such grievous calamities before
the Christian doctrine was promulgated through-
out the world, it is easy to find a reply in the
Lord's own words in the gospel, " That servant
which knew not his lord's wiU, and did com-
mit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten,
with few stripes ; but the servant which knew his
lord's will, and prepared not himself,, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes." ' What is there to excite surprise, if,
in the Christian dispensation, the world, like that
servant, knowing the will of the Lord, and re-
fusing to do it, is beaten with many stripes?
These men remark the rapidity with which the

' Luke xii. 47, 48.


434


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


gospel is proclaimed : they do not remark the
perversity with which by many it is despised.
But the meek and pious servants of God, who
have to bear a double portion of temporal ca-
lamities, since they suffer both at the hands of
wicked men and along with them, have also con-
solations peculiarly tlieir own, and the hope of
the world to come ; for which reason the apostle
says, " The sufferings of this present time are
not worthy to be compared with the glory which
shall hereafter be revealed in us." '

3. Wherefore, my beloved, even when you
meet those whose words you say you cannot
bear, because they say, " If we have deserved
these things for our sins, how comes it that the
servants of God are cut off not less than our-
selves by the sword of the barbarians, and the
handmaids of God are led away into captivity? "
— answer them humbly, truly, and piously in
such words as these : However carefully we keep
the way of righteousness, and yield obedience
to our Lord, can we be better than those three
men who were cast into the fiery furnace for
keeping the law of God? And yet, read what
Azarias, one of those three, said, opening his
lips in the midst of the fire : " Blessed art Thou,
O Lord God of our fatliers : Thy name is worthy
to be praised and glorified for evermore ; for
Thou art righteous in all the things that Thou
hast done to us ; yea, true are all Thy works :
Thy ways are right, and all Thy judgments truth.
In all the things which Thou hast brought upon
us, and upon the holy city of our fathers, even
Jerusalem, Thou hast executed true judgment ;
for according to truth and judgment didst Thou
bring all these things upon us because of our
sins. For we have sinned and committed in-
iquity, departing from Thee. In all things have
we trespassed, and not obeyed Thy command-
ments, nor kept them, neither done as Thou
hast commanded us, that it might go well with
us. Wherefore all that Thou hast brought
upon us, and everything tliat Thou hast done
to us, Thou hast done in true judgment. And
Thou didst deliver us into the hands of lawless
enemies, most hateful forsakers of God, and to
an unjust king, and the most wicked in all the
world. And now we cannot open our mouths :
we are become a shame and reproach to Thy
servants, and to them that worship Thee. Yet
deliver us not up wholly, for Thy name's sake,
neither disannul Thou Thy covenant ; and cause
not Thy mercy to depart from us, for Thy beloved
Abraham's sake, for Thy servant Isaac's sake, and
for Thy holy Israel's sake, to whom Thou hast
spoken, and promised that Thou wouldst multi-
ply their seed as the stars of heaven, and as the
sand that lieth upon the sea-shore. For we, O

* Rom. viii. 18.


Lord, are become less than any nation, and be
kept under this day in all the world because of
our sins." ^ Here, my brother, thou mayest
surely see how men such as they, men of holi-
ness, men of courage in the midst of tribulation,

— from which, however, they were delivered,
the flame itself fearing to consume them, —
were not silent about their sins, but confessed
them, knowing that because of these sins they
were deservedly and justly brought low.

4. Nay, can we be better men than Daniel
himself, concerning whom God, speaking to the
prince of Tyre, says by the prophet Ezekiel,
".Art thou wiser than Daniel? "^ who also is
placed among the three righteous men to whom
alone God saith that He would grant deliverance,

— pointing, doubtless, in them to three represen-
tative righteous men, — declaring that he would
deliver only Noah, Daniel, and Job, and that they
should save along with themselves neither son nor
daughter, but only their own souls ?'' Neverthe-
less, read also the prayer of Daniel, and see how,
when in captivity, he confesses not only the sins
of his people, but his own also, and acknowledges
that because of these the justice of God has
visited them with the punishment of captivity
and with reproach. For it is thus written : " And
I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by
prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sack-
cloth, and aslies : and I prayed unto the Lord
my God, and made my confession, and said : O
Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the

.covenant and mercy to them that love Him, and
to them that keep His commandments ; we have
sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have i
done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by de^
parting from Thy precepts and from Thy judg- i
ments : neither have we hearkened unto Thyi
servants the prophets, which spake in Tliy name
to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to
all the people of the land. O Lord, righteousness
belongeth unto Thee, but unto us confusion of
faces, as at this day ; to the men of Judah, and
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all
Israel, that are near, and that are far off, throughi
all the countries whither Thou hast driven them,
because of their trespass that they have trespassedi
against Thee. O Lord, to us belongeth confusion!
of face, to our kings, to our princes, and to ouii
fathers, because we have sinned against Thee
To the Lord our God belong mercies and for-
givenesses, though we have rebelled against Hira j
neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord
to walk in His laws which He set before us byi
His servants the prophets. Yea, all Israel havei
transgressed Thy law, even by departing, thai
they might not obey Thy voice ; therefore tM


2 Song of the Three Holy Children, vers. 3-14.

3 Ezek. xxviii. 3.

^ Ezek. xiv. 14, 18, 20.


i


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


435


curse is poured upon us, and the oath that is |
written in the law of Moses the servant of God,
because we have sinned against them. And He
liath confirmed His words which He spake against
us, and against our judges that judged us, by
bringing upon us a great evil ; for under the
whole heaven hath not been done as hath been
done upon Jerusalem. As it is written in the I
law of Moses, all this evil is come upon us : yet
made we not our prayer before the Lord our God,
that we might turn from our iniquities and un-
derstand Thy truth. Therefore hath the Lord
watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us ;
for the Lord our God is righteous in all His works
which He doeth ; for we obeyed not His voice.
And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought
Thy people forth out of the land of Egypt with
a mighty hand, and hast gotten Thee renown as at
this day ; we have sinned, we have done wickedly.
O Lord, according to all Thy righteousness, I
beseech Thee, let Thine anger and Thy fury be
turned away from Thy city Jerusalem, Thy holy
mountain, because, for our sins, and for the in-
iquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and Thy people
are become a reproach to all that are about us.
Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of
Thy servant, and His supplications, and cause
Thy face to shine upon Thy sanctuary which is
desolate, for the Lord's sake. O my God, incline
Thine ear, and hear ; open Thine eyes, and be-
hold our desolations, and the city which is called
by Thy name ; for we do not present our sup-
plications before Thee for our righteousnesses,
but for Thy great mercies. O Lord, hear ; O
Lord, forgive ; O Lord, hearken and do : defer
not, for Thine own sake, O my God ; for Thy
city and Thy people are called by Thy name.
And while I was speaking, and praying, and
confessing my sin, and the sin of my people
. . . " ' Observe how he spoke first of his own
sins, and then of the sins of his people. And
he extols the righteousness of God, and gives
praise to God for this, that He visits even His
saints with the rod, not unjustly, but because of
their sins. If, therefore, this be the language
of men who by reason of their eminent sanctity
found even encompassing flames and lions harm-
less, what language would befit men standing on
a level so low as we occupy, seeing that, what-
ever righteousness we may seem to practise, we
are very far from being worthy of comparison
Iwith them ?

5. Lest, however, any one should think that
[those servants of God, whose death at the hand
of barbarians you relate, ought to have been de-
livered from them in the same manner as the
Ithree young men were delivered from the fire,
nd Daniel from the lions, let such an one know

' Dan. ix. 3-20.


that these miracles were performed in order that
the kings by whom they were delivered to these
punishments might believe that they worshipped
the true God. For in His hidden counsel and
mercy God was in this manner making provision
for the salvation of these kings. It pleased
Him, however, to make no such provision in the
case of Antiochus the king, \\\\o cruelly put the
Maccabees to death ; but He punished the heart
of the obdurate king with sharper severity through
their most glorious sufferings. Yet read what
was said by even one of them — the sixth who
suffered : " After him they brought also the
sixth, who, being ready to die, said, •* Be not
deceived without cause ; for we suffer these
things for ourselves, having sinned against God :
therefore marvellous things are done unto us ;
but think not thou that takest in hand to strive
against God and His law that thou shalt escape
unpunished.'"^ You see how these also are
wise in the exercise of humility and sincerity,
confessing that they are chastened because of
their sins by the Lord, of whom it is written :
" Whom the Lord loveth He correcteth," ^ and
"He scourgeth every son whom He receiveth j"''
wherefore the Apostle says also, " If we would
judge ourselves, we should not be judged ; but
when we are judged, we are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with
the world." s

6. These things read faithfully, and proclaim
faithfully ; and to the utmost of your power be-
ware, and teach others that they must beware,
of murmuring against God in these trials and
tribulations. You tell me that good, faithful,
and holy servants of God have been cut off by
the sword of the barbarians. But what matters
it whether it is by sickness or by sword that they
have been set free from the body ? The Lord is
careful as to the character with which His ser-
vants go from this world — not as to the mere
circumstances of their departure, excepting this,
that lingering weakness involves more suffering
than a sudden death ; and yet we read of this
same protracted and dreadful weakness as the
lot of that Job to whose righteousness God Him-
self, who cannot be deceived, bears such testi-
mony.

7. Most calamitous, and much to be bewailed,
is the captivity of chaste and holy women ; but
their God is not in the power of their captors,
nor does He forsake those captives whom He
knows indeed to be His own. For those holy
men, the record of whose sufferings and confes-
sions I have quoted from the Holy Scriptures,
being held in captivity by enemies who had car-


2 2 Mace. vii. 18, 19.

3 Prov. iii. I2.
* Heb. xii. 6.

5 I Cor. xi. 31, 32.


436


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


ried them away, uttered those words, which, pre-
served in writing, we can read for ourselves, in
order to make us understand that servants of
God, even when they are in captivity, are not
forsaken by their Lord. Nay, more, do we
know what wonders of power and grace the
almighty and merciful God may ])lease to accom-
plish by means of these captive women even
in the land of the barbarians? Be that as it
may, cease not to intercede with groanings on
their behalf before God, and to seek, so far as
your power and His providence permits you, to
do for them whetever can be done, and to give
them whatever consolation can be given, as time
and opportunity may be granted. A few years
ago, a nun, a grand-daughter of Bishop Severus,
was carried off by barbarians from the neigh-
bourhood of Sitifa, and was by the marvellous
mercy of God restored with great honour to her
parents. For at the very time when the maiden
entered the house of her barbarian captors, it
became the scene of much distress through the
sudden illness of its owners, all the barbarians —
three brothers, if I mistake not, or more — being
attacked with most dangerous disease. Their
mother observed that the maiden was dedicated
to God, and believed that by her prayers her
sons might be delivered from the danger of death,
which was imminent. She begged her to inter-
cede for them, promising that if they were
healed she should be restored to her parents.
She fasted and prayed, and straightway was
heard ; for, as the result showed, the event had
been appointed that this might take place. They
therefore, having recovered health by this unex-
pected favour from God, regarded her with ad-
miration and respect, and fulfilled the promise
which their mother had made.

8. Pray, therefore, to God for them, and be-
seech Him to enable them to say such things as
the holy Azariah, whom we have mentioned,
poured forth along with other expressions in his
prayer and confession before God. For in the
land of their captivity these women are in cir-
cumstances similar to those of the three Hebrew
youths in that land in which they could not sac-
rifice to the Lord their God in the manner pre-
scribed : they cannot either bring an oblation to
the altar of God, or find a priest by whom their
oblation may be presented to God. May God
therefore grant them grace to say to Him what
Azariah said in the following sentences of his
prayer : " Neither is there at this time prince,
or prophet, or leader, or burnt-offering, or sacri-
fice, or oblation, or incense, or place to sacrifice
before Thee, and to find mercy : nevertheless,
in a contrite heart and humble spirit let us be
accepted. Like as in the burnt-offerings of rams
and bullocks, and hke as in ten thousands of fat
lambs, so let our sacrifice be in Thy sight this


day. And grant that we may wholly go after
Thee ; for they shall not be confounded that put
their trust in Thee. And now we follow Thee
with all our heart : we fear Thee and seek Thy
face. Put us not to shame, but deal with us
after Thy loving-kindness, and according to the
multitude of Thy mercies. Deliver us also
according to Thy marvellous works, and give
glory to Thy name, O Lord ; and let all them
that do Thy servants hurt be ashamed : and let
them be confounded in all their power and might,
and let their strength be broken : and let them
know that Thou art Lord, the only God, and
glorious over the whole world." '

9. When His servants use these words, and
pray fervently to God, He will stand by them, as
He has been wont ever to stand by His own, and
will either not permit their chaste bodies to suffer
any wrong from the lust of their enemies, or if
He permit this, He will not lay sin to their charge
in the matter. For when the soul is not defiled
by any impurity of consent to such wrong, the
body also is thereby protected from all partici-
pation in the guilt ; and in so far as nothing was
committed or permitted by lust on the part of
her who suffers, the whole blame lies with him
who did the wrong, and all the violence done to
the sufferer will be regarded not as implying the
baseness of wanton compliance, but as a wound
blamelessly endured. For such is the worth of
unblemished purity in the soul, that while it re-
mains intact, the body also retains its purity
unsullied, even although by violence its members
may be overpowered.

I beg your Charity to be satisfied with this j
letter, which is very long considering my other j
work (although too short to meet your wishes),
and is somewhat hurriedly written, because the [
bearer is in haste to be gone. The Lord will]
furnish you with much more abundant consola-|
tion if you read attentively His holy word.

LETTER CXV. j

(a.d. 410.) '

to fortltnatus, mv colleague in the priest-
hood, my lord most blessed, and mv brothef
beloved with profound esteem, and to thi
brethren who are with thee, augustin seni
greeting in the lord.

Your Holiness is well acquainted with Faven-|
tius, a tenant on the estate of the Paratian for-^
est. He, apprehending some injury or other at|
the hands of the owner of that estate, took ref|
uge in the church at Hippo, and was there, aaj
fugitives are wont to do, waiting till he couWi
get the matter settled through my mediationi
Becoming every day, as often happens, less anq|

' Song of the Three Children, vers. 15-22.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


437


less alarmed, and in fact completely off his
guard, as if his adversary had desisted from his
enmity, he was, when leaving the house of a
tViend after supper, suddenly carried off by one
Florentinus, an officer of the Count, who used
in this act of violence a band of armed men suf-
ficient for the purpose. When this was made
known to me, and as yet it was unknown by
whose orders or by whose hands he had been
carried off, though suspicion naturally fell on the
man from whose apprehended injury he had
claimed the protection of the Church, I at once
communicated with the tribune who is in com-
mand of the coast-guard. He sent out soldiers,
but no one could be found. But in the morn-
ing we learned in what house he had passed the
night, and also that he had left it after cock-
crowing, with the man who had him in custody.
I sent also to the place to which it was reported
that he had been removed : there the officer
above-named was found, but refused to allow
the presb)ter whom I had sent to have even a
sight of his prisoner. On the following day I
sent a letter requesting that he should be allowed
the privilege which the Emperor appointed in
cases such as his, namely, that persons sum-
moned to appear to be tried should in the
municipal court be interrogated whether they
desired to spend thirty days under adequate sur-
veillance in the town, in order to arrange their
affairs, or find funds for the expense of their
trial, my expectation being that within that pe-
riod of time we might perhaps bring his matters
to some amicable setdement. Already, how-
ever, he had gone farther under charge of the
officer Florentinus ; but my fear is, lest perchance,
if he be brought before the tribunal of the ma-
gistrate,' he suffer some injustice. For although
the integrity of that judge is widely famed as
'incorruptible, Faventius has for his adversary a
man of very great wealth. To secure that money
may not prevail in that court, I beg your Holi-
ness, my beloved lord and venerable brother,
to have the kindness to give the accompanying
letter to the honourable magistrate, a man very
much beloved by us, and to read this letter also
to him ; for I have not thought it necessary to
write twice the same statement of the case. I
trust that he will delay the hearing of the case,
because I do not know whether the man is inno-
cent or guilty. I trust also that he will not over-
look the fact that the laws have been violated in
his having been suddenly carried off, without be-
ing brought, as was enacted by the Emperor,
before the municipal court, in order to his being
asked whether he wished to accept the benefit
iof the delay of thirty days, so that in this way
we may get the affair settled between him and
his adversary.

' Consularis.


LEITER CXVI.

(enclosed in the foregoing letter.)
TO generosus, my noble and justly distinguished

LORD, MY honoured AND MUCH-LOVED SON,
AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING IN THE LORD.

Although the praises and favourable report
of your administration and your own illustrious
good name always give me the greatest pleas-
ure, because of the love which we feel due to
your merit and to your benevolence, on no oc-
casion have I hitherto been burdensome to your
Excellency as an intercessor requesting any fa-
vour from you, my much-loved lord and justly-
honoured son. When, however, your Excellency
has learned from the letters which I have sent to
my venerable brother and colleague, Fortunatus,
what has occurred in the town in which I serve
the Church of God, your kind heart will at once
perceive the necessity under which I have been
constrained to trespass by this petition on your
time, already fully occupied. I am perfectly
assured that, cherishing towards us the feeling
which, in the name of Christ, we are fully war-
ranted to expect, you will act in this matter as
becomes not only an upright, but also a Chris-
tian magistrate.

LETTER CXVIL
(a.d. 410.)

FROM DIOSCORUS TO AUGUSTIN.

To you, who esteem the substance, not the
style of expression, as important, any formal pre-
amble to this letter would be not only unneces-
sary, but irksome. Therefore, without further
preface, I beg your attention. The aged Alypius
had often promised, in answer to my request, that
he would, with your help, furnish a reply to a very
few brief questions of mine in regard to the
Dialogues of Cicero ; and as he is said to be at
present in Mauritania, I ask and earnestly entreat
you to condescend to give, without his assistance,
those answers which, even had your brother been
present, it would doubtless have fallen to you
to furnish. What I require is not money, it is
not gold ; though, if you possessed these, you
would, I am sure, be willing to give them to me
for any fit object. This request of mine you can
grant without effort, by merely speaking. I might
importune you at a greater length, and through
many of your dear friends ; but I know your dis-
position, that you do not desire to be solicited,
but show kindness readily to all, if only there be
nothing improper in the thing requested : and
there is absolutely nothing improper in what I
ask. Be this, however, as it may, I beg you to
do me this kindness, for I am on the point of
embarking on a vo}age. You know how very


438


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


painful it is to me to be burdensome to any one,
and much more to one of your frank disposition ;
but God alone knows how irresistible is the
pressure of the necessity under which I have
made this apj^lication. For, taking leave of you,
and committing myself to divine protection, I
am about to undertake a voyage ; and you know
the ways of men, how prone they are to censure,
and you see how any one will be regarded as
illiterate and stupid who, when questions are
addressed to him, can return no answer. There-
fore, I implore you, answer all my queries with-
out delay. Send me not away downcast. I ask
this that so I may see my parents ; for on this
one errand I have sent Cerdo to you, and I now
delay only till he return. My brother Zenoblus
has been appointed imperial remembrancer,' and
has sent me a free pass for my journey, with pro-
visions. If I am not worthy of your reply, let
at least the fear of my forfeiting these provisions
by delay move you to give answers to my little
questions.^

May the most high God spare you long to us
in health ! Papas salutes your excellency most
cordially.

LETTER CXVIII.

(a.d. 410.)

augustin to dioscorus.

Chap. i. — i. You have sent suddenly upon
me a countless multitude of questions, by which
you must have purposed to blockade me on
every side, or rather bury me completely, even
if you were under the impression that I was
otherwise unoccupied and at leisure ; for how
could I, even though wholly at leisure, furnish
the solution of so many questions to one in
such haste as you are, and, in fact, as you write,
on the eve of a journey? I would, indeed, be
prevented by the mere number of the questions
to be resolved, even if their solution were easy.
But they are so perplexingly intricate, and so
hard, that even if they were few in number, and
engaging me when otherwise wholly at leisure,
they would, by the mere time required, exhaust
my powers of application, and wear out my
strength. I would, however, fain snatch you
forcibly away from the midst of those inquiries
in which you so much delight, and fix you down
among the cares which engage my attention, in
order that you may either learn not to be un-
profitably curious, or desist from presuming to

■ This officer, *' magister memorise," was a private secretary of 1
the emperor, and had, among other privileges of his office, the right [
of granting liberty to private individuals to travel by the imperial con-
veyances along the great highways connecting Rome with the remo- |
test boundaries of the provinces. See Suetonius, / 'ita A xgusti, I
chap. .\lix., and Pliny, Letters, Books x.-xiv., and Codex Justini-
ani. Book xii. Title 51.

^ We conjecture from the context that this expresses the force of I
the obscure words, " saltern timeantur annonae." 1


impose the task of feeding and fostering your
curiosity upon men among whose cares one of
the greatest is to repress and curb those who are
too inquisitive. For if time and pains are de-
voted to writing anything to you, how much bet-
ter and more profitably are these employed in
endeavours to cut off those vain and treacherous
passions (which are to be guarded against with
a caution proportioned to the ease with which
they impose upon us, by their being disguised
and cloaked under the semblance of virtue and
the name of liberal studies), rather than in caus-
ing them to be, by our service, or rather obse-
quiousness, so to speak, roused to a more
vehement assertion of the despotism under which
they so oppress your excellent spirit.

2. For tell me what good purpose is served by
the many Dialogues which you have read, if they
have in no way helped you towards the disco\'ery
and attainment of the end of all your actions?
For by your letter you indicate plainly enough
what you have proposed to yourself as the end
to be attained by all this most ardent study of
yours, which is at once useless to yourself and
troublesome to me. For when you were in your
letter using every means to persuade me to
answer the questions which you sent, you wrote
these words : " I might importune you at greater
length, and through many of your dear friends ;
but I know your disposition, that you do not
desire to be solicited, but show kindness readily
to all, if only there be nothing improper in the
thing requested : and there is absolutely nothing
improper in what I ask. Be this, however, as it
may, I beg you to do me this kindness, for I am
on the point of embarking on a voyage." In
these words of your letter you are indeed right
in your opinion as to myself, that I am desirous
of showing kindness to all, if only there be noth-
ing improper in the request made ; but it is not
my opinion that there is nothing improper in
what you ask. For when I consider how a
bishop is distracted and overwrought by the
cares of his office clamouring on every side, it
does not seem to me proper for him suddenly,
as if deaf, to withdraw himself from all these,
and devote himself to the work of expounding
to a single student some unimportant questions
in the Dialogues of Cicero. The impropriety
of this you yourself apprehend, although, carried
away with zeal in the pursuit of your studies,
you will by no means give heed to it. For what
other construction can I put on the fact that,
after saying that in this matter there is absolutely
nothing imjiroper, you have immediately sub-
joined : " Be this, however, as it may, I beg you
to do me this kindness, for I am on the point
of embarking on a voyage " ? For this intimates
that in your view, at least, there is no imprO'
priety in your request, but that whatever imprO'


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


439


priety may be in it, you nevertlieless ask me to
do what you ask, because you are about to go on
a voyage. Now what is the force of this sup-
plementary plea — "lam on the point of em-
barking on a voyage"? Do you mean that,
unless you were in these circumstances, I ought
not to do you service in which anything improper
may be involved ? You think, forsooth, that the
impropriety can be washed away by salt water.
But even were it so, my share at least of the
fault would remain unexpiated, because I do not
propose undertaking a voyage.

3. You write, further, that I know how very
painful it is to you to be burdensome to any one,
and you solemnly protest that God alone knows
how irresistible is the necessity under which you
make the application. When I came to this
statement in your letter, I turned ray attention
eagerly to learn the nature of the necessity ; and,
behold, you bring it before me in these words :
*' You know the ways of men, how prone they
are to censure, and how any one will be regarded
as illiterate and stupid who, when questions are
addressed to him, can return no answer." On
readmg this sentence, I felt a burning desire to
reply to your letter; for, by the morbid weak-
ness of mind which this indicated, you pierced
my inmost heart, and forced your way into the
midst of my cares, so that I could not refuse to
minister to your relief, so far as God might en-
able me — not by devising a solution of your
difficulties, but by breaking the connection be-
tween your happiness and the wretched support
on which it now insecurely hangs, viz. the opin-
ions of men, and fastening it to a hold which is
firm and immovable. Do you not, O Dioscorus,
remember an ingenious line of your favourite
Persius, in which he not only rebukes your folly,
but administers to your boyish head, if you have
only sense to feel it, a deserved correction, re-
straining your vanity with the words, '•' To know
is nothing in your eyes unless another knows
that you know " ? ' You have, as I said before,
read so many Dialogues, and devoted your atten-
tion to so many discussions of philosophers —
tell me which of them has placed the chief end
of his actions in the applause of the vulgar, or
in the opinion even of good and wise men ? But
you, — and what should make you the more
ashamed, — you, when on the eve of sailing
away from Africa, give evidence of your having
made signal progress, forsooth, in your studies
here, when you affirm that the only reason why
you impose the task of expounding Cicero to
you upon bishops, who are already oppressed
with work and engrossed with matters of a very
different nature, is, that you fear that if, when
questioned by men prone to censure, you cannot

' "Scire tuuni uihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter." — Persius,
Sat. i, 27.


answer, you will be regarded by them as illit-
erate and stupid. O cause well worthy to oc-
cupy the hours which bishops devote to study
while other men sleep !

4. You seem to me to be prompted to mental
effort night and day by no other motive than

! ambition to be praised by men for your industry
and acquisitions in learning. Although I have
ever regarded this as fraught with danger to per-
sons who are striving after the true and the
right, I am now, by your case, more convinced
of the danger than before. For it is due to no
other cause than this same pernicious habit that
you have failed to see by what motive we might
j be induced to grant to you what you asked ; for
I as by a perverted judgment you yourself are
' urged on to acquire a knowledge of the things
about which you put questions, from no other
motive than that you may receive praise or escape
censure from men, you imagine that we, by a
like perversity of judgment, are to be influenced
by the considerations alleged in your request.
Would that, when we declare to you that by
your writing such things concerning yourself we
are moved, not to grant your request, but to re-
I prove and correct you, we might be able to
effect for you also complete emancipation from
j the influence of a boon so worthless and deceit-
j ful as the applause of men ! " It is the manner
I of men," you say, " to be prone to censure."
j What then ? " Any one who can make no reply
I when questions are addressed to him," you say,
J " will be regarded as illiterate and stupid." Be-
hold, then, I ask you a question not concerning
something in the books of Cicero, whose mean-
ing, perchance, his readers may not be able to
find, but concerning your own letter and the
meaning of your own words. My question is :
Why did you not say, " Any one who can make
no reply will be proved to be illiterate and stu-
pid," but prefer to say, " He will be regarded as
illiterate and stupid"? ^Vhy, if not for this
reason, that you yourself already understand well
enough that the person who fails to answer such
questions is not in reality, but only in the opin-
ion of some, illiterate and stupid? But I warn
you that he who fears to be subjected to the edge
of the pruning-hook by the tongues of such men
is a sapless log, and is therefore not only re-
garded as illiterate and stupid, but is actually
such, and proved to be so.

5. Perhaps you will say, "But seeing that I
am not stupid, and that I am specially earnest in
striving not to be stupid, I am reluctant even to
be regarded as stupid." And righdy so ; but I
ask. What is your motive in this reluctance ? For
in stating why you did not hesitate to burden us
with those questions which you wish to have
solved and explained, you said that this was the
reason, and that this was the end, and an end so


440


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


necessary in your estiniation that you said it
was of overwhelming urgency, — lest, forsooth, if
you were posed with these questions and gave
no answer, you should be regarded as illiterate
and stupid by men prone to censure. Now, I
ask, is this [jealousy as to your own reputation]
the whole reason why you beg this from us, or is
it because of some ulterior object that you are
unwilling to be thought illiterate and stupid? If
this be the whole reason, you see, as I think,
that this one thing [the praise of men] is the
end pursued by that vehement zeal of yours, by
which, as you admit, a burden is imposed on us.
But, from Dioscorus, what can be to us a bur-
den, except that burden which Dioscorus him-
self unconsciously bears, — a burden which he
will begin to feel only when he attempts to rise,
— a burden of which I would fain believe that
it is not so bound to him as to defy his efforts to
shake his shoulders free ? And this I say not
because these questions engage your studies, but
because they are studied by you for such an end.
For surely you by this time feel that this end is
trivial, unsubstantial, and light as air. It is also
apt to produce in the soul what may be likened
to a dangerous swelling, beneath which lurk the
germs of decay, and by it the eye of the mind
becomes suffused, so that it cannot discern the
riches of truth. Believe this, my Dioscorus, it
is true : so shall I enjoy thee in unfeigned long-
ing for truth, and in that essential dignity of
truth by the shadow of which you are turned
aside. If I have failed to convince you of this
by the method which I have now used, I know
no other that I can use. For you do not see it ;
nor can you possibly see it so long as you build
your joys on the crumbling foundation of human
applause.

6. If, however, this be not the end aimed at
in these actions and by this zeal of yours, but
there is some other ulterior reason for your un-
willingness to be regarded as iUiterate and stupid,
I ask what that reason is. If it be to remove
impediments to the acquisition of temporal
riches, or the obtaining of a wife, or the grasping
of honours, and other things of that kind which
are flowing past with a headlong current, and
•dragging to the bottom those who fall into them,
it is assuredly not our duty to help you towards
that end, nay, rather we ought to turn you away
from it. For we do not so forbid your fixing the
aim of your studies in the precarious possession
of renown as to make you leave, as it were, the
waters of the Mincius and enter the Eridanus,
into which, perchance, the Mincius would carry
you even without yourself making the change.
For when the vanity of human applause has
failed to satisfy the soul, because it furnishes for
its nourishment nothing real and substantial, this
same eager desire compels the mind to go on to


something else as more rich and productive ;
and if, nevertheless, this also belong to the things
which pass away with time, it is as when one
river leads us into another, so that there can be
no rest from our miseries so long as the end
aimed at in our discharge of duty is placed in
that which is unstable. We desire, therefore,
that in some firm and immutable good you
should fix the home of your most stedfast
efforts, and the perfectly secure resting-place of
all your good and honourable activity. Is it,
perchance, your intention, if you succeed by the
breath of propitious fame, or even by spreading
your sails for its fitful gusts, in reaching that
earthly happiness of which I have spoken, to
make it subservient to the acquisition of the
other — the sure and true and satisfying good ?
But to me it does not seem probable — and truth
itself forbids the supposition — that it should be
reached either by such a circuitous way when it
is at hand, or at such cost when it is freely given.

7. Perhaps you think that we ought to turn
the praise of men itself to good account as an
instrument for making others accessible to coun-
sels regarding that which is good and useful ;
and perhaps you are anxious lest, if men regard
you as illiterate and stupid, they think you un-
worthy to receive their earnest or patient atten-
tion, if you were either exhorting any one to do
well, or reproving the malice and wickedness of
an evil-doer. If, in proposing these questions,
you contemplated this righteous and beneficent
end, we have certainly been wronged by your
not giving the preference to this in your letter as
the consideration by which we might be moved
either to grant willingly what you asked, or, if
declining your request, to do so on the ground
of some other cause which might perchance
prevent us, but not on the ground of our being
ashamed to accept the position of serving or
even not resisting the aspirations of your vanity.
For, I pray you, consider how much better and
more profitable it is for you to receive from us
with far more certainty and with less loss of time
those principles of truth by which you can for
yourself refute all that is false, and by so doing
be prevented from cherishing an opinion so false
and contemptible as this — that you are learned
and intelligent if you have studied with a zeal in
which there is more pride than prudence the
worn-out errors of many writers of a bygone age.
But this opinion I do not suppose you now to
hold, for surely I have not in vain spoken so long
to Dioscorus things so manifestly true ; and from
this, as understood, I proceed with my letter.

Chap. ii. — 8. Wherefore, seeing that you do
not consider a man illiterate and stupid merely
on the ground of ignorance of these things, but
only if he be ignorant of the truth itself, and that,
consequently, the opinions of any one who has


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


441


written or may have written on these subjects
are either true, and therefore are already held
by you, or false, and therefore you may be con-
tent not to know them, and need not be con-
sumed with vain solicitude about knowing the
variety of the opinions of other men under the
fear of otherwise remaining illiterate and stupid,
— seeing, I say, that this is the case, let us now,
if you please, consider whether, in the event of
other men, who are, as you say, prone to cen-
sure, finding you ignorant of these things, and
therefore regarding you, though falsely, as an
illiterate and stupid person, this mistake of theirs
ought to have so much weight with you as to
make it not unseemly for you to apply to bish-
ops for instruction in these things. I propose
this on the assumption that we now believe you
to be seeking this instruction in order that by it
you may be helped in recommending the truth
to men, and in reclaiming men who, if they sup-
posed you to be illiterate and stupid in regard to
those books of Cicero, would regard you as a
person from whom they considered it unworthy
of them to receive any useful or profitable in-
struction. Believe me, you are under a mis-
take.

9. For, in the first place, I do not at all see
that, in the countries in which you are so afraid
of being esteemed deficient in education and
acuteness, there are any persons who will ask
you a single question about these matters. Both
in this country, to which you came to learn these
things, and at Rome, you know by experience
how little they are esteemed, and that, in con-
sequence, they are neither taught nor learned ;
and throughout all Africa, so far are you from
being troubled by any such questioner, that yoil
cannot find any one who will be troubled with
your questions, and are compelled by the dearth
of such persons to send your questions to bish-
ops to be solved by them : as if, indeed, these
bishops, although in their youth, under the influ-
ence of the same ardour — let me rather say
error — which carries you away, they were at
pains to learn these things as matters of great
moment, permitted them still to remain in mem-
ory now that their heads are white with age and
they are burdened with the responsibilities of
episcopal office ; or as if, supposing them to de-
sire to retain these things in memory, greater and
graver cares would not in spite of their desire
banish them from their hearts ; or as if, in the
event of some of these things lingering in recol-
lection by the force of long habit, they would not
wish rather to bury in utter obHvion what was
thus remembered, than to answer senseless ques-
tions at a time when, even amidst the comparative
leisure enjoyed in the schools and in the lecture-
rooms of rhetoricians, they seem to have so lost
both voice and vigour that, in order to have in-


struction imparted concerning them, it is deemed
necessary to send from Carthage to Hippo, — a
place in which all such things are so unwonted
and so wholly foreign, that if, in taking the
trouble of writing an answer to your question, I
wished to look at any passage to discover the
order of thought in the context preceding or
following the words requiring exposition, I would
be utterly unable to find a manuscript of the
works of Cicero. However, these teachers of
rhetoric in Carthage who have failed to satisfy
you in this matter are not only not blamed, but,
on the contrary, commended by me, if, as I sup-
pose, they have not forgotten that the scene of
these contests was wont to be, not the Roman
forum, but the Greek gymnasia. But when you
have applied your mind to these gymnasia, and
have found even them to be in such things bare
and cold, the church of the Christians of Hippo
occurred to you as a place where you might lay
down your cares, because the bishop now occu-
pying that see at one time took fees for instruct-
ing boys in these things. But, on the one hand,
I do not wish you to be still a boy, and, on the
other hand, it is not becoming for me, either for
a fee or as a favour, to be dealing now in child-
ish things. This, therefore, being the case —
seeing, that is to say, that these two great cities,
Rome and Carthage, the living centres of Latin
literature, neither try your patience by asking
you such questions as you speak of, nor care pa-
tiently to listen to you when you propound them,
I am amazed in a degree beyond all expression
that a young man of your good sense should be
afraid lest you should be afflicted with any ques-
tioner on these subjects in the cities of Greece
and of the East. You are much more likely to
hear jackdaws ' in Africa than this manner of
conversation in those lands.

10. Suppose, however, in the next place, that
I am wrong, and that perchance some one should
arise putting questions like these, — a phenome-
non the more unwelcome because in those parts
peculiarly absurd, — are you not much more
afraid lest far more readily men arise who, being
Greeks, and finding you settled in Greece, and
acquainted with the Greek language as your
mother tongue, may ask you some things in the
original works of their philosophers which Cicero
may not have put into his treatises? If this
happen, what reply will you make? Will you
say that you preferred to learn these things from
the books of Latin rather than of Greek authors ?
By such an answer you will, in the first place,
put an affront upon Greece ; and you know how
men of that nation resent this. And in the next
place, they being now wounded and angry, how

' Corniculas. The lapse of centuries may have introduced into
the north of Africa birds unknown in Auguslin's time. The trans-
lator has seen these birds in Egypt.


442


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


readily will you find what you are too anxious to
avoid, that they will count you on the one hand
stupid, because you preferred to learn the opin-
ions of the Greek philosophers, or, more prop-
erly speaking, some isolated and scattered tenets
of their philosophy, in Latin dialogues, rather
than to study the complete and connected sys-
tem of their oi)inions in the Greek originals, —
and, on the other hand, illiterate, because, al-
though ignorant of so many things written in
your language, you have unsuccessfully laboured
to gather some of them together from writings
in a foreign tongue. Or will you perhaps reply
that you did not despise the Greek writings on
these subjects, but that you devoted your atten-
tion first to the study of Latin works, and now,
proficient in these, are beginning to inquire after |
Greek learning ? If this does not make you
blush, to confess that you, being a Greek, have
in your boyhood learned Latin, and are now, |
like a man of some foreign nation,' desirous of
studying Greek literature, surely you will not
blush to own that in the department of Latin j
literature you are ignorant of some things, of
which you may perceive how many versed in
Latin learning are equally ignorant, if you will


onlv consider that, although


in the midst


of so many learned men in Carthage, you assure
me that it is under the pressure of necessity that
you impose this burden on me.

II. Finally, suppose that you, being asked all
those questions which you have submitted to me,
have been able to answer them all. Behold !
you are now spoken of as most learned and most
acute ; behold ! now this insignificant breath of
Greek laudation raises you to heaven. Be it
yours now to remember your responsibilities and
the end for which you coveted these praises,
namely, that to men who have been easily won
to admire you by these trifles, and who are now
hanging most affectionately and eagerly on your
lips, you may impart some truly important and
wholesome instruction ; and I should like to
know whether you possess, and can rightly im-
part to others, that which is truly most important
and wholesome. For it is absurd if, after learning
many unnecessary things with a view to prepar-
ing the ears of men to receive what is necessary,
you be found not to possess those necessary
things for the reception of which you have by
these unnecessary things prepared the way ; it
is absurd if, while busying yourself with learning
things by which you may win men's attention,
you refuse to learn that which may be poured
into their minds when their attention is secured.
But if you reply that you have already learned
this, and say that the truth supremely necessary
is Christian doctrine, which I know that you es-

* Barbarum.


teem above all other things, placing in it alone
your hope of everlasting salvation, then surely
this does not demand a knowledge of the Dia-
logues of Cicero, and a collection of the beggarly
and divided opinions of other men, in order to
your persuading men to give it a hearing. Let
your character and manner of life command the
attention of those who are to receive any such
teaching from you. I would not have you open
the way for teaching truth by first teaching what
must be afterwards unlearned.

12. Yox if the knowledge of the discordant
and mutually contradictory opinions of others is
of any service to him who would obtain an en-
trance for Christian truth in overthrowing the
opposition of error, it is useful only in the way
of preventing the assailant of the truth from
being at liberty to fix his eye solely on the work
of controverting your tenets, while carefully hid-
ing his own from view. For the knowledge of
the truth is of itself sufficient both to detect and
to subvert all errors, even those which may not
have been heard before, if only they are brought
forward. If, however, in order to secure not
only the demolition of open errors, but also the
rooting out of those which lurk in darkness, it is
necessary for you to be acquainted with the er-
roneous opinions which others have advanced^
let both eye and ear be wakeful, I beseech you,
— look well and listen well whether any of our
assailants bring fonvard a single argument from
Anaximenes and from Anaxagoras, when, though
the Stoic and Epicurean philosophies were more
recent and taught largely, even their ashes are
not so warm as that a single spark can be struck
out from them against the Christian faith. ' The
Gin which resounds in the battle-field of contro-
versy now comes from innumerable small com-
panies and cliques of sectaries, some of them
easily discomfited, others presuming to make
bold resistance, — such as the partisans of Do-
natus, Maximian, and Manichasus here, or the
unruly herds of Arians, Eunomians, Macedoni-
ans, and Cataphrygians and other pests which
abound in the countries to which you are on
your way. If you shrink from the task of ac-
quainting yourself with the errors of all these
sects, what occasion have we in defending the
Christian religion to inquire after the tenets of
Anaximenes, and with idle curiosity to awaken
anew controversies which have slept for ages,
when already the cavillings and arguments even
of some of the heretics who claimed the glory
of the Christian name, such as the Marcionites !
and the Sabellians, and many more, have been
put to silence ? Nevertheless, if it be necessary,
as I have said, to know beforehand some of the
opinions which war against the truth, and be-
come thoroughly conversant with these, it is our
duty to give a place in such study to the here-


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


443


tics who call themselves Christians, much rather
than to Anaxagoras and Democritus.

Chap. hi. — 13. Again, whoever may put to
you the questions which you have propounded
to us, let him understand that, under the guid-
ance of deeper erudition and greater wisdom, '
you are ignorant of things like these. For if
Themistocles regarded it as a small matter that
he was looked upon as imperfectly educated
when he had declined to play on the lyre at a j
banquet, and at the same time, when, after he ,
had confessed ignorance of this accomplishment,
one said, "What, then, do you know? " gave as '
his reply, " The art of making a small repub-
lic great" — are you to hesitate about admitting
ignorance in trifles like these, when it is in your
power to answer any one who may ask, " What,
then, do you know?" — "The secret by which '
without such knowledge a man may be blessed " ? '
And if you do not yet possess this secret, you ;
act in searching into those other matters with as
blind perversity as if, when labouring under some
dangerous disease of the body, you eagerly sought
after dainties in food and finery in dress, instead of
physic and physicians. For this attainment ought
not to be put off upon any pretext whatever, and
no other knowledge ought, especially in our age,
to receive a prior place in your studies. And
now see how easily you may have this knowledge ;
if you desire it. He who inquires how he may I
attain a blessed life is assuredly inquiring after
nothing else than this : where is the highest


good \


in


other words, wherein resides man's


supreme good, not according to the perverted
and hasty opinions of men, but according to the
sure and immovable truth ? Now its residence
is not found by any one except in the body, or
in the mind, or in God, or in two of these, or in
the three combined. If, then, you have learned
that neidier the supreme good nor any part what-
ever of the supreme good is in the body, the
remaining alternatives are, that it is in the mind,
or in God, or in both combined. And if now
you have also learned that what is true of the
body in this respect is eqally true of the mind,
what now remains but God Himself as the One
in whom resides man's supreme good ? — not that
there are no other goods, but that good is called
the supreme good to which all others are re-
lated. For every one is blessed when he enjoys
that for the sake of which he desires to have all
other things, seeing that it is loved for its own
sake, and not on account of something else.
And the supreme good is said to be there be-
cause at this point nothing is found towards
which the supreme good can go forth, or to
which it is related. In it is the resting-place of
desire ; in it is assured fruition ; in it the most
tranquil satisfaction of a will morally perfect.
14. Give me a man who sees at once that the


body is not the good of the mind, but that the
mind is rather the good of the body : with such
a man we would, of course, forbear from inquir-
ing whether the highest good of which we speak,
or any part of it, is in the body. For that the
mind is better than the body is a truth which it
would be utter folly to deny. Etpially absurd
would it be to deny that that which gives a happy
life, or any part of a happy life, is better than
that which receives the boon. The mind, there-
fore, does not receive from the body either the
supreme good or any part of the supreme good.
Men who do not see this have been blinded by
that sweetness of carnal pleasures which they do
not discern to be a consequence of imperfect
health. Now, perfect health of body shall be
the consummation of the immortality of the
whole man. For God has endowed the soul
with a nature so powerful, that from that con-
summate fulness of joy which is promised to the
saints in the end of time, some portion over-
flows also upon the lower part of our nature, the
body, — not the blessedness which is proper to
the part which enjoys and understands, but the
plenitude of health, that is, the vigour of incor-
ruption. Men who, as I have said, do not see
this war with each other in unsatisfactory debates,
each maintaining the view which may please his
own fancy, but all placing the supreme good of
man in the body, and so stir up crowds of dis-
orderly carnal minds, of whom the Epicureans
have flourished in pre-eminent estimation with
the unlearned multitude.

15. Give me a man who sees at once, more-
over, that when the mind is happy, it is happy
not by good which belongs to itself, else it would
never be unhappy : and with such a man we
would, of course, forbear from inquiring whether
that highest and, so to speak, bliss-bestowing
good, or any part of it, is in the mind. For
when the mind is elated with joy in itself, as if
in good which belongs to itself, it is proud. But
when the mind perceives itself to be mutable, —
a fact which may be learned from this, even
though nothing else proved it, that the mind
from being foolish may be made wise, — and
apprehends that wisdom is unchangeable, it must
at the same time apprehend that wisdom is su-
perior to its own nature, and that it finds more
abundant and abiding joy in the communications
and light of w-isdom than in itself. Thus desist-
ing and subsiding from boasting and self-conceit,
it strives to cling to God, and to be recruited
and reformed by Him who is unchangeable ;
whom it now understands to be the Author not
only of every species of all things with which it
comes in contact, either by the bodily senses or
by intellectual faculties, but also of even the
very capacity of taking form before any form
has been taken, since the formless is defined to


444


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


be that which can receive a form. Therefore it
feels its own instability more, just in proportion
as it clings less to God, whose being is perfect :
it discerns also that the perfection of His being
is consummate because He is immutable, and
therefore neither gains nor loses, but that in
itself every change by which it gains capacity
for perfect clinging to (iod is advantageous, but
every change by which it loses is pernicious, and
further, that all loss tends towards destruction ;
and although it is not manifest whether any ;
thing is ultimately destroyed, it is manifest to
every one that the loss brings destruction so far j
that the object no longer is what it was. Whence
the mind infers that the one reason why things '
suffer loss, or are liable to suffer loss, is, that \
they were made out of nothing ; so that their
property of being, and of permanence, and the
arrangement whereby each finds even accord- ^
ing to its imperfections its own place in the !
complex whole, all depend on the goodness and
omnipotence of Him whose being is perfect,'
and who is the Creator able to make out of^
nothing not only something, but something \
great ; and that the first sin, i.e. the first volun- \
tary loss, is rejoicing in its own power : for it ]
rejoices in something less than would be the '
source of its joy if it rejoiced in the power of
God, which is unquestionably greater. Not per-
ceiving this, and looking only to the capacities
of the human mind, and the great beauty of its '
achievements in word and deed, some, who
would have been ashamed to place man's su-
preme good in the body, have, by placing it in
the mind, assigned to it unquestionably a lower j
sphere than that assigned to it by unsophisti-
cated reason. Among Greek philosophers who
hold these views, the chief place both in number I
of adherents and in subtlety of disputation has
been held by the Stoics, who have, however, in
consequence of their opinion that in nature
everything is material, succeeded in turning the
mind rather from carnal than material objects.

1 6. Among those, again, who say that our su-
preme and only good is to enjoy God, by whom
both we ourselves and all things were made, the
most eminent have been the Platonists, who not
unreasonably judged it to belong to their duty to
confute the Stoics and Epicureans — the latter
especially, and almost exclusively. The Aca- '
demic School is identical with the Platonists, as
is shown plainly enough by the links of unbro-
ken succession connecting the schools. For if
you ask who was the predecessor of Arcesilas, !
the first who, announcing no doctrine of his j
own, set himself to the one work of refuting the !
Stoics and Epicureans, you will find that it was
Polemo ; ask who preceded Polemo, it was Xen-

' Qui suntme at. |


ocrates ; but Xenocrates was Plato's disciple, and
by him appointed his successor in the academy.
Wherefore, as to this question concerning the
supreme good, if we set aside the representatives
of conflicting views, and consider the abstract
question, you find at once that two errors con-
front each other as diametrically opposed — the
one declaring the body, and the other declaring
the mind to be the seat of the supreme good of
men. You find also that truly enlightened rea-
son, by which God is perceived to be our su-
preme good, is opposed to both of these errors,
but does not impart the knowledge of what is
true until it has first made men unlearn what is
false. If now you consider the ciuestion in con-
nection with the advocates of different views,
you will find the Epicureans and Stoics most
keenly contending with each other, and the Pla-
tonists, on the other hand, endeavouring to de-
cide the controversy between them, concealing
the truth which they held, and devoting them-
selves only to prove and overthrow the vain con-
fidence with which the others adhered to error.

1 7. It was not in the power of the Platonists,
however, to be so efficient in supporting the side
of reason enlightened by truth, as the others
were in supporting their own errors. For from
them all there was then withheld that example
of divine humility, which, in the fulness of time,^
was furnished by our Lord Jesus Christ, — that
one example before which, even in the mind of
the most headstrong and arrogant, all pride
bends, breaks, and dies. And therefore the Pla-
tonists, not being able by their authority to lead
the mass of mankind, blinded by love of earthly
things, into faith in things invisible, — although
they saw them moved, especially by the argu-
ments of the Epicureans, not only to drink
freely the cup of the pleasures of the body to
which they were naturally inclined, but even to
plead for these, affirming that they constitute
man's highest good ; although, moreover, they
saw that those who were moved to abstinence
from these pleasures by the praise of virtue
found it easier to regard pleasure as having its
true seat in the soul, whence the good actions,
concerning which they were able, in some meas-
ure, to form an opinion, proceeded, — at the
same time, saw that if they attempted to intro-
duce into the minds of men the notion of some-
thing divine and supremely immutable, which
cannot be reached by any one of the bodily
senses, but is apprehensible only by reason,
which, nevertheless, surpasses in its nature the
mind itself, and were to teach that this is God,
set before the human soul to be enjoyed by it
when purged from all stains of human desires,
in whom alone every longing after happiness

2 Opportt4ni$simo tempore. ,


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


445


finds rest, and in whom alone we ought to find
the consummation of all good, — men would
not understand them, and would much more
readily award the palm to their antagonists,
whether Epicureans or Stoics ; the result of
which would be a thing most disastrous to the
human race, namely, that the doctrine, which is
true and profitable, would become sullied by the
contempt of the uneducated masses. So much
in regard to Ethical questions.

i8. As to Physics, if the Platonists taught that
the originating cause of all natures is immaterial
wisdom, and if, on the other hand, the rival sects
of philosophers never got above material things,
while the beginning of all things was attributed
by some to atoms, by others to the four elements,
in which fire was of special power in the con-
struction of all things, — who could fail to see
to which opinion a favourable verdict would be
given, when the great mass of unthinking men
are enthralled by material things, and can in no
wise comprehend that an immaterial power could
form the universe ?

19. The department of dialectic questions re-
mains to be discussed ; for, as you are aware, all
questions in the pursuit of wisdom are classified
under three heads, — Ethics, Physics, and Dia-
lectics. When, therefore, the Epicureans said
that the senses are never deceived, and, though
the Stoics admitted that they sometimes are mis-
taken, both placed in the senses the standard by
which truth is to be comprehended, who would '
listen to the Platonists when both of these sects
opposed them ? Who would look upon them as
entitled to be esteemed men at all, and much
less wise men, if, without hesitation or qualifica-
tion, they affirmed not only that there is some-
thing which cannot be discerned by touch, or
smell, or taste, or hearing, or sight, and which
cannot be conceived of by any image borrowed
from the things with which the senses acquaint
us, but that this alone truly exists, and is alone
capable of being perceived, because it is alone
unchangeable and eternal, but is perceived only
by reason, the faculty whereby alone truth, in so
far as it can be discovered by us, is found ?

20. Seeing, therefore, that the Platonists held
opinions which they could not impart to men
enthralled by the flesh ; seeing also that they were
not of such authority among the common people
as to persuade them to accept what they ought
to believe until the mind should be trained to
that condition in which these things can be un-
derstood, — they chose to hide their own opin-
ions, and to content themselves with arguing
against those who, although they affirmed that
the discovery of truth is made through the senses
of the body, boasted that they had found the
truth. And truly, what occasion have we to in-
quire as to the nature of their teaching? We


know that it was not divine, nor invested with
any divine authority. But this one fact merits
our attention, that whereas Plato is in many ways
most clearly proved by Cicero to have placed
both the supreme good and the causes of things,
and the certainty of the processes of reason, in
Wisdom, not human, but divine, whence in some
way the light of human wisdom is derived — in
Wisdom which is wholly immutable, and in Truth
always consistent with itself; and whereas we
also learn from Cicero that the followers of Plato
laboured to overthrow the philosophers known
as Epicureans and Stoics, who placed the su-
preme good, the causes of things, and the cer-
tainty of the processes of reason, in the nature
either of body or of mind, — the controversy had
continued rolling on with successive centuries, so
that even at the commencement of the Christian
era, when the faith of things invisible and eter-
nal was with saving power preached by means
of visible miracles to men, who could neither see
nor imagine anything beyond things material,
these same Epicureans and Stoics are found in
the Acts of the Apostles to have opposed them-
selves to the blessed Apostle Paul, who was be-
ginning to scatter the seeds of that faith among
the Gentiles.

21. By which thing it seems to me to be suf-
ficiently proved that the errors of the Gentiles
in ethics, physics, and the mode of seeking
truth, errors many and manifold, but conspic-
uously represented in these two schools of phi-
losophy, continued even down to the Christian
era, notwithstanding the fact that the learned as-
sailed them most vehemently, and employed
both remarkable skill and abundant labour in
subverting them. Yet these errors we see in our
time to have been already so completely silenced,
that now in our schools of rhetoric the question
what their opinions were is scarcely ever men-
tioned ; and these controversies have been now
so completely eradicated or suppressed in even
the Greek gymnasia, notably fond of discussion,
that whenever now any school of error lifts up
its head against the truth, i.e. against the Church
of Christ, it does not venture to leap into the
arena except under the shield of the Christian
name. Whence it is obvious that the Platonist
school of philosophers felt it necessary, having
changed those few things in their opinions which
Christian teaching condemned, to submit with
pious homage to Christ, the only King who is in-
vincible, and to apprehend the Incarnate Word
of God, at whose command the truth which they
had even feared to publish was immediately be-
lieved.

22. To Him, my Dioscorus, I desire you to
submit yourself with unreserved piety, and I
wish you to prepare for yourself no other way
of seizing and holding the truth than that which


446


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


4


has been prepared by Him who, as God, saw
the weakness of our goings. In that way the
first part is humihty ; the second, humility ; the
third, humihty : and this I would continue to
repeat as often as you might ask direction, not
that there are no other instructions which may
be given, but because, unless humility precede,
accompany, and follow every good action which
we perform, being at once the object which we
keep before our eyes, the support to which we
cling, and the monitor by which we are restrained,
pride wrests wholly from our hand any good
work on which we are congratulating ourselves."
All other vices are to be apprehended when we
are doing wrong ; but pride is to be feared even
when we do right actions, lest those things which
are done in a praiseworthy manner be spoiled by
the desire for praise itself. Wherefore, as that
most illustrious orator, on being asked what
seemed to him the first thing to be observed in
the art of eloquence, is said to have replied, De-
livery ; and when he was asked what was the sec-
ond thing, replied again, Dehvery ; and when
asked what was the third thing, still gave no other
reply than this, Delivery ; so if you were to ask
me, however often you might repeat the ques-
tion, what are the instructions of the Christian
religion, I would be disposed to answer always
and only, "Humility," although, perchance, ne-
cessity might constrain me to speak also of other
things.

Chap. iv. — 23. To this most wholesome humil-
ity, in which our Lord Jesus Christ is our teacher

— having submitted to humiliation that He
might instruct us in this — to this humility, I
say, the most formidable adversary is a certain
kind of most unenlightened knowledge, if I may
so call it, in which we congratulate ourselves on
knowing what may have been the view^s of
Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, Pythagoras, Democri-
tus, and others of the same kind, imagining that
by this we become learned men and scholars,
although such attainments are far removed from
true learning and erudition. For the man who
has learned that God is not extended or diffused
through space, either finite or infinite, so as to
be greater in one part and less in another, but
that He is wholly present everywhere, as the
Truth is, of which no one in his senses will affirm
that it is partly in one place, partly in another

— and the Truth is God Himself — such a man
will not be moved by the opinions of any philos-
opher soever who believes [like Anaximenes]


• We give the original of this exquisite sentence, both for its in-
trinsic vahie, and because it is a good example of that antithetic
style of writing which makes the exact and fehcitous rendering of
Augustin's words into any other language peculiarly difficult:
I</isi liiinitlitas omnia quacuinqne bctie facinius et pmcesserit,
et cotnitetnr, et consecuta fjicrit, et proposita quani intueaiiiur,
et apposita cni adlKPreatnus, et iinposita qua reprimaviur, jam
nobis lie aliquo bono facto gaudentibus totuin extorguet de manu
Supcrbia.


that the infinite air around us is the true God.
What matters it to such a man though he be igno-
rant what bodily form they speak of, since they
speak of a form which is bounded on all sides?
VVhat matters it to him whether it was only as
an Academician, and merely for the purpose
of confuting y\naximenes, who had said that j
God is a material existence, — for air is material,
— that Cicero objected that God must have form
and beauty?^ or himself perceived that truth
has immaterial form and beauty, by which the
mind itself is moulded, and by which we judge
all the deeds of the wise man to be beautiful,
and therefore affirmed that God must be of the
most perfect beauty, not merely for the purpose
of confuting an antagonist, but with profound
insight into the fact that nothing is more beautiful
than truth itself, which is cognisable by the un-
derstanding alone, and is immutable ? Moreover,
as to the opinion of Anaximenes, who held that
the air is generated, and at the same time be-
Heved it to be God, it does not in the least move
the man who understands that, since the air is
certainly not God, there is no likeness between
the manner in which the air is generated, that is
to say, produced by some cause, and the manner,
understood by none except through divine inspi-
ration, in which He was begotten who is the
Word of God, God with God. Moreover, who
does not see that even in regard to material
things he speaks most foolishly in affirming that
air is generated, and is at the same time God,
while he refuses to give the name of God to
that by which the air has been generated, — for
it is impossible that it could be generated by no
power? Yet once more, his saying that the air
is always in motion will have no disturbing influ-
ence as proof that the air is God upon the man
who knows that all movements of body are of a
lower order than movements of the soul, but
that even the movements of the soul are infi-
nitely slow compared with His who is supreme
and immutable Wisdom.

24. In like manner, if Anaxagoras or any other
affirm that the mind is essential truth and wis-
dom,3 what call have I to debate with a man
about a word? For it is manifest that mind
gives being to the order and mode of all things,
and that it may be suitably called infinite with
respect not to its extension in space, but to its
power, the range of which transcends all human
thought. Nor [shall I dispute his assertion]
that this essential wisdom is formless ; for this
is a property of material things, that whatever


* The words of Cicero are: " Post, Anaximenes aera Deum statuit,
eumque gigni, esseque immensum, el infinitum, et semper in motu:
quasi aut aer sine ulla forma Deus esse possit, cum praesertim Deum
non modo aliqua sed pulcherrima specie esse deceat; aut non omne
quod ortum sit mortalitas consequatur." — De Natura Deorunt,
Book 1. J,

3 Ipsam veritatem atqne sapientiatn. i.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


447


bodies are infinite are also formless. Cicero,
however, from his desire to confute such opin-
ions, as I suppose, in contending with adversa-
ries who believed in nothing immaterial, denies
that anything can be annexed to that which is
infinite, because in things material there must be
a boundary at the part to which anything is
annexed. Therefore he says that Anaxagoras
" did not see that motion joined to sensation
and to it " {i.e. linked to it in unbroken con-
nection) "is impossible in the infinite "(that is,
in a substance which is infinite), as if treating
of material substances, to which nothing can be
joined except at their boundaries. Moreover, in
the succeeding words — " and that sensation of
which the whole system of nature is not sensible
when struck is an impossibility " ' — Cicero
speaks as if Anaxagoras had said that mind —
to which he ascribed the power of ordering and
fashioning all things — had sensation such as the
soul has by means of the body. For it is mani-
fest that the whole soul has sensation when it
feels anything by means of the body ; for what-
ever is perceived by sensation is not concealed
from the whole soul. Now, Cicero's design in
saying that the whole system of nature must be
conscious of every sensation was, that he might,
as it were, take from the philosopher that mind
which he affirms to be infinite. For how does
the whole of nature experience sensation if it
be infinite? Bodily sensation begins at some
point, and does not pervade the whole of any
substance unless it be one in which it can reach
an end ; but this, of course, cannot be said of
that which is infinite. Anaxagoras, however,
had not said anything about bodily sensation.
The word "whole," moreover, is used differently
when we speak of that which is immaterial, be-
cause it is understood to be without boundaries
in space, so that it may be spoken of as a whole
and at the same time as infinite — the former
because of its completeness, the latter because
of its not being Hmited by boundaries in space.
25. "Furthermore," says Cicero, "if he will
affirm that the mind itself is, so to speak, some
kind of animal, there must be some principle
from within from which it receives the name ' ani-
mal,' " — so that mind, according to Anaxagoras,
is a kind of body, and has within it an animating
principle, because of which it is called "animal."
Observe how he speaks in language which we
are accustomed to apply to things corporeal, —
animals being in the ordinary sense of the word
visible substances, — adapting himself, as I sup-
pose, to the blunted perceptions of those against
whom he argues ; and yet he has uttered a thing

_ ' The words of Cicero are these: " Nee vidit neque motum sensui
j junctum et continentem in infinito ullum esse posse, neque sensum
omnino quo non tola natura pulsa sentiret." Augustin, quoting
probably from memory (see § 9), gives iiifinito as the dative of pos-
session instead of in infinito.


which, if they could awake to perceive it, might
suffice to teach them that everything which pre-
sents itself to our minds as a living body must
be thought of not as itself a soul, but as an ani-
mal having a soul. For having said, " There
must be something within from which it receives
the name animal," he adds, " But what is deeper
within than mind?" The mind, therefore, can-
not have any inner soul, by possessing which it is
an animal ; for it is itself that which is inner-
most. If, then, it is an animal, let it have some
external body in relation to which it may be
within ; for this is what he means by saying, " It
is therefore girt round by an exterior body," as
if Anaxagoras had said that mind cannot be
otherwise than as belonging to some animal.
And yet Anaxagoras held the opinion that essen-
tial supreme Wisdom is mind, although it is not
i the peculiar property of any living being, so to
speak, since Truth is near to all souls alike that
are able to enjoy it. Observe, therefore, how
wittily he concludes the argument : " Since this
is not the opinion of Anaxagoras " {i.e. seeing
that he does not hold that that mind which he
calls God is girt about with an external body,
through its relation to which it could be an ani-
mal), " we must say that mind pure and simple,
without the addition of anything " {i.e. of anv
body) " through which it may exercise sensa-
tion, seems to be beyond the range and concep-
tions of our intelligence." ^

26. Nothing is more certain than that this lies
beyond the range and conception of the intelli-
gence of Stoics and Epicureans, who cannot
think of anything which is not material. But
by the word "our" intelligence he means "hu-
man " intelligence ; and he very properly does
not say, " it lies beyond our intelligence," but
" it seems to lie beyond." For their opinion is,
that this hes beyond the understanding of all
men, and therefore they think that nothing of
the kind can be. But there are some whose
intelligence apprehends, in so far as this is given
to man, the fact that there is pure and simple
Wisdom and Truth, which is the peculiar proper-
ty of no living being, but which imparts wisdom
and truth to all souls alike which are suscepti-
ble of its influence. If Anaxagoras perceived
the existence of this supreme Wisdom, and ap-
prehended it to be God, and called it INIind, it
is not by the mere name of this philosopher —
with whom, on account of his place in the re-
mote antiquity of erudition, all raw recruits in
literature ^ (to adopt a military phrase) delight
to boast an acquaintance — that we are made
learned and wise ; nor is it even by our having
the knowledge through which he knew this
truth. For truth ought to be dear to me not


* Cicero, de Natura Deorum, lib. I.
3 Liiteriones ut niititariter loquar.


II


448


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


merely because it was not unknown to Anax-
agoras, but because, even though none of these
philosophers had known it, it is the truth.

27. If, therefore, it is unbecoming for us to be
elated either by the knowledge of the man who
peradventure apprehended the truth, by which
knowledge we obtain, as it were, the appearance
of learning, or even by the solid possession of
the truth itself, whereby we obtain real acquisi-
tions in learning, how much less can the names
and tenets of those men who were in error
assist us in Christian learning and in making
known things obscure? For if we be men, it
would be more fitting that we should grieve on
account of the errors into which so many famous
men fell, if we happen to hear of them, than
that we should studiously investigate them, in
order that, among men who are ignorant of
them, we may enjoy the gratification of a most
contemptible conceit of knowledge. For how
much better would it be that I should never
have heard the name of Democritus, than that
I should now with sorrow ponder the fact that a
man was highly esteemed in his own age who
thought that the gods were images which ema-
nated from solid bodies, but were not solid
themselves ; and that these, circling this way
and that way by their independent motion, and
gliding into the minds of men, make the divine
power enter into the region of their thoughts,
although, certainly, that body from which the
image emanated may be rightly judged to sur-
pass the image in excellence and proportion, as
it surpasses it in solidity. Hence his opinion
wavered, as they say, and oscillated, so that
sometimes he said that the deity was some kind
of nature from which images emanate," and
which nevertheless can be thought of only by
means of those images which he pours forth and
sends out, that is, which from that nature (which
he considered to be something material and
eternal, and on this very account divine) were
borne as by a kind of evaporation or continu-
• ous emanation, and came and entered into our
minds, so that we could form the thought of a
god or gods. For these philosophers conceive
of no cause of thought in our minds, except
when images from those bodies which are the
object of our thoughts come and enter into our
minds ; as if, forsooth, there were not many
things, yea, more than we can number, which,
without any material form, and yet intelligible,
are apprehended by those who know how to ap-
prehend such things. Take as an example essen-
tial Wisdom and Truth, of which if they can
frame no idea, I wonder why they dispute con-
cerning it at all ; if, however, they do frame some
idea of it in thought, I wish they would tell me
either from what body the image of truth comes
into their minds, or of what kind it is.


28. Democritus, however, is said to differ here
also in his doctrine on physics from Epicurus ;
for he holds that there is in the concourse of
atoms a certain vital and breathing power, by
which power (I believe) he affirms that the im-
ages themselves (not all images of all things, but
images of the gods) are endued with divine at-
tributes, and that the first beginnings of the mind
are in those universal elements to which he as-
cribed divinity, and that the images possess life,
inasmuch as they are wont either to benefit or
to hurt us. Epicurus, however, does not assume
anything in the first beginnings of things but
atoms, that is, certain corpuscles, so minute that
they cannot be divided or perceived either by
sight or by touch ; and his doctrine is, that by
the fortuitous concourse (clashing) of these at-
oms, existence is given both to innumerable
worlds and to living things, and to the souls

I which animate them, and to the gods whom, in
human form, he has located, not in any world,
but outside of the worlds, and in the spaces
which separate them ; and he will not allow of

; any object of thought beyond things material.
But in order to these becoming an object of
thought, he says that from those things which
he represents as formed of atoms, images more

I subtle than those which come to our eyes flow
down and enter into the mind. For accord-
ing to him, the cause of our seeing is to be
found in certain images so huge that they em-
brace the whole outer world. But I suppose
that you already understand their opinions re-
garding these images.

29. I wonder that Democritus was not con-
vinced of the error of his philosophy even by
this fact, that such huge images coming into
our minds, which are so small (if being, as they
affirm, material, the soul is confined within the
body's dimensions), could not possibly, in the
entirety of their size, come into contact with it.
For when a small body is brought into contact
with a large one, it cannot in any wise be touched
at the same moment by all points of the larger.
How, then, are these images at the same mo-
ment in their whole extent objects of thought,
if they become objects of thought only in so
far as, coming and entering into the mind, they
touch it, seeing that they cannot in their whole
extent either find entrance into so small a body
or come in contact with so small a mind ? Bear
in mind, of course, that I am speaking now after
their manner ; for I do not hold the mind to be
such as they affirm. It is true that Epicurus
alone can be assailed with this argument, if
Democritus holds that the mind is immaterial;
but we may ask him in turn why he did not per-

' ceive that it is at once unnecessary and impos-
sible for the mind, being immaterial, to think
! through the approach and contact of material


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


449


images.


Both philosophers alike are certainly-
confuted by the facts of vision ; for images so
great cannot possibly touch in their entirety eyes
so small.

30. Moreover, when the question is put to
them, how it comes that one image is seen of a
body from which images emanate in countless
multitudes, their answer is, that just because the
images are emanating and passing in such multi-
tudes, the effect produced by their being crowded
and massed together is, that out of the many one
is seen. The absurdity of this Cicero exposes
by saying that their deity cannot be thought of
as eternal, for this very reason, that he is thought
of through images which are in countless multi-
tudes flowing forth and passing away. And when
they say that the forms of the gods are rendered
eternal by the innumerable hosts of atoms sup-
plying constant reinforcements, so that other
corpuscles immediately take the place of those
which depart from the divine substance, and by
the same succession prevent the nature of the
gods from being dissolved, Cicero replies, " On
this ground all things would be eternal as well
as the gods," since there is nothing which has
not the same boundless store of atoms by which
it may repair its perpetual decays. Again, he
asks how their god could be otherwise than
afraid of coming to destruction, seeing that he
is without a moment's intermission beaten and
shaken by an unceasing incursion of atoms, —
beaten, inasmuch as he is struck by atoms
rushing upon him, and shaken, inasmuch as
he is penetrated by atoms rushing through him.
'Nay, more ; seeing that from himself there em-
anate continually images (of which we have said
enough), what good ground can he have for
persuasion of his own immortality?'

31. As to all these

entertain such opinions, it is especially deplora

3le that the mere statement of them does not

suffice to secure their rejection without any one

:ontroverting them in discussion ; instead of

vhich, the minds of men most gifted with acute-

less have accepted the task of copiously refuting

jpinions which, as soon as they were enunciated,

night to have been rejected with contempt even

>y the slowest intellects. For even granting that

here are atoms, and that these strike and shake

■ach other by clashing together as chance may

;uide them, is it lawful for us to grant also that

toms thus meeting in fortuitous concourse can

0 make anything as to fashion its distinctive

jrms, determine its figure, polish its surface,

nliven it with colour, or quicken it by imparting

0 it a spirit? — all which things every one sees

0 be accomplished in no other way than by the

•rovidence of God, if only he loves to see with

• Cicero, de Natura Deorum, lib. I.


ravings of the men who


the mind rather than with the eye alone, and
asks this faculty of intelligent perception from
the Author of his being. Nay, more ; we are
not at liberty even to grant the existence of
atoms themselves, for, without discussing the
subtle theories of the learned as to the divisi-
bility of matter, observe how easily the absurdity
of atoms may be proved from their own opin-
ions. For they, as is well known, affirm that
there is nothing else in nature but bodies and
empty space, and the accidents of these, by
which I believe that they mean motion and
striking, and the forms which result from these.
Let them tell us, then, under which category
they reckon the images which they suppose to
flow from the more solid bodies, but which, if
indeed they are bodies, possess so little solidity
that they are not discernible except by their
contact with the eyes when we see them, and
with the mind when we think of them. For
the opinion of these philosophers is, that these
images can proceed from the material object and
come to the eyes or to the mind, which, never-
theless, they affirm to be material. Now, I ask,
do these images flow from atoms themselves?
If they do, how can these be atoms from which
some bodily particles are in this process sepa-
rated? If they do not, either something can
be the object of thought without such images,
which they vehemently deny, or we ask, whence
have they acquired a knowledge of atoms, see-
ing that they can in nowise become objects of
thought to us? But I blush to have even thus
far refuted these opinions, although they did not
blush to hold them. When, however, I consider
that they have even dared to defend them, I
blush not on their account, but for the race of
mankind itself whose ears could tolerate such
nonsense.

Chap. v. — 32. Wherefore, seeing that the
minds of men are, through the pollution of sin
and the lust of the flesh, so blinded that even
these monstrous errors could waste in discussion
concerning them the leisure of learned men,
will you, Dioscorus, or will any man of an ob-
servant mind, hesitate to affirm that in no way
could better provision have been made for the
pursuit of truth by mankind than that a Man,
assumed into ineffable and miraculous union by
the Truth Himself, and being the manifestation
of His Person on the earth, should by perfect
teaching and divine acts move men to saving
faith in that which could not as yet be intellect-
ually apprehended ? To the glory of Him who
has done this we give our service ; and we exhort
you to believe immoveably and stedfastly in Him
through whom it has come to pass that not a
select few, but whole peoples, unable to discern
these things by reason, do accept them in faith,
until, upheld by instruction in saving truth, they


450


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


escape from these perplexities into the atmos-
phere of perfectly pure and simple truth. It
becomes us, moreover, to yield submission to
His authority all the more unreservedly, when
we see that in our day no error dares to lift up
itself to rally round it the uninstructed crowd
without seeking the shelter of the Christian
name, and that of all who, belonging to an
earlier age, now remain outside of the Christian
name, those alone continue to have in their
obscure assemblies a considerable attendance
who retain the Scriptures by which, however
they may pretend not to see or understand it,
the Lord Jesus Christ Himself was prophetically
announced. Moreover, those who, though they
are not within the Catholic unity and commun-
ion, boast of the name of Christians, are com-
pelled to oppose them that believe, and presume
to mislead the ignorant by a pretence of appeal-
ing to reason, since the Lord came with this
remedy above all others, that He enjoined on the
nations the duty of faith. But they are com-
pelled, as I have said, to adopt this policy
because they feel themselves most miserably
overthrown if their authority is compared with
the Catholic authority. They attempt, accord-
ingly, to prevail against the firmly-settled author-
ity of the immoveable Church by the name and
the promises of a pretended appeal to reason.
This kind of effrontery is, we may say, charac-
teristic of all heretics. But He who is the most
merciful Lord of faith has both secured the
Church in the citadel of authority by most
famous oecumenical Councils and the Apostolic
sees themselves, and furnished her with the
abundant armour of equally invincible reason
by means of a few men of pious erudition and
unfeigned spirituality. The perfection of method
in training disciples is, that those who are weak
be encouraged to the utmost to enter the citadel
of authority, in order that when they have been
safely placed there, the conflict necessary for
their defence may be maintained with the most
strenuous use of reason.

33. The Platonists, however, who, amidst the
errors of false philosophies assailing them at
that time on all sides, rather concealed their own
doctrine to be searched for than brought it into
the light to be vilified, as they had no divine
personage to command faith, began to exhibit
and unfold the doctrines of Plato after the name
of Christ had become widely known to the won-
dering and troubled kingdoms of this world.
Then flourished at Rome the school of Plotinus,
which had as scholars many men of great acute-
ness and ability. But some of them were cor-
rupted by curious inquiries into magic, and
others, recognising in the Lord Jesus Christ the
impersonation of that essential and immutable
Truth and Wisdom which they were endeavour-


ing to reach, passed into His service. Thus the
whole supremacy of authority and light of rea-
son for regenerating and reforming the human
race has been made to reside in the one saving
Name, and in His one Church.

34. I do not at all regret that I have stated
these things at great length in this letter, although
perhaps you would have preferred that I had
taken another course ; for the more progress
that you make in the truth, the more will you
approve what I have written, and you will then
approve of my counsel, though now you do not
think it helpful to your studies. At the same
time, I have, to the best of my ability, given
answers to your questions, — to some of them
in this letter, and to almost all the rest by brief
annotations on the parchments on v/hich you had
sent them. If in these answers you think I
have done too little, or done something else than
you expected, you do not duly consider, my
Dioscorus, to whom you addressed your ques-
tions. I have passed without reply all the ques-
tions concerning the orator and the books of
Cicero de Oratore. I would have seemed to
myself a contemptible trifler if I had entered on
the exposition of these topics. For I might
with propriety be questioned on all the other
subjects, if any one desired me to handle and L
expound them, not in connection with the works L
of Cicero, but by themselves ; but in these J.
questions the subjects themselves are not in har-
mony with my profession now. I would not,
however, have done all that I have done in this
letter had I not removed from Hippo for a time
after the illness under which I laboured whenj
your messenger came to me. Even in these
days I have been visited again with interruption,
of health and with fever, on which account there
has been more delay than might otherwise have
been in sending these to you. I earnestly beg
you to write and let me know how you receive
them.


K


LETTER CXXII.

(a.d. 410.)

to his well- beloved brethren the clergy, and
to the whole people [of hippo], augustin
sends greeting in the lord,

I. In the first place, I beseech you. m'
friends, and implore you, for Christ's sake, ni
to let my bodily absence grieve you. For
suppose you do not imagine that I could by an;
means be separated in spirit and in unfeigned
love from you, although perchance it is even a
greater grief to me than to you that my weat
ness unfits me for bearing all the cares which are
laid on me by those members of Christ to whose
service both fear of Him and love to them covt
strain me to devote myself. For you know this!


rf:


to:


ti


titf


1


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


451


my beloved, that I have never absented myself
from you through self-indulgent taking of ease,
but only when compelled by such duties as have
made it necessary for some of my holy col-
leagues and brethren to endure, both on the sea
and in countries beyond the sea, labours from
which I was exempted, not because of reluc-
tance of spirit, but by reason of imperfect bodily
health. ^Vherefore, my dearly-beloved brethren,
act so that, as the apostle says, " whether I come
and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of
your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with
one mmd striving together for the faith of the
gospel." ' If any vexation pertaining to time
causes you distress, this itself ought the more to
remmd you how you should occupy your thoughts
[with that life in which you may live without any
burden, escaping not the annoying hardships of
this short life, but the dread flames of eternal
fire. For if ye strive with so much anxiety, so
much earnestness, and so much labour, to save
yourselves from falling into some transient suf-
ferings in this world, how solicitous ought you
to be to escape everlasting misery ! And if the
death which puts an end to the labours of time
is so feared, how ought we to fear the death
which ushers men into eternal pain ! And if
the short-lived and sordid pleasures of this world
are so loved, with how much greater earnestness
ought we to seek the pure and infinite joys of the
ivorld to come ! Meditating upon these things,
36 not slothful in good works, that ye may come
in due season to reap what you have sown.

2. It lias been reported to me that you have
'orgotten your custom of providing raiment for
he poor, to which work of charity I exhorted
^ou when I was present with you ; and I now
pxhort you not to allow yourselves to be over-
pome and made slothful by the tribulation of
his world, which you see now v'isited with such
alamities as were foretold by our Lord and
edeemer, who cannot lie. You ought in pres-
nt circumstances not to be less diligent in works
|if charity, but rather to be more abundant in
ese than you were wont to be. For as men
etake themselves in greater haste to a place of
'eater security when they see in the shaking
f their walls the ruin of their house impending,
b ought Christians, the more that they perceive,
■om the increasing frequency of their afflictions,
;at the destruction of this world is at hand, to
|e the more prompt and active in transferring

» Phil. i. 27.


to the treasury of heaven the goods which they
were proposing to store up on earth, in order
that, if any accident common to the lot of men
occur, he may rejoice who has escaped from a
dwelling doomed to ruin ; and if, on the other
hand, nothing of this kind happen, he may be
exempt from painful solicitude who, die when
he may, has committed his possessions to the
keeping of the ever-living Lord, to whom he is
about to go. Wherefore, my dearly-beloved
brethren, let every one of you, according to his
ability, of which he himself is the best judge,
do with a portion of his substance as ye were
wont to do ; do it also with a more willing mind
than ye were wont ; and amid all the vexations
of this life bear in your hearts the apostolic ex-
hortation : " The Lord is at hand : be careful
for nothing." ^ Let such things be reported to
me concerning you as may make me understand
that it is not through my presence with you, but
from obedience to the precept of God, who is
never absent, that you follow that good practice
which for many years while I was with you, and
for some time after my departure, you observed.
May the Lord preserve you in peace ! And,
dearly-beloved brethren, pray for us.


LETTER CXXIIL
(a.d. 410.)

[from JEROME TO AUGUSTIN.]

There are many who go halting upon both
feet, and refuse to bend their heads even when
their necks are broken, persisting in adherence
to their former errors, even though they have
not their former liberty of proclaiming them.

Respectful salutations are sent to you by the
holy brethren who are with your humlile servant,
and especially by your pious and venerable
daughters. 3 I beg your Excellency to salute in
my name your brethren my lord Alypius and my
lord Evodius. Jerusalem is held captive by
Nebuchadnezzar, and refuses to listen to the
I counsels of Jeremiah, preferring to look wist-
fully towards Egypt, that it may die in Tah-
panhes, and perish there in eternal bondage.*

2 Phil. Iv. 5, 6.

3 Paula, Eustochium, and other recluses of Bethlehem.

* Two opinions have been advanced as to the sisnification of this
enigmatical alhision to the events recorded in Jeremiah, chap, .xliii.
Some think that Jerome refers to Rome, then occupied by the Goths.
Others find here a reference to the state of the Church at Jerusalem
at the time; perhaps under the name of Nebuchadnezzar some hereti-
cal bishop is designed.


452


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


THIRD DIVISION.

LETTERS WHICH WERE WRITTEN BV AUGUSTIN AFTER THE TIME OF THE CONFERENCE WITH THE
DONATISTS AND THE RISE O? THE PELAGIAN HERESY IN AFRICA ; I.E., DURING THE LAST
TWENTY YEARS OF HIS LIFE (a.D. 4II-430).


LETTER CXXIV.

(a.D. 411.)

to albina, pinl\nus, and melania,' honoured in
the lord, beloved in holiness and longed
for in brotherly affection, augustin sends
greeting in the lord.

X. I AM, whether through present infirmity or
by natural temperament, very susceptible of
cold ; nevertheless, it would not be possible for
me to suffer greater heat than I have done
throughout this exceptionally dreadful winter,
having been kept in a fever by distress because
I have been unable, I do not say to hasten, but
to fly to you (to visit whom it would have been
fitting for me to fly across the seas), after you
had been settled so near to me, and had come
from so remote a land to see me. It may be,
also, that you have supposed the rigorous weather
of this winter to be the only cause of my suffer-
ing this disappointment ; I pray you, beloved,
give no place to this thought. For what incon-
venience, hardship, or even danger, can these
heavy rains bring, which I would not have en-
countered and endured in order to make my
way to you, who are such comforters to us in
our great calamities, and who, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation, are lights kin-
dled into vehement flame by the Supreme Light,
raised aloft by lowliness of spirit, and deriving
more glorious lustre from the glory which you
have despised? Moreover, I would have en-
joyed participation in the spiritual felicity vouch-
safed to my earthly birthplace, in that it has
been permitted to have you present, of whom
when absent its citizens had heard much — so
much, indeed, that although giving charitable
credence to the report of what you were by na-
ture and had become by grace, they feared, per-


* The name Melania, though now almost as little known to the
world at large as the fossil univalve molluscs to which palaeontologists
have assigned the designation, was in the time of Augustin highly-
esteemed throughout Christendom. The elder Melania, a lady of
rank and affluence, left Rome when it was threatened by Alaric, and
spent thirty-seven years in the East, returning to the city in 445 a.d.
Her daughter-in-law, Albina, and her grand-daughter, the younger
Melania (whose husband was the Pinianus mentioned here and in the
two following letters) , left Rome with her in 408 a.d., and after spend-
ing two years in Sicily, passed over into Africa, and fixed their resi-
dence at Thagaste, the native town of St. Augustin. A visit which
they paid to him at Hippo was the occasion of the extraordinary pro-
ceedings referred to in Letters CXXV. and CXXVI.


chance, to repeat it to others, lest it should be
disbelieved.

2. I shall therefore tell you the reason why I
have not come, and the trials by which I have
been kept back from so great a privilege, that I
may obtain not only your forgiveness, but also,
through your prayers, the mercy of Him who so
works in you that ye live to Him. The congre-
gation of Hippo, whom the Lord has ordained
me to serve, is in great measure, and almost!
wholly, of a constitution so infirm, that the
pressure of even a comparatively light affliction j
might seriously endanger its well-being ; at pres-
sent, howe\'er, it is smitten with tribulation so
overwhelming, that, even were it strong, it could
scarcely survive the imposition of the burden.
Moreover, when I returned to it recently, I
found it offended to a most dangerous degree
by my absence ; and you, over whose spiritual
strength we rejoice in the Lord, can with health-
ful taste relish and approve the saying of Paul :
" \Mio is weak, and I am not weak ? who is
offended, and I burn not?" ^ I feel this espe-
cially because there are many here who by dis-
paraging us attempt to excite against us the
minds of the others by whom we seem to be
loved, in order that they may make room in
them for the devil. But when those whose sal-
vation is our care are angry with us, their strong
determination to take vengeance on us is only
an unreasonable desire for bringing death to
themselves, — not the death of the body, but
of the soul, in which the fact of death discovers
itself mysteriously by the odour of corruption
before it is possible for our care to foresee and
provide against it.

Doubtless you will readily excuse this anxiety
on my part, especially because, if you were dis-
pleased and wished to punish me, you could per-
haps invent no severer pain than what I already
suffer in not seeing you at Thagaste. I trust,
however, that, assisted by your prayers, I may
be permitted when the present hindrance has
been removed with all speed to come to you, in
whatsoever part of Africa you may be, if this
town in which I labour is not worthy (and I do
not presume to pronounce it worthy) to be
along with us made joyful by your presence.


^ 2 Cor. xi. 29.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


453


LETTER CXXV.

(a.d. 411.)

to alypius, my lord most blessed and brother
beloved with all reverence, and my parl'-
ner in the priestly office, and to the
brethren who are with him, augustin and
the brethren who are with him send greet-
ing in the lord.

1. We are deeply grieved, and can by no
means regard it as a small matter, that the peo-
ple of Hippo clamorously said so much to the
disparagement of your Holiness ; but, my good
brother, their clamorous utterance of these
things is not so great a cause for grief as the
fact that we are, without open accusation,
deemed guilty of similar things. For when we
are believed to be actuated in retaining God's
servants among us, not by love of righteousness,
but by love of money, is it not to be desired
that persons who believe this concerning us
should with their voices avow what is hidden in
their hearts, and so obtain, if possible, remedies
great in proportion to the disease, rather than
silently perish under the venom of these fatal
suspicions ? Wherefore it ought to be a greater
care to us (and for this reason we conferred to-
gether before this happened) to provide how
men to whom we are commanded to be exam-
ples in good works may be convinced that there
is no ground for suspicions which they cherish,
than to provide how those may be rebuked who
in words give definite utterance to their sus-
picions.

2. Wherefore I am not angry with the pious
Albina, nor do I judge her to deserve rebuke ;
but I think she requires to be cured of such suspi-
cions. It is true that she has not pointed at myself
the words to which I refer, but has complained
of the people of Hippo, as it were, alleging that
their covetousness has been brought to light, and
that in desiring to retain among them a man of
wealth who was known to despise money, and to
give it away freely, they were moved, not by his
fitness for the office, but by regard to his ample
means ; nevertheless, she almost said openly that
she had the same suspicion of myself, and not
phe only, but also her pious son-in-law and daugh-
■;er, who, on that very day, said the same thing
in the apse of the church.' In my opinion, it is

ore necessary that the suspicions of these per-
sons should be removed than that their utterance
bf them should be rebuked. For where can im-
munity and rest from such thorns be provided
jmd given to us, if they can sprout forth against

s even in the hearts of intimate friends, so pious


' The " absis " was a chapel or recess in the choir, where the bish-
l>p was accustomed to stand surrounded by his clergy.


and so much beloved by us ? It is by the igno-
rant multitude that such things have been thought
concerning you, but I am the victim of similar
suspicions from those who are the lights of the
Church ; you may see, therefore, which of us
has the greater cause for grief. It seems to me that
both cases call, not for invectives, but for reme-
dial measures ; for they are men, and their sus-
picions are of men, and therefore such things as
they suspect, though they may be false, are not
incredible. Persons such as these are of course
not so foolish as to believe that the people are
covedng their money, especially after their expe-
rience that the people of Thagaste obtained none
of their money, from which it was certain that
the people of Hippo would also obtain none.
Nay, all the violence of this odium comes against
the clergy alone, and especially against the bish-
ops, whose authority is visibly pre-eminent, and
who are supposed to use and enjoy as owners
and lords the property of the Church. My dear
Alypius, let not the weak be encouraged through
our example to cherish this pernicious and fatal
covetousness. Call to mind what we said to each
other before the occurrence of this temptation,
which makes the duty all the more urgent. Let
us rather by God's help endeavour to have this
difficulty removed by friendly conference, and
let us not count it sufficient to be guided by our
own conscience alone ; for this is not one of the
cases in which its voice alone is sufficient for our
direction. For if we be not unworthy servants of
our God, if there live in us a spark of that chari-
ty which seeketh not her own, we are bound by
all means to provide things honest, not only in
the sight of God, but also in the sight of men,
lest while drinking untroubled waters in our own
conscience, we be chargeable with treading with
incautious feet, and so making the Lord's flock
drink from a turbid stream.

3. For as to the proposal in your letter that we
should discuss together the obligation of an oath
which has been extorted by force, I beseech you,
let not the method of our discussion involve in
obscurity things which are perfectly clear. For
if inevitable death were threatened in order to
compel a servant of God to swear that he would
do something forbidden by laws both human and
divine, it would be his duty to prefer death to
such an oath, lest he should be guilty of a crime
in fulfilling his oath. But in this case, in which
the determined clamour of the people, and only
this, was forcing the man, not to a crime, but to
that which if it were done would be lawfully done ;
when, moreover, there was indeed apprehension
lest some reckless men, such as are mixed with
a multitude even of good men, should through
love of rioting break out into some wicked deeds
of violence, if they found a pretext for disturb-
ance and for plausibly justifiable indignation, but


:\


454


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


there was no certainty of this fear being realized,
— who will affirm that it is lawful to commit a
deliberate act of perjury in order to escape from
uncertain consequences, involving, I shall not
say loss or bodily injury, but even death itself?
Regulus had not heard anything from the Holy
Scriptures concerning the impiety of perjury, he
had never heard of the flying roll of Zechariah,'
and he confirmed his oath to the Carthaginians,
not by the sacraments of Christ, but by the abom-
inations of false gods ; and yet in the face of in-
evitable tortures, and a death of unprecedented
horror, he was not moved by fear so as to swear
under constraint, but, because he had given his
oath, he of his own free will submitted to these,
lest he should be guilty of perjury. In that age,
also, the Roman censors refused to inscribe in
the roll, not of saints inheriting heavenly glory,
but of senators received into the curia of Rome,
not only men who, through fear of death and of
cruel tortures, had chosen rather to commit mani-
fest perjury than to return to merciless enemies,
but also one who had believed himself clear of
the guilt of perjury, because, after giving his oath,
he had under the pretext of alleged necessity
violated it by returning ; in which we see that
those who expelled him from the senate took in-
to consideration, not what he himself had in his
mind when he gave his oath, but what those to
whom he pledged his word expected from him.
Yet they had never read what we sing continu-
ally in the Psalm : " He that sweareth to his own
hurt, and changeth not." ^ We are wont to speak
of these instances of virtue with the highest ad-
miration, although they are found in men who
were strangers to the grace and to the name of
Christ ; and yet do we seriously imagine that the
question whether perjury is occasionally lawful is
one for an answer to which we should search the
divine books, in which, to prevent us from fall-
ing into this sin by inconsiderate oaths, this pro-
hibition is written : "Swear not at all "?

4. I by no means dispute the perfect correct-
ness of the maxim, that good faith requires an
oath to be kept, not according to the mere
words of him who gives it, but according to that
which the person giving the oath knows to
be the expectation of the person to whom he
swears. For it is very difficult to define in
words, especially in few words, the promise in
regard to which security is exacted from him
who gives his oath. They, therefore, are guilty
of perjury, who, while adhering to the letter of
their promise, disappoint the known expectation
of those to whom their oath was given ; and
they are not guilty of perjury, who, even though

' Zech. V. 4. Augustin calls it " Zacharise falx," translating, as
the LXX. have done: 6pijravoy,
- Ps. XV. 4.


departing from the letter of the promise, fulfil
that which was expected of them when they
gave their oath. Wherefore, seeing that the
people of Hippo desired to haye the holy Pinia-
nus, not as a prisoner who had forfeited liberty,
but as a much-loved resident in their town, the
limits of that which they expected from him,
though it could not be adequately embraced in
the words of his promise, are nevertheless so
obvious that the fact of his being at this moment
absent, after giving his oath to remain among
them, does not disturb any one who may have
heard that he was to leave this place for a defi-
nite purpose, and with the intention of returning.
Accordingly, he will not be guilty of perjury, nor
will he be regarded by them as violating his
oath, unless he disappoint their expectation ; and
he will not disappoint their expectation, unless
he either abandon his purpose of residing among
them, or at some future time depart from them
without intending to return. May God forbid
that he should so depart from the holiness and
fidelity which he owes to Christ and to the
Church ! For, not to speak of the dread judg-
ment of God upon perjurers, which you know as
well as myself, I am perfectly certain that hence-
forth we shall have no right to be displeased
with any one who may refuse to believe what we
attest by an oath, if we are found to think that
perjury in such a man as Pinianus is to be not
only tolerated without indignation, but actually
defended. From this may we be saved by the
mercy of Him who delivers from temptation
those who put their trust in Him ! Let Pinia-
nus, therefore, as you have written in your com-
munication, fulfil the promise by which he bound
himself not to depart from Hippo, just as I my-
self and the other inhabitants of the town do
not depart from it, having, of course, full free-
dom in going and returning at any time ; the
only difference being, that those who are not
bound by any oath to reside here have it also
in their power at any time, without being charge-
able with perjury, to depart with no purpose of
coming back again.

5. As to our clergy and the brethren settled
in our monastery, I do not know that it can be
proved that they either aided or abetted in the
reproaches which were made against you. For
when I inquired into this, I was informed that
only one from our monastery, a man of Car-
thage, had taken part in the clamour of the peo-
ple ; and this was not when they were uttering
insults against you, but when they were demand-
ing Pinianus as presbyter.

I have annexed to this letter a copy of the
promise given to him, taken from the very paper
which he subscribed and corrected under my
own inspection.


I


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


455


LETTER CXXVI.

(a.d. 411.)

to the holy lady and venerable handmaid of
god, albina, augustin sends greeting in the

LORD.

I. As to the sorrow of your spirit, which you
describe as inexpressible, it becomes me to as-
suage rather than to augment its bitterness,
endeavouring if possible to remove your suspi-
cions, instead of increasing the agitation of one
so venerable and so devoted to God by giving
vent to indignation because of that which I have
suffered in this matter. Nothing was done to
our holy brother, your son-in-law Pinianus, by
the people of Hippo which might justly awaken
in him the fear of death, although, perchance, he
hmiself had such fears. Indeed, we also were
apprehensive lest some of the reckless characters
who are often secretly banded together for mis-
chief in a crowd might break out into bold acts
of violence, finding occasion for beginning a riot
with some plausible pretext for passionate excite-
ment. Nothing of this nature, however, was
either spoken of or attempted by any one, as I
have since had opportunity to ascertain ; but
against my brother Alypius the people did clam-
orously utter many opprobrious and unworthy
reproaches, for which great sin I desire that they
may obtain pardon in answer to his prayers. For \
my own part, after their outcries began, when
I had told them how I was precluded by prom-
ise from ordaining him against his will, adding
that, if they obtained him as their presbyter
through my breaking my word, they could not
retain me as their bishop, I left the multitude,
and returned to my own seat.' Thereupon, they
being made for a little while to pause and waver
by my unexpected reply, like a flame driven back
j for a moment by the wind, began to be much
more warmly excited, imagining that possibly a
violation of my promise might be extorted from
me, or that, in the event of my abiding by my
promise, he might be ordained by another bishop.
To all to whom I could address myself, namely,
to the more venerable and aged men who had
come up to me in the apse, I stated that I could
not be moved to break my word, and that in the
church committed to my care he could not be
ordained by any other bishop except with my
consent asked and obtained, in granting which
I should be no less guilty of a breach of faith. I
said, moreover, that if he were ordained against
his own will, the people were only wishing him
to depart from us as soon as he was ordained.
They did not believe that this was possible. But
the crowd having gathered in front of the steps,

' Ad nostra subsellia.


and persisting in the same determination with
terrible and incessant clamour and shouting,
made them irresolute and perplexed. At that
time unworthy reproaches were loudly uttered
against my brother Alypius : at that time, also,
more serious consequences were apprehended
by us.

2. But although I was much disturbed by so
great a commotion among the people, and such
trepidation among the office-bearers of the
church, I did not say to that mob anything else
than that I could not ordain him against his own
will ; nor after all that had passed was I influ-
enced to do what I had also promised not to do,
namely, to advise him m any way to accept the
office of presbyter, which had I been able to per-
suade him to do, his ordination would have
been with his consent. I remained faithful to
both the promises which I had made, — not only
to the one which I had shortly before intimated to
the people, but also to the one in regard to which
I was bound, so far as men were concerned, by
only one witness. I was faithful, I say, not to
an oath, but to my bare promise, even in the
face of such danger. It is true that the fears of
danger were, as we afterwards ascertained, with-
out foundation ; but whatever the danger might
be, it was shared by us all alike. The fear was
also shared by all ; and I myself had thoughts
of retiring, being alarmed chiefly for the safety
of the building in which we were assembled.
But there was reason to apprehend that if I were
absent some disaster might be more likely to
occur, as the people would then be more exas-
perated by disappointment, and less restrained
by reverential sentiments. Again, if I had gone
through the dense mob along with Alypius, I had
reason to fear lest some one should dare to lay
violent hands on him ; if, on the other hand, I
had gone without him, what would have been
the most natural opinion for men to have formed,
if any accident had befallen Alypius, and I ap-
peared to have deserted him in order to hand
him over to the power of an infuriated people ?
3. In the midst of this excitement and great
distress, when, being at our wit's end, we could
not, so to speak, take breath, behold our pious
son Pinianus, suddenly and quite unexpectedly,
sends to me a servant of God, to tell me that
he wished to swear to the people, that if he were
ordained against his will he would leave Africa
altogether, thinking, I believe, that the people,
knowing that of course he could not violate his
oath, would not continue their outcry, seeing
that by perseverance they could gain nothing,
but only drive from among us a man whom we
ought at least to retain as a neighbour, if he was
to be no more. As it seemed to me, however,
that it was to be feared that the vehemence of
the people's grief would be increased by his


45^


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


taking an oath of this kind, I was silent in re-
gard to it ; and as he had by the same messen-
ger begged me to come to him, I went without
delay. When he had said to me again what he
had stated by the messenger, he immediately
added to the same oath what he had sent another
messenger to intimate to me while I was hasten-
ing towards him, namely, that he would consent
to reside in Hippo if no one compelled him to
accept against his will the burden of the clerical
office. On this, being comforted in my per-
plexities as by a breath of air when in danger
of suffocation, I made no reply, but went with
quickened pace to my brother Alypius, and told
him what Pinianus had said. But he, being
careful, I suppose, lest anything should be done
with his sanction by which he thought you might
be offended, said, " Let no one ask my opinion
on this subject." Having heard this, I hastened
to the noisy crowd, and having obtained silence,
declared to them what had been promised, along
with the proffered guarantee of an oath. The
people, however, having no other thought or
desire than that he should be their presbyter,
did not receive the proposal as I had expected
they would, but, after talking in an under-tone
among themselves, made the request that to this
promise and oath a clause might be added, that
if at any time he should be pleased to consent
to accept the clerical office, he should do so in
no other church than that of Hippo. I re-
ported this to him : without hesitation he agreed
to it. I returned to them with his answer ; they
were filled with joy, and presendy demanded the
promised oath.

4, I came back to your son-in-law, and found
him at a loss as to the words in which his prom-
ise, confirmed by oath, could be expressed, be-
cause of various kinds of necessity which might
emerge and might make it necessary for him to
leave Hippo. He stated at the time what he
feared, namely, that a hostile incursion of bar-
barians might occur, to avoid which it would be
necessary to leave the place. The holy Melania
wished to add also, as a possible reason for de-
parture, the unhealthiness of the climate ; but
she was kept from this by his reply, I said,
however, that he had brought forward an impor-
tant reason deserving consideration, and one
which, if it occurred, would compel the citizens
themselves to abandon the place ; but that, if
this reason were stated to the people, we might
jusdy fear lest they should regard us as prophe-
sying evil, and, on the other hand, if a pretext
for withdrawing from the promise were put under
the general name of necessity, it might be
thought that the necessity was only covering an
intention to deceive. It seemed good to him,
therefore, that we should test the feeling of the
people in regard to this, and we found the re-


sult exactly as I had expected. For when the
words which he had dictated were read by the
deacon, and had been received with approba-
tion, as soon as the clause concerning necessity \
which might hinder the fulfilment of his promise
fell upon their ears, there arose at once a shout
of remonstrance, and the promise was rejected ;
and the tumult began to break out again, the
people thinking that these negotiations had no
other object than to deceive them. When our
pious son saw this, he ordered the clause regard-
ing necessity to be struck out, and the people
recovered their cheerfulness once more.

5. I would gladly have excused myself on
the ground of fatigue, but he would not go to the
people unless I accompanied him ; so we went
together. He told them that he had himself
dictated what they had heard from the deacon,
that he had confirmed the promise by an oath,
and would do the things promised, after which
he forthwith rehearsed all in the words which he
had dictated. The response of the people was,
" Thanks be unto God ! " and they begged that
all which was written should be subscribed. \N'e
dismissed the catechumens, and he adhibited
his signature to the document at once. Then
we [Alypius and myself] began to be urged, not
by the voices of the crowd, but by faithful men
of good report as their representatives, that we
also as bishops should subscribe the writing.
But when I began to do this, the pious Melania
protested against it. I wondered why she did
this so late, as if we could make his promise and
oath void by forbearing from appending our
names to it ; I obeyed, however, and so my sig-
nature remained incomplete, and no one thought
it necessary to insist further upon our subscrip-
tion.

6. I have been at pains to communicate to
your Holiness, so far as I thought sufficient, what
were the feelings, or rather the remarks, of the
people on the following day, when they heard
that he had left the town. Whoever, therefore,
may have told you anything contradicting what
I stated, is either intentionally or through his
own mistake misleading you. For I am aware
that I passed over some things which seemed to
me irrelevant, but I know that I said nothing
but the truth. It is therefore true that our holy
son Pinianus took his oath in my presence and
with my permission, but it is not true that he
did it in obedience to any command from me.
He himself knows this : it is also known to
those servants of God whom he sent to me, the
first being the pious Barnabas, the second Tima-
sius, by whom also he sent me the promise of
his remaining in Hippo. As for the people
themselves, moreover, they were urging him by
their cries to accept the office of presbyter.
They did not ask for his oath, but they did not


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


457


refuse it when offered, because they hoped that
if he remained amongst us, there might be pro-
duced in him a wilhngness to consent to ordi-
nation, while they feared lest, if ordained against
his will, he should, according to his oath, leave
Africa. And therefore they also were actuated
in their clamorous procedure by regard to God's
work (for surely the consecration of a presbyter
is a work of God) ; and inasmuch as they did
not feel satisfied with his promise of remaining
in Hippo, unless it were also promised that, in
the event of his at any time accepting the cleri-
cal office, he should do it nowhere else than
among them, it is perfectly manifest what they
hoped for from his dwelling among them, and
that they did not abandon their zeal for the
work of God.

I 7. On what ground, then, do you allege that
[the people did this out of a base desire for
' money ? In the first place, the people who were
so clamorous have nothing whatever of this kind
to gain ; for as the people of Thagaste derive
from the gifts which you have bestowed on their
church no profit but the joy of seeing your good
work, it will be the same in the case of the
people of Hippo, or of any other place in which
you have obeyed or may yet obey the law of your
Lord concerning the " mammon of unright-
eousness." The people, therefore, in most ve-
hemently insisting upon guiding the procedure
of their church in regard to so great a man, did I
not ask from you a pecuniary advantage, but
testified their admiration for your contempt of
money. For if in my own case, because they
had heard that, despising my patrimony, which
consisted of only a few small fields, I had conse-
crated myself to the liberty of serving God, they
loved this disinterestedness, and did not grudge
this gift to the church of my birthplace, Thagaste,
but, when it had not imposed upon me the cleri-
cal office, made me by force, so to speak, their
own, how much more ardently might they love
in our Pinianus his overcoming and treading
under foot with such remarkable decision riches
so great and hopes so bright, and a strong natu-
ral capacity for enjoying this world ! I indeed
seem, in the opinion of many, who compare
themselves with themselves, to have rather found
than forsaken wealth. For my patrimony can
scarcely be considered a twentieth part of the
ecclesiastical property which I am now sup-
posed to possess as master. But in whatever
church, especially in Africa, our Pinianus might
be ordained (I do not say a presbyter, but) a
bishop, he would be still in deep poverty com-
pared with his former affluence, even if he were
using the church's- revenues in the spirit of one
lording it over God's heritage. Christian pov-
erty is much more clearly and certainly loved in
the case of one in whom there is no room for


suspecting a desire for acquiring an accession to
his wealth. It was this admiration which kin-
dled the minds of the people, and roused them
to such violence of persevering clamour. Let
us therefore not charge them gratuitously with
base covetousness, but rather, without imputing
unworthy motives, allow them at least to love in
others that good thing which they do not them-
selves possess. For although there may have
mixed in the crowd some who are indigent or
beggars, who helped to increase the clamour,
and were actuated by the hope of some relief to
their wants out of your honourable affluence,
even this is not, in my opinion, base covetous-
ness.

8. It remains, therefore, that the reproach of
disgraceful covetousness must be levelled indi-
rectly at the clergy, and especially at the bishop.
For we are supposed to act as lords of the
church's property; we are supposed to enjoy its
revenues. In short, whatever money we have
received for the church either is still in our pos-
session or has been spent according to our judg-
ment ; and of it we have given nothing to any
of the people besides the clergy and the brethren
in the monastery, excepting only a very few in-
digent persons. I do not mean by this to say
that the things which were said by you must
necessarily have been said specially against us,
but that, if said against any others than ourselves,
they must have been incredible. What, then,
shall we do? If it be not possible to clear our-
selves before enemies, by what means may we
at least clear ourselves before you ? The matter
is one pertaining to the soul ; it is within us,
hidden from the eyes of men, and known to God
alone. What, then, remains for us but to call
to witness God, to whom it is known? When,
therefore, you harbour these suspicions concern-
ing us, you do not command but absolutely
compel us to give our oath, — a much more
grievous wrong than the commanding of an
oath, which you have thought proper in your
letter to censure as highly culpable in me ; you
compel us, I say, not by menacing death to the
body, as the people of Hippo were supposed to
have done, but by menacing death to our good
name, which deserves to be regarded by us as
more precious than life itself, for the sake of
those weak brethren to whom we endeavour in
all circumstances to exhibit ourselves as ensam-
ples in good works.

9. We, however, are not indignant against you
who compel us to this oath, as you are indignant
against the people of Hippo, For you believe,
as men judging of other men, things which,
though not actually existing in us, might possi-
bly have existed. Your suspicions we must la-
bour not so much to reprove as to remove ; and
since our conscience is clear in the sight of God,


458


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


we must seek to clear our character in your sight.
It may be, as Alypius and I said to each other
before this trial occurred, that God will grant
that not only you, our much-beloved fellow-
members of Christ's body, but even our most
implacable enemies, may be thoroughly satisfied
that we are not defiled by any love of money in
our administration of ecclesiastical affairs. Until
this be done (if the Lord, answering our prayer,
permit it to be done), hear in the meantime
what we are compelled to do, rather than put
off for any length of time the healing of your
heart. God is my witness that, as for the whole
management of those ecclesiastical revenues over
which we are supposed to love to exercise lord-
ship, I only bear it as a burden which is imposed
on me by love to the brethren and fear of God :
I do not love it ; nay, if I could, without unfaith-
fulness to my office, I would desire to be rid of
it. God also is my witness that I believe the
sentiments of Alypius to be the same as mine
in this matter. Nevertheless, on the one hand,
the people, and what is worse, the people of
Hippo, have hastily done Alypius great wrong
by entertaining another opinion of his character ;
and on the other hand, you who are saints of
God and full of unfeigned compassion have,
through believing such things concerning us,
thought proper to touch and admonish us while
nominally censuring the same people of Hippo,
who have no part whatever in the guilt of the
alleged covetousness. You have desired unques-
tionably to correct us, and that without hating
us (this be far from you !) ; wherefore I ought
not to be angry with you, but to thank you, be-
cause it was not possible for you to have com-
bined modesty and freedom more happily than
when, instead of stating your sentiments as an
offensive accusation against the bishop, you left
them to be discovered by indirect inferences.

10. Let not the fact that I have thought it
necessary thus to confirm my statements by
oath cause you vexation by making you think
that you are treated with harshness. There was
no harshness or lack of kindly feeling in the apos-
tle towards those to whom he wrote : " Neither
used we at any time flattering words, as ye know,
nor a cloak of covetousness ; God is witness." '
In the thing which was opened to men's obser-
vation he appealed to their own testimony, but
in regard to that which was hidden, to whom
could he appeal but to God? If, therefore, fear
lest the ignorance of men should make them en-
tertain some such thoughts concerning him was
reasonably felt even by Paul, whose labours, as
all men knew, were such that except in extreme
necessitv he never took anvthing for his own
benefit from the communities to which he dis-


' I Thess. ii. 5.


pensed the grace of Christ, obtaining in all other
cases the necessary provision for his support by
working with his own hands, how much more
pains must be taken to establish confidence in
our disinterestedness by us, who are, both in the
merit of holiness and in strength of mind, so far
behind him, and who are not only unable to do
anything by the work of our hands to support
ourselves, but also precluded from this, even if
we could work, by an accumulation of duties
from which I believe that the apostles were ex-
empt ! Let the charge, therefore, of most base
covetousness be brought no more in this matter
against the Christian people — that is, the Church
of Christ. For it is more tolerable that this charge
be alleged against us, on whom the suspicion,
though groundless, might fall without being ut-
terly improbable, than on the people, of whom
it is certainly known that they could not either
cherish the covetous desire or be reasonably sus-
pected of entertaining it.

II. For persons possessing any faith — and
how much more the Christian faith ! — to be
unfaithful to their oath, I do not say by doing
something contrary to it, but by hesitating at all
as to its fulfilment, is utterly wrong. What my
judgment is on this question I have with suffi-
cient fulness declared in the letter which I sent
to my brother Alypius. Your Holiness wrote
asking me " whether I or the people of Hippo
consider any one under obligation to fulfil an
oath which has been extorted by violence." But
what is your opinion ? Do you think that even
if death, which in this case was feared without
reason, were certainly imminent, a Christian
might use the name of his Lord to confirm a
lie, and call his God to be witness to a false-
hood? For assuredly a Christian, if urged by
the menace of instant death to perjure himself
by false testimony, ought to fear the loss of hon-
our more than the loss of life. Hostile armies
confront each other in the battle-field with mu-
tual menaces of death, about which there can
be no uncertainty ; and yet, when they pledge
themselves to each other by oath, we praise those
who are faithful to their engagement, and we
I justly abhor those who are unfaithful. Now what
I was the motive leading them to swear to each
1 other, but the fear on both sides of being killed
or taken prisoners? And by this promise even
such men hold themselves bound, lest they be
guilty of sacrilege and perjury if they did not
fulfil the oath extorted by the fear of death or
captivity, and broke the promise given in such
circumstances : they are more afraid of break-
ing their oath than of taking a man's life. And
do we propose to discuss as a debatable question
whether an oath must be fulfilled which has been
given under fear of harm by servants of God,
who are uhder pre-eminent obligations to holi-


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


459


ness, by monks who are running the race towards
Christian perfection, by distributing their prop-
erty according to Christ's command?

12. Tell me, I beseech you, what hardship de-
serving the name of exile, or transportation, or
banishment, is involved in his promise to reside
here? I suppose that the office of presbyter is
not exile. Would our Pinianus prefer exile to
that office ? Far be it from us to find such apol-
ogy for one who is a saint of God and very dear
to us : God Corbid, I say, that it should be said
of him that he preferred exile to the office of
presbyter, and preferred to perjure himself rather j
than submit to exile. This I would say even if
it were true that the oath by which he promised
to reside among us had been extorted from him ;
but the fact is that, instead of being extorted
in spite of his refusal, it was accepted when he
had proffered it himself. It was accepted, more-
over, as I have already said, because of the hope,
which was encouraged by his remaining here,
that he might also consent to comply with our
desire that he should accept the clerical office.
In fine, whatever opinion may be entertained
concerning us or concerning the people of Hip-
po, the case of those who may have compelled
him to take the oath is very different from that
of those who may have — I do not say compelled,
but at least — counselled him to break the oath.
I trust, also, that Pinianus himself will not refuse
to consider seriously whether it is worse to swear
under the pressure of fear, however great, or, in
the absence of all alarm, to commit deliberate
perjury.

13. God be thanked that the men of Hippo
regard his promise of residence here as kept
fully, if only he come with the intention of
making this town his home, and in going whither-
soever necessity may call him, go with the inten-
tion of coming back to us again. For if they
were to exact literal fulfilment of the words of
the promise, it would be the duty of a servant
of God to adhere to every sentence of it rather
than forswear himself. But as it would be a
crime for them so to bind any one, much more
such a man as he is, so they have themselves
proved that they had no such unreasonable ex-
pectation ; for on hearing that he had gone
away with the intention of returning, they ex-
pressed their satisfaction ; and fidelity to an oath
requires no more than the performance of what
was expected by those to whom it was given.
Let me ask, moreov&r, what is meant by saying
that he, in giving the oath with his own lips,
mentioned the possibility of necessity prevent-
ing his fulfilment of the promise ? The truth is,
that with his own lips he ordered the qualifying
clause to be removed. If he put it in, it would
be when he himself spoke to the people ; but
if he had done so, they assuredly would not have


answered, "Thanks be unto God," but would
have renewed the protestations which they made
when it was read with the qualifying clause by
the deacon. And what difference does it really
make whether this plea of necessity for depart-
ing from the promise was or was not inserted?
Nothing more than we have stated above was
expected from him ; but he who disappoints the
known expectation of those to whom his oath
is given, cannot but be a perjured person.

14. Wherefore, let his promise be fulfilled,
and let the hearts of the weak be healed, kst,
on the one hand, those who approve of it be
taught by such a conspicuous example to imitate
an act of perjury, and lest, on the other hand,
those who condemn it have just grounds for say-
ing that none of us is worthy to be believed, not
only when we make promises, but even when we
give our oath. Let us especially guard against
giving occasion in this to the tongues of ene-
mies, which are used by the great Enemy as
darts wherewith to slay the weak. But God
forbid that we should expect from a man like
Pinianus anything else than what the fear of God
inspires, and the superior excellence of his own
piety approves. As for myself, whom you blame
for not interfering to forbid his oath, I admit
that I could not bring myself to believe that,
in circumstances so disorderly and scandalous, I
ought rather to allow the church which I serve
to be overthrown, than accept the deliverance
which was offered to us by such a man.


LETTER CXXX.

(a.d. 412.)

to proba,' a devoted handmaid of god, bishop
augustin, a servant of christ and of christ's
servants, sends greeting in the name of
the lord of lords,

Chap, i, — i . Recolleojting your request and
my promise, that ais soon as time and oppor-
tunity should be given by Him to whom we
pray, I would write you something on the sub-


' Anicia Faltonia Proba, the widow of Sextus Petroniiis Probus,
belonged to a Roman family of great wealth and noble lineage.
Three of her sons held the consulship, two of them together in 395
A.D., and the third in 406 a.d. When Rome was taken by Alaric in
410, Proba and her family were in the city, and narrowly escaped
from violence durmg the six days in which the Goths pillaged the
city. About this time one of the sons of Proba died, and very soon
after this sad event she resolved to quit Rome, as the return of Alaric
was daily apprehended. Having realized her ample fortune, she
sailed to Africa, accompanied by her daughter-in-law Juliana (the
widow of Aniens Hermogenianus Olybrius), and the daughter of
Juliana, Demetrias, the well known rcligieiise, whose taking of the
veil in 413 produced so profound an impression throughout the eccle-
siastical world. A considerable retinue of widows and younger
women, seeking protection under her escort, accompanied the dis-
tinguished refugee to Carthage. After paying a large sum to secure
the protection of Heraclianus, Count of Africa, she was permitted to
establish herself with her community of pious women in Carthage.
Her piety led her to seek the friendship and counsel of Augustin.
How readily it was given is seen here, and in Letters CXXXI., CL.,
and CLXXXVIIL


460


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


ject of prayer to God, I feel it my duty now to
discharge this debt, and in the love of Christ
to minister to the satisfaction of your pious de-
sire. I cannot express in words how greatly I
rejoiced because of the request, in which I per-
ceived how great is your solicitude about this
supremely important matter. For what could
be more suitably the business of your widow-
hood than to continue in supplications night and
day, according to the apostle's admonition, "She
that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in
God, and continueth in supplications night and
day " ? ' It might, indeed, appear wonderful
that solicitude about prayer should occupy your
■heart and claim the first place in it, when you
are, so far as this world is concerned, noble and
wealthy, and the mother of such an illustrious
family, and, although a widow, not desolate,
were it not that you wisely understand that in
this world and in this life the soul has no sure
portion.

2. Wherefore He who inspired you with this
thought is assuredly doing what He promised to
His disciples when they were grieved, not for
tliemselves, but for the whole human family, and
were despairing of the salvation of any one,
after they heard from Him that it was easier for
a camel to go through the eye of a needle than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven. He gave them this marvellous and
merciful reply : "The things which are impossi-
ble with men are possible with God." ^ He,
therefore, with whom it is possible to make even
the rich enter into the kingdom of heaven, in-
spired you with that devout anxiety which makes
you think it necessary to ask my counsel on the
question how you ought to pray. For while He
was yet on earth. He brought Zaccheus,^ though
rich, into the kingdom of heaven, and, after
being glorified in His resurrection and ascension,
He made many who were rich to despise this
present world, and made them more truly rich
by extinguishing their *desire for riches through
His imparting to them His Holy Spirit. For
how could you desire so much to pray to God
if you did not trust in Him ? And how could
you trust in Him if you were fixing your trust in
uncertain riches, and neglecting the wholesome
exhortation of the apostle : " Charge them that are
rich in this world that they be not high-minded,
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living
God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy ;
that they do good, that they be rich in good
works, ready to distribute, willing to communi-
cate, laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation, that they may lay hold on eternal
hfe " ? 4

' I Tim. V. 5.

^ Matt. xix. 21-26.

3 Luke xix. 9

< I Tim. vi. 17-19.


Chap. ii. — 3. It becomes you, therefore, out
of love to this true life, to account yourself
"desolate" in this world, however great the
prosperity of your lot may be. For as that is
the true life, in comparison with which the pres-
ent life, which is much loved, is not worthy to
be called life, however happy and prolonged it
be, so is it also the true consolation promised by
the Lord in the words of Isaiah, " I will give
him the true consolation, peace upon peace," s
without which consolation men find themselves,
in the midst of every mere earthly solace, rather
desolate than comforted. For as for riches and
high rank, and all other things in which men
who are strangers to true felicity imagine that
happiness exists, what comfort do they bring,
seeing that it is better to be independent of such
things than to enjoy abundance of them, because,
when possessed, they occasion, through our fear
of losing them, more vexation than was caused
by the strength of desire with which their pos-
session was coveted? Men are not made good
by possessing these so-called good things, but, if
men have become good otherwise, they make
these things to be really good by using them well.
Therefore true comfort is to be found not in
them, but rather in those things in which true
life is found. For a man can be made blessed
only by the same power by which he is made
good.

4. It is true, indeed, that good men are seen
to be the sources of no small comfort to others
in this world. For if we be harassed by pov-
erty, or saddened by bereavement, or disquieted
by bodily pain, or pining in exile, or vexed by
any kind of calamity, let good men visit us, —
men who can not only rejoice with them that
rejoice, but also weep with them that weep,^ and
who know how to give profitable counsel, and
win us to express our feelings in conversation :
the effect is, that rough things become smooth,
heavy burdens are lightened, and difficulties van-
quished most wonderfully. But this is done in
and through them by Him who has made them
good by His Spirit. On the other hand, al-
though riches may abound, and no bereavement
befal us, and health of body be enjoyed, and
we live in our own country in peace and safety,
if, at the same time, we have as our neighbours
wicked men, among whom there is not one who
can be trusted, not one from whom we do not
apprehend and experience treachery, deceit,
outbursts of anger, dissensions, and snares, — in
such a case are not all these other things made
bitter and vexatious, so that nothing sweet or
pleasant is left in them? Whatever, therefore,
be our circumstances in this world, there is noth-
ing truly enjoyable without a friend. But how


5 Isa. Ivii. 18, 19, in LXX. version.
'' Rom. xii. 15.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


461


rarely is one found in this life about whose spirit
and behaviour as a true friend there may be
perfect confidence ! For no one is known to
another so intimately as he is known to himself,
and yet no one is so well known even to him-
self that he can be sure as to his own conduct
on the morrow ; wherefore, although many are
known by their fruits, and some gladden their
neighbours by their good lives, while others
grieve their neighbours by their evil Hves, yet
the minds of men are so unknown and so un-
stable, that there is the highest wisdom in the
exhortation of the apostle : "Judge nothing be-
fore the time until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
will make manifest the counsels of the hearts ;
and then shall every man have praise of God." '
5. In the darkness, then, of this world, in
which we are pilgrims absent from the Lord as
long as " we walk by faith and not by sight," ^
the Christian soul ought to feel itself desolate,
and continue in prayer, and learn to fix the eye
of faith on the word of the divine sacred Scrip-
tures, as " on a light shining in a dark place,
until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in our
hearts." 3 For the ineffable source from which
this lamp borrows its hght is the Light which
shineth in darkness, but the darkness compre-
hendeth it not — the Light, in order to seeing
which our hearts must be purified by faith ; for
" blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God ; " * and " we know that when He shall ap-
pear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him
as He is." 5 Then after death shall come the true
life, and after desolation the true consolation,
that life shall deliver our " souls from death " —
that consolation shall deliver our " eyes from
tears," and, as follows in the psalm, our feet
shall be delivered from falling ; for there shall
be no temptation there.^ Moreover, if there be
no temptation, there will be no prayer ; for there
we shall not be waiting for promised blessings,
but contemplating the blessings actually be-
stowed ; wherefore he adds, " I will walk before
the Lord in the land of the living," 7 where we
shall then be — not in the wilderness of the
dead, where we now are : " For ye are dead,"
saj-s the apostle, "and your life is hid with Christ
in God ; when Christ, who is our life, shall ap-
pear, then shall ye also appear with Him in
glory." '^ For that is the true life on which the
rich are exhorted to lay hold by being rich in
good works ; and in it is the true consolation,
for want of which, meanwhile, a widow is " deso-


I I Cor. iv. 5.
' 2 Cor. V. 6, 7.

2 Pet. i. ig.

Matt. V. 8.

I John iii. 2.

Ps. cxvi. 8.

Ps. cxvi. 9. In the LXX., Evapecrrijo-co ; in .^ug., " placebo."

Col. iii. 3, 4.


late " indeed, even though she has sons and grand-
children, and conducts her household piously,
entreating all dear to her to put their hope in
God : and in the midst of all this, she says in
her prayer, " My soul thirsteth for Thee ; my
flesh longeth in a dry and thirsty land, where no
water is ; " ^ and this dying life is nothing else
than such a land, however numerous our mor-
tal comforts, however pleasant our companions
in the pilgrimage, and however great the abun-
dance of our possessions. You know how un-
certain all these things are ; and even if they
were not uncertain, what would they be in com-
parison with the felicity which is promised in
the life to come !

6. In saying these things to you, who, being a
widow, rich and noble, and the mother of an
illustrious family, have asked from me a dis-
course on prayer, my aim has been to make you
feel that, even while your family are spared to
you, and live as you would desire, you are deso-
late so long as you have not attained to that
life in which is the true- and abiding consolation,
in which shall be fulfilled what is spoken in
prophecy : " We are satisfied in the morning
with Thy mercy, we rejoice and are glad all our
days ; we are made glad according to the days
wherein Thou hast afilicted us, and the years
wherein we have seen evil." '°

Ch.ap. III. — 7. Wherefore, until that consola-
tion come, remember, in order to your " contin-
uing in prayers and supplications night and day,"
that, however great the temporal prosperity may
be which flows around you, you are desolate.
For the apostle does not ascribe this gift to
every widow, but to her who, being a widow in-
deed, and desolate, " trusteth in God, and con-
tinueth in supplication night and day." Observe,
however, most vigilantly the warning which fol-
lows : " But she that liveth in pleasure is dead
while she liveth ; " " for a person lives in those
things which he loves, which he greatly desires,
and in which he believes himself to be blessed.
Wherefore, what Scripture has said of riches :
" If riches increase, set not your heart upon
them," '^ I say to you concerning pleasures : " If
pleasures increase, set not your heart upon them."
Do not, therefore, think highly of yourself because
these things are not wanting, but are yours abun-
dandy, flowing, as it were, from a most copious
fountain of earthly felicity. By all means look
upon your possession of these things with indif-
ference and contempt, and seek nothing from
them beyond health of body. For this is a
blessing not to be despised, because of its being
necessary to the work of life until " this mortal


9 Ps. Ixiii. I.

'° Ps. xc. 14, 15, version of LXX.

" I Tim. V. 5, 6.

" Ps. Ixii. ID.


462


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


shall have put on immortality"' — in other
words, the true, perfect, and everlasting health,
which is neither reduced by earthly infirmities
nor repaired by corruptible gratificatioh, but, en-
during with celestial vigour, is animated with a
life eternally incorruptible. For the apostle him-
self says, " Make not provision for the flesh, to
fulfil the lusts thereof," ^ because we must take
care of the flesh, but only in so far as is neces-
sary for health ; " For no man ever yet hated
his own flesh," ^ as he himself likewise says.
Hence, also, he admonished Timothy, who was,
as it appears, too severe upon his body, that he
should " use a little wine for his stomach's sake,
and for his often infirmities." ♦

8. Many holy men and women, using every
precaution against those pleasures in which she
that liveth, cleaving to them, and dwelling in
them as her heart's delight, is dead while she
liveth, have cast from them that which is as it
were the mother of pleasures, by distributing
their wealth among the poor, and so have stored
it in the safer keeping of the treasury of heaven.
If you are hindered from doing this by some
consideration of duty to your family, you know
yourself what account you can give to God of
your use of riches. For no one knoweth what
passeth within a man, " but the spirit of the man
which is in him." 5 We ought not to judge any-
thing " before the time until the Lord come,
who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of
the hearts, and then shall every man have praise
of God." ^ It pertains, therefore, to your care
as a widow, to see to it that if pleasures in-
crease you do not set your heart upon them,
lest that which ought to rise that it may live, die
through contact with their corrupting influence.
Reckon yourself to be one of those of whom it
is written, "Their hearts shall live for ever." ?

Chap. iv. — 9. You have now heard what
manner of person you should be if you would
pray ; hear, in the next place, what you ought
to pray for. This is the subject on which you
have thought it most necessary to ask my opin-
ion, because you were disturbed by the words
of the apostle : " We know not what we should
pray for as we ought ; " ** and you became alarmed
lest it should do you more harm to pray other-
wise than you ought, than to desist from praying
altogether. A short solution of your difficulty
may be given thus : " Pray for a happy life."
This all men wish to have ; for even those whose
lives are worst and most abandoned would by


* I Cor. XV. 54.

2 Rom. xiii. 14.

3 Eph. V. 39.

* I Tim. V. 23.
^ I Cor. ii. II.
*> I Cor. iv. 5.
7 Ps. xxii. 26.

* Rom. viii. 26.


no means live thus, unless they thought that in
this way they either were made or might be made
truly happy. Now what else ought we to pray
for than that which both bad and good desire,
but which only the good obtain ?

Chap. v. — lo. You ask, perchance. What is
this happy life? On this question the talents
and leisure of many philosophers have been
wasted, who, nevertheless, failed in their re-
searches after it just in proportion as they failed
to honour Him from whom it proceeds, and were
unthankful to Him. In the first place, then,
consider whether we should accept the opinion
of those philosophers who pronounce that man
happy who lives according to his own will. Far
be it, surely, from us to believe this ; for what
if a man's will inclines him to live in wickedness ?
Is he not proved to be a miserable man in pro-
portion to the facility with which his depraved
will is carried out? Even philosophers who were
strangers to the worship of God have rejected
this sentiment with deserved abhorrence. One
of them, a man of the greatest eloquence, says :
" Behold, however, others, not philosophers in-
deed, but men of ready power in disputation,
who affirm that all men are happy who live
according to their own will. But this is cer-
tainly untrue, for to wish that which is unbecom-
ing is itself a most miserable thing ; nor is it so
miserable a thing to fail in obtaining what you
wish as to wish to obtain what you ought not to
desire." 9 What is your opinion? Are not these
words, by whomsoever they are spoken, derived
from the Truth itself? We may therefore here
say what the apostle said of a certain Cretan
poet '° whose sentiment had pleased him : " This
witness is true." "

II. He, therefore, is truly happy who has all
that he wishes to have, and wishes to have noth-
ing which he ought not to wish. This being
understood, let us now observe what things men
may without impropriety wish to have. One
desires marriage ; another, having become a
widower, chooses thereafter to live a life of con-
tinence ; a third chooses to practise continence
though he is married. And although of these
three conditions one may be found better than
another, we cannot say that any one of the three
persons is wishing what he ought not : the same
is true of the desire for children as the fruit of
marriage, and for life and health to be enjoyed
by the children who have been received, — of
which desires the latter is one with which widows
remaining unmarried are for the most part occu-
pied ; for although, refusing a second marriage,
they do not now wish to have children, they wish
that the children that they have may live in


9 Cicero Hortensius.
'° Epimenides.
*' Titus i. 13.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


463


health. From all such care those who preseiTC
their virginity intact are free. Nevertheless, all
have some clear to them whose temporal welfare
they do without impropriety desire. But when
men have obtained this health for themselves,
and for those whom they love, are we at liberty
to say that they are now happy? They have, it
is true, something which it is quite becoming to
desire ; but if they have not other things which
are greater, better, and more full both of utility
and beauty, they are still far short of possessing
a happy life.

Chap. vi. — 12. Shall we then say, that in
addition to this health of body men may desire
for themselves and for those dear to them hon-
our and power? By all means, if they desire
these in order that by obtaining them they may
promote the interest of those who may be their
dependants. If they seek these things not for
the sake of the things themselves, but for some
good thing which may through this means be
accomplished, the wish is a proper one ; but if
it be merely for the empty gratification of pride
and arrogance, and for a superfluous and perni-
cious triumph of vanity, the wish is improper.
Wherefore, men do nothing wrong in desiring for
themselves and for their kindred the competent
portion of necessary things, of which the apostle
speaks when he says : " Godliness with a com-
petency [contentment in English version] is
great gain ; for we brought nothing into this
world, and it is certain we can carry nothing
out : and having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content. But they that will be rich
fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition ; for the love of money
is the root of all evil, which while some coveted
after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows." ' This
competent portion he desires without impropriety
who desires it and nothing beyond it ; for if his
desires go beyond it, he is not desiring it, and
therefore his desire is improper. This was de-
sired, and was prayed for by him who said :
" Give me neither poverty nor riches : feed me
with food convenient for me : lest I be full, and
deny Thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest
I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my
God in vain." 2 You see assuredly that this
competency is desired not for its own sake, but
to secure the health of the body, and such pro-
vision of house and clothing as is befitting the
man's circumstances, that he may appear as he
ought to do among those amongst whom he has
to live, so as to retain their respect and discharge
the duties of his position.


' I Tim. vi. 6-10.
- I'rov. XXX. 8, 9.


13. Among all these things, our own welfare
and the benefits which friendship bids us ask for
others are things to be desired on their own ac-
count ; but a competency of the necessaries of
life is usually sought, if it be sought in the proper
way, not on its own account, but for the sake of
the two higher benefits. Welfare consists in the
possession of life itself, and health and sound-
ness of mind and body. The claims of friend-
ship, moreover, are not to be confined within too
narrow range, for it embraces all to whom love
and kindly affection are due, although the heart
goes out to some of these more freely, to others
more cautiously ; yea, it even extends to our
enemies, for whom also we are commanded to
pray. There is accordingly no one in the whole
human family to whom kindly affection is not
due by reason of the bond of a common hu-
manity, although It may not be due on the ground
of reciprocal love ; Chap. vii. — but in those by
whom we are requited with a holy and pure love,
we find great and reasonable pleasure.

For these things, therefore, it becomes us to
pray : if we have them, that we may keep them ;
if we have them not, that we may get them.

14. Is this all? Are these the benefits in
which exclusively the happy hfe is found? Or
does truth teach us that something else is to be
preferred to them all? We know that both the
competency of things necessary, and the well-
being of ourselves and of our friends, so long as
these concern this present world alone, are to be
cast aside as dross in comparison with the ob-
taining of eternal life ; for although the body
may be in health, the mind cannot be regarded
as sound which does not prefer eternal to tem-
poral things ; yea, the life which we live in time
is wasted, if it be not spent in obtaining that by
which we may be worthy of eternal life. There-
fore all things which are the objects of useful
and becoming desire are unquestionably to be
viewed with reference to that one life which is
lived with God, and is derived from Him. In
so doing, we love ourselves if we love God ; and
we truly love our neighbours as ourselves, ac-
cording to the second great commandment, if,
so far as is in our power, we persuade them to a
similar love of God. We love God, therefore,
for what He is in Himself, and ourselves and
our neighbours for His sake. Even when living
thus, let us not think that we are securely estab-
lished in that happy life, as if there was nothing
more for whicli we should still pray. For how
could we be said to live a happy life now, while
that which alone is the object of a well-directed
life is still wanting to us?

Chap. VIII. — 15. Why, then, are our desires
scattered over many things, and why, through
fear of not praying as we ought, do we ask
what we should pray for, and not rather say


464


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


with the Psalmist : " One thing have I desired
of the Lord, that will I seek after : that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and
to inquire in His temple "? ' For in the house
of the Lord " all the days of life " are not days
distinguished by their successively coming and
passing away : the beginning of one day is not
the end of another ; but they are all alike un-
ending in that place where the life which is made
up of them has itself no end. In order to our
obtaining this true blessed life, He who is Him-
self the True Blessed Life has taught us to pray,
not with much speaking, as if our being heard
depended upon the fluency with which we ex-
press ourselves, seeing that we are praying to
One who, as the Lord tells us, " knoweth what
things we have need of before we ask Him." ^
^^'hence it may seem surprising that, although
He has forbidden " much speaking," He who
knoweth before we ask Him what things we need
has nevertheless given us exhortation to prayer
in such words as these : " Men ought always to
pray and not to faint ; " setting before us the
case of a widow, who, desiring to have justice
done to her against her adversary, did by her
persevering entreaties persuade an unjust judge
to listen to her, not moved by a regard either to
justice or to mercy, but overcome by her weari-
some importunity ; in order that we might be
admonished how much more certainly the Lord
God, who is merciful and just, gives ear to us
praying continually to Him, when this widow, by
her unremitting supplication, prevailed over the
indifference of an unjust and wicked judge, and
how willingly and benignantly He fulfils the good
desires of those whom He knows to have for-
given others their trespasses, when this suppliant,
though seeking vengeance upon her adversary,
obtained her desire.^ A similar lesson the Lord
gives in the parable of the man to whom a friend
in his journey had come, and who, having noth-
ing to set before him, desired to borrow from
another friend three loaves (in which, perliaps,
there is a figure of the Trinity of persons of one
substance), and finding him already along with
his household asleep, succeeded by very urgent
and importunate entreaties in rousing him up, so
that he gave him as many as he needed, being
moved rather by a wish to avoid further annoy-
ance than by benevolent thoughts : from which
the Lord would have us understand that, if even
one who was asleep is constrained to give, even in
spite of himself, after being disturbed in his sleep
by the person who asks of him, how much more
kindly will He give who never sleeps, and who
rouses us from sleep that we may ask from Him.-*

' Ps. xxvii. 4.

2 Matt. vi. 7, 8.

3 Luke -vviii. 1-8.
♦ Luke xi. 5-8.


16. With the same design He added: "Ask,
and ye shall receive ; seek, and ye shall find ;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you : for
every one that asketh receiveth ; and he that
seeketh findeth ; and to him that knocketh it
shall be opened. If a son shall ask bread of
any of you that is a father, will he give him a
stone ? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give
him a serpent? or if he shall ask an egg, will he
offer him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children,
how much more shall your heavenly Father give
good things to them that ask Him ? " 5 VVe have
here what corresponds to those three things which
the apostle commends : faith is signified by the
fish, either on account of the element of water
used in baptism, or because it remains unharmed
amid the tempestuous waves of this world, —
contrasted with which is the serpent, that with
poisonous deceit persuaded man to disbelieve
God ; hope is signified by the egg, because the
life of the young bird is not yet in it, but is to
be — is not seen, but hoped for, because " hope
which is seen is not hope,"^ — contrasted with
which is the scorpion, for the man who hopes
for eternal life forgets the things which are be-
hind, and reaches forth to the things which are
before, for to him it is dangerous to look back ;
but the scorpion is to be guarded against on ac-
count of what it has in its tail, namely, a sharp
and venomous sting ; charity is signified by
bread, for "the greatest of these is charity," and
bread surpasses all other kinds of food in use-
fulness, — contrasted with which is a stone, be-
cause hard hearts refuse to exercise charity.
Whether this be the meaning of these symbols,
or some other more suitable be found, it is at
least certain that He who knoweth how to give
good gifts to His children urges us to " ask and
seek and knock."

17. Why this should be done by Him who
" before we ask Him knoweth what things we
have need of," might perplex our minds, if we
did not understand that the Lord our God re-
quires us to ask not that thereby our wish may
be intimated to Him, for to Him it cannot be
unknown, but in order that by prayer there may
be exercised in us by supplications that desire by
which we may receive what He prepares to be-
stow. His gifts are very great, but we are small
and straitened in our capacity of receiving.
Wherefore it is said to us : " Be ye enlarged, not
bearing the yoke along with unbelievers." ^ For,
in proportion to the simplicity of our faith, the
firmness of our hope, and the ardour of our
desire, will we more largely receive of that which
is immensely great ] which " eye hath not seen,"


5 Luke xi. 9-13, and Matt. vii. 7-11.
^ Rom. viii. 24.
7 2 Cor. vi. 13, 14.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


465


for it is not colour ; which " the ear hath not
heard," for it is not sound ; and which hath
not ascended into the heart of man, for the heart
of man must ascend to it."

Chap. ix. — 18. When we cherish uninter-
rupted desire along with the exercise of faith and
hope and charity, we "pray always." But at
certain stated hours and seasons we also use
words in prayer to God, that by these signs of
things we may admonish ourselves, and may ac-
quaint ourselves with the measure of progress
which we have made in this desire, and may
more warmly excite ourselves to obtain an in-
crease of its strength. For the effect following
upon prayer will be excellent in proportion to the
fervour of the desire which precedes its utter-
ance. And therefore, what else is intended by
the words of the apostle : " Pray without ceas-
ing," ^ than, " Desire without intermission, from
Him who alone can give it, a happy life, which
no life can be but that which is eternal " ? This,
therefore, let us desire continually from the Lord
our God ; and thus let us pray continually. But
at certain hours we recall our minds from other
cares and business, in which desire itself some-
how is cooled down, to the business of prayer,
admonishing ourselves by the words of our
prayer to fix attention upon that which we desire,
lest what had begun to lose heat become alto-
gether cold, and be finally extinguished, if the
flame be not more frequently fanned. Whence,
also, when the same apostle says, " Let your re-
quests be made known unto God," ^ this is not to
be understood as if thereby they become known
to God, who certainly knew them before they
were uttered, but in this sense, that they are to be
made known to ourselves in the presence of God
jjby patient waiting upon Him, not in the presence
of men by ostentatious worship. Or perhaps
that they may be made known also to the angels
:hatare in the presence of God, that these beings
nay in some way present them to God, and con-
sult Him concerning them, and may bring to us,
iither manifestly or secretly, that which, hearken-
ng to His commandment, they may have learned
0 be His will, and which must be fulfilled by
hem according to that which they have there
earned to be their duty ; for the angel said to
I'obias : * " Now, therefore, when thou didst pray,
aid Sara thy daughter-in-law, I did bring the
emembrance of your prayers before the Holy
3ne."

Chap. x. — 19. Wherefore it is neither wrong
lor unprofitable to spend much time in praying,
f there be leisure for this without hindering
ither good and necessary works to which duty
alls us, although even in the doing of these, as I

' I Cor. ii. 9.
^ I Thess. V. 17.
3 Phil. iv. 6.
* Tobias xii. 12.


have said, we ought by cherishing holy desire to
pray without ceasing. For to spend a long time
in prayer is not, as some think, the same thing
as to pray "with much speaking." Multiplied
words are one thing, long-continued warmth of
desire is another. For even of the Lord Him-
self it is written, that He continued all night in
prayer,5 and that His prayer was more prolonged
when He was in an agony ; ^ and in this is not
an example given to us by Him who is in time
an Litercessor such as we need, and who is with
the Father eternally the Hearer of prayer?

20. The brethren in Egypt are reported to
have very frequent prayers, but these very brief,
and, as it were, sudden and ejaculatory, lest the
wakeful and aroused attention which is indispen-
sable in prayer should by protracted exercises
vanish or lose its keenness. And in this they
themselves show plainly enough, that just as this
attention is not to be allowed to become exhausted
if it cannot continue long, so it is not to be
suddenly suspended if it is sustained. Far be it
from us either to use "much speaking" in prayer,
or to refrain from prolonged prayer, if fervent
attention of the soul continue. To use much
speaking in prayer is to employ a superfluity
of words in asking a necessary thing ; but to
prolong prayer is to have the heart throbbing
with condnued pious emotion towards Him to
whom we pray. For in most cases prayer con-
sists more in groaning than in speaking, in tears,
rather than in words. But He setteth our tears,
in His sight, and our groaning is not hidden from;
Him who made all things by the word, and does,
not need human words.

Chap. xi. — 21. To us, therefore, words are-
necessary, that by them we may be assisted;
in considering and observing what we ask, not
as means by which we expect that God is to be-
either informed or moved to compliance. WheB,.
therefore, we say : " Hallowed be Thy name/''
we admonish ourselves to desire that His name,,
which is always holy, may be also among, meru
esteemed holy, that is to say, not despised ;;
which is an advantage not to God, but t® menj.
When we say : " Thy kingdom come," whicfii
shall certainly come whether we wish it ©r not,
we do by these words stir up our own desires for
that kingdom, that it may come to us, aird tliat
we may be found worthy to reign in it When
we say : " Thy wiU be done on earth as iit is in
heaven," we pray for ourselves that He would
give us the grace of obedience, that His will
may be done by us in the same way as it is done
in heavenly places by His angels. When we
say : " Give us this day our daily bread," the
word " this day" signifies for the present time, in
which we ask either for that competency of tem-

i Luke vi. 12.

^ Luke xxii. 43. English version, " more earnestly."


466


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


poral blessings which I have spoken of before
(" bread " being used to designate the whole of
those blessings, because of its constituting so
important a part of them), or the sacrament of
believers, which is in this present time necessary,
but necessary in order to obtain the felicity not
of the present time, but of eternity. When we
say : " Forgive us our debts as we forgive our
debtors," we remind ourselves both what we
should ask, and what we should do in order
that we may be worthy to receive what we ask.
When we say : " Lead us not into temptation,"
we admonish ourselves to seek that we may not,
through being deprived of God's help, be either
ensnared to consent or compelled to yield to
temptation. When we say : " Deliver us from
evil," we admonish ourselves to consider that
we are not yet enjoying that good estate in
which we shall experience no evil. And this
petition, which stands last in the Lord's Prayer,
is so comprehensive that a Christian, in whatso-
ever affliction he be placed, may in using it give
utterance to his groans and find vent for his
tears — may begin with this petition, go on with
it, and with it conclude his prayer. For it was
necessary that by the use of these words the
things which they signify should be kept before
our memory.

Chap. xii. — 22. For whatever other words we
may say, — whether the desire of the person pray-
ing go before the words, and employ them in
order to give definite form to its requests, or come
after them, and concentrate attention upon them,
that it may increase in fervour, — if we pray right-
.ly, and as becomes our wants, we say nothing but
what is already contained in the Lord's Prayer.
.And whoever says in prayer anything which can-
not find its place in that gospel prayer, is pray-
ing in a way which, if it be not unlawful, is at
least not spiritual ; and I know not how carnal
prayers can be lawful, since it becomes those
who are born again by the Spirit to pray in no
other way than spiritually. For example, when
one prays : " Be Thou glorified among all nations
as Thou art glorified among us," and " Let Thy
;prophets be found faithful," ' what else does he
ask than, " Hallowed be Thy name " ? When
one says : " Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts,
"Cause Thy face to shine, and we shall be saved," ^
•what else is he saying than, " Let Thy kingdom
come "? When one says : " Order my steps in
'Thy word, and let not any iniquity have domin-
iion over me," ^ what else is he saying than, "Thy
■will be done on earth as it is in heaven " ? When
one says : " Give me neither poverty nor riches," ■'
what else is this than, " Give us this day our daily


' Ecclus. xxxvi. 4, 18.

2 Ps. Ixxx. 7, 19.

3 Ps. cxix. 133.
♦ Prov. XXX. 8.


bread " ? When one says : " Lord, remember
David, and all his compassion," s or, " O Lord,
if I have done this, if there be iniquity in my
hands, if I have rewarded evil to them that did
evil to me,"*^ what else is this than, " Forgive us
our debts as we forgive our debtors"? When
one says : " Take away from me the lusts of the
appetite, and let not sensual desire take hold on
me," ^ what else is this than, " Lead us not into
temptation"? When one says: "Deliver nie
from mine enemies, O my God ; defend me from
them that rise up against me,"^ what else is this
than, " Deliver us from evil"? And if you go
over all the words of holy prayers, you will, I
believe, find nothing which cannot be comprised
and summed up in the petitions of the Lord's
Prayer. Wherefore, in praying, we are free to
use different words to any extent, but we must
ask the same things ; in this we have no choice.

23. These things it is our duty to ask without
hesitation for ourselves and for our friends, and
for strangers — yea, even for enemies ; although
in the heart of the person praying, desire for one
and for another may arise, differing in nature or
in strength according to the more immediate or
more remote relationship. But he who says in
prayer such words as, " O Lord, multiply my
riches ; " or, " Give me as much wealth as Thou
hast given to this or that man ; " or, " Increase
my honours, make me eminent for power and
fame in this world," or something else of this
sort, and who asks merely from a desire for these
things, and not in order through them to bene-
fit men agreeably to God's will, I do not think
that he will find any part of the Lord's Prayer
in connection with which he could fit in these
requests. Wherefore let us be ashamed at least
to ask these things, if we be not ashamed to de-
sire them. If, however, we are ashamed of even
desiring them, but feel ourselves overcome by
the desire, how much better would it be to ask
to be freed from this plague of desire by Him
to whom we say, " Deliver us from evil" !

Chap. xiii. — 24. You have now, if I am not
mistaken, an answer to two questions, — what
kind of person you ought to be if you would
pray, and what things you should ask in prayer ;
and the answer has been given not by my teach-
ing, but by His who has condescended to teach I
us all. A happy life is to be sought after, and
this is to be asked from the Lord God. Many
different answers have been given by many in|
discussing wherein true happiness consists ; but|
why should we go to many teachers, or considerJ
many answers to this question? It has been]
briefly and truly stated in the divine ScripturesJ


s Ps. cxxxii. I (LXX.).
* Ps. vii. 3, 4.

7 Ecclus. xxiii. 6,

8 Ps. lix. I.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


467


bes


" Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord." '
That we may be numbered among this people,
and that we may attain to beholding Him and
dwelling for ever with Him, " the end of the
commandment is, charity out of a pure heart,
and of a good conscience, and of faith un-
feigned." ^ In the same three, hope has been
placed instead of a good conscience. Faith,
hope, and charity, therefore, lead unto God the
man who prays, i.e. who believes, hopes, and de-
sires, and is guided as to what he should ask
from the Lord by studying the Lord's Prayer.
Fasting, and abstinence from gratifying carnal
desire in other pleasures without injury to health,
and especially frequent almsgiving, are a great
assistance in prayer ; so that we may be able to
say, " In the day of my trouble I sought the
Lord, with my hands in the night before Him,
and I was not deceived." ^ For how can God,
who is a Spirit, and who cannot be touched, be
sought with hands in any other sense than by
good works ?

Chap. xiv. — 25. Perhaps you may still ask
why the apostle said, " We know not what to
pray for as we ought," ■♦ for it is wholly incredi-
ble that either he or those to whom he wrote
were ignorant of the Lord's Prayer. He could
not say this either rashly or falsely ; what, then,
do we suppose to be his reason for the state-
ment ? Is it not that vexations and troubles in
this world are for the most part profitable either
to heal the swelling of pride, or to prove and
exercise patience, for which, after such probation
and discipline, a greater reward is reserved, or
to punish and eradicate some sins ; but we, not
knowing what beneficial purpose these may serve,
desire to be freed from ail tribulation? To this
ignorance the apostle showed that even he him-
self was not a stranger (unless, perhaps, he did
it notwithstanding his knowing what to pray for
as he ought), when, lest he should be exalted
above measure by the greatness of the revela-
tions, there was given unto him a thorn in the
flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet him ; for
which thing, not knowing surely what he ought
to pray for, he besought the Lord thrice that it
might depart from him. At length he received
the answer of God, declaring why that which so
great a man prayed for was denied, and why it
was expedient that it should not be done : " My
grace is sufficient for thee ; my strength is made
perfect in weakness." 5

26. Accordingly, we know not what to pray
for as we ought in regard to tribulations, which
may do us good or harm ; and yet, because they
are hard and painful, and against the natural

' Ps. cxiiv. 15.

" I Tim. i. 5.

3 Ps. Lxxvii. 2 (LXX.).

* Rom. viii. 26.

^ 2 Cor. xii. 7-9.


feelings of our weak nature, we pray, with a de-
sire which is common to mankind, that they
may be removed from us. But we ought to ex-
ercise such submission to the will of the Lord
our God, that if He does not remove those vex-
ations, we do not suppose ourselves to be neg-
lected by Him, but rather, in patient endurance
of evil, hope to be made partakers of greater
good, for so His strength is perfected in our
weakness. God has sometimes in anger granted
the request of impatient petitioners, as in mercy
He denied it to the apostle. For we read what
the Israelites asked, and in what manner they
asked and obtained their request ; but while
their desire was granted, their impatience was
severely corrected.^ Again, He gave them, in
answer to their request, a king according to their
heart, as it is written, not according to His own
heart. 7 He granted also what the devil asked,
namely, that His servant, who was to be proved,
might be tempted.*' He granted also the re-
quest of unclean spirits, when they besought
Him that their legion might be sent into the
great herd of swine.' These things are written
to prevent any one from thinking too highly of
himself if he has received an answer when he
was urgently asking anything which it would be
more advantageous for him not to receive, or to
prevent him from being cast down and despair-
ing of the divine compassion towards himself if
he be not heard, when, perchance, he is asking
something by the obtaining of which he might
be more grievously afflicted, or might be by the
corrupting influences of prosperity wholly de-
stroyed. In regard to such things, therefore, we
know not what to pray for as we ought. Accord-
ingly, if anything is ordered in a way contrary
to our prayer, we ought, patiently bearing the
disappointment, and in everything giving thanks
to God, to entertain no doubt whatever that it
was right that the will of God and not our will
should be done. For of this the Mediator has
given us an example, inasmuch as, after He had
said, " Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me," transforming the human will which
was in Him through His incarnation. He immedi-
ately added, " Nevertheless, O Father, not as I
will but as Thou wilt."'° Wherefore, not without
reason are many made righteous by the obedi-
ence of One."

27. But whoever desires from the Lord that
" one thing," and seeks after it,'- asks in certainty
and in confidence, and has no fear lest when
obtained it be injurious to him, seeing that, with-
out it, anything else which he may have obtained

6 Numb. xi.

7 I Sam. viii. 6, 7.

8 Job i. 12, ii. 6.

9 Luke viii. 32.
'° Matt. XX vi. 39.
" Rom. V. 19.

'^ Ps. xxvii. 4.


468


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


by asking in a right way is of no advantage to
him. The thing referred to is the one true and
only happy life, in which, immortal and incor-
ruptible in body and spirit, we may contemplate
the joy of the Lord for ever. All other things
are desired, and are without impropriety prayed
for, with a view to this one thing. For whoso-
ever has it shall have all that he wishes, and can-
not possibly wish to have anything along with it
which would be unbecoming. For in it is the
fountain of life, which we must now thirst for in
prayer so long as we hve in hope, not yet see-
ing that which we hope for, trusting under the
shadow of His wangs before whom are all our
desires, that we may be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of His house, and made to
drink of the river of His pleasures ; because
with Him is the fountain of life, and in His light
we shall see light,' when our desire shall be
satisfied with good things, and when there shall
be nothing beyond to be sought after with groan-
ing, but all things shall be possessed by us with
rejoicing. At the same time, because this bless-
ing is nothing else than the " peace which pass-
eth all understanding,"^ even when we are asking
it in our prayers, we know not what to pray for
as we ought. For inasmuch as we cannot pre-
sent it to our minds as it really is, we do not
know it, but whatever image of it may be pre-
sented to our minds we reject, disown, and con-
demn ; we know it is not what we are seeking,
although we do not yet know enough to be able
to define what we seek.

Chap. XV. — 28. There is therefore in us a
certain learned ignorance, so to speak — an
ignorance which we learn from that Spirit of
God who helps our infirmities. For after the
apostle said, " If we hope for that we see not,
then do we with patience wait for it," he added
in the same passage, " Likewise the Spirit also
helpeth our infirmities : for we know not what
we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit
itself maketh intercession for us, with groanings
which cannot be uttered. And He that searcheth
the hearts knoweth what is in the mind of
the Spirit, because He maketh intercession for the
saints according to the will of God." ^ This is
not to be understood as if it meant that the
Holy Spirit of God, who is in the Trinity, God
vmchangeable, and is one God with the Father
and the Son, intercedes for the saints like one
who is not a divine person ; for it is said, " He
maketh intercession for the saints," because He
enables the saints to make intercession, as in
another place it is said, "The Lord your God
proveth you, that He may know whether ye love
Him," ^ i.e. that He may make you know. He

' Ps. xxxvi. 8-10.

2 Phil. iv. 7.

3 Rom. viii. 25-27,
* Deut. xii. 3.


therefore makes the saints intercede with groan-
ings which cannot be uttered, when He inspires
them with longings for that great blessing, as
yet unknown, for which we patiently wait. For
how is that which is desired set forth in language
if it be unknown, for if it were utterly unknown
it would nut be desired ; and on the other hand,
if it were seen, it would not be desired nor
sought for with groanings?

Chap. xvi. — 29. Considering all these things,
and whatever else the Lord shall have made
known to you in this matter, which either does
not occur to me or would take too much time
to state here, strive in prayer to overcome this
world : pray in hope, pray in faith, pray in love,
pray earnestly and patiently, pray as a widow
belonging to Christ. For although prayer is, as
He has taught, the duty of all His members, i.e.
of all who believe in Him and are united to His
body, a more assiduous attention to prayer is
found to be specially enjoined in Scripture upon
those who are widows. Two women of the
name of Anna are honourably named there, —
the one, Elkanah's wife, who was the mother of
holy Samuel ; the other, the widow who recog-
nised the Most Holy One when He was yet a
babe. The former, though married, prayed with
sorrow of mind and brokenness of heart because
she had no sons ; and she obtained Samuel, and
dedicated him to the Lord, because she vowed
to do so when she prayed for him.s It is not
easy, however, to find to what petition of the
Lord's Prayer her petition could be referred,
unless it be to the last, " Deliver us from evil,"
because it was esteemed to be an evil to be
married and not to have offspring as the fruit of
marriage. Observe, however, what is written
concerning the other Anna, the widow : she
" departed not from the temple, but served God
with fastings and prayers night and day." ^ In
like manner, the apostle said in words already
quoted, " She that is a widow indeed, and deso-
late, trusteth in God and continueth in supplica-
tions and prayers night and day ; " 7 and the
Lord, when exhorting men to pray always and
not to faint, made mention of a widow, who, by 1
persevering importunity, persuaded a judge to
attend to her cause, though he was an unjust \
and wicked man, and one who neither feared
God nor regarded man. How incumbent it is
on widows to go beyond others in devoting time
to prayer may be plainly enough seen from the j
fact that from among them are taken the exam-
ples set forth as an exhortation to all to earnest-
ness in prayer.

30. Now what makes this work specially suit-
able to widows but their bereaved and desolate!!


S 1 Sam. i.

*> Luke ii. 36, 37.

' I Tim. V. 5.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


469


condition? Whosoever, then, understands that
he is in this world bereaved and desolate as long
as he is a pilgrim absent from his Lord, is careful
to commit his widowhood, so to speak, to his
God as his shield in continual and most fervent
prayer. Pray, therefore, as a widow of Christ,
not yet seeing Him whose help you implore.
And though you are very wealthy, pray as a poor
person, for you have not yet the true riches of
the world to come, in which you have no loss to
fear. Though you have sons and grandchil-
dren, and a large household, still pray, as I said
already, as one who is desolate, for we have no
certainty in regard to all temporal blessings that
they shall abide for our consolation even to the
end of this present life. If you seek and relish
the things that are above, you desire things ever-
lasting and sure ; and as long as you do not yet
possess them, you ought to regard yourself as
desolate, even though all your family are spared i
to you, and live as you desire. And if you thus
act, assuredly your example will be followed by
your most devout daughter-in-law," and the other
holy widows and virgins that are settled in peace j
under your care ; for the more pious the manner '
in which you order your house, the more are ;
you bound to persevere fervently in prayer, not
engaging yourselves with the affairs of this world
further than is demanded in the interests of
religion.

31. By all means remember to pray earnestly
for me. I would not have you yield such defer-
ence to the office fraught with perils which I
bear, as to refrain from giving the assistance
which I know myself to need. Prayer was
made by the household of Christ for Peter and
for Paul. I rejoice that you are in His house-
hold ; and I need, incomparably more than
Peter and Paul did, the help of the prayers of
the brethren. Emulate each other in prayer
with a holy rivalry, with one heart, for you
wrestle not against each other, but against the
devil, who is the common enemy of all the
saints. " By fasting, by vigils, and all mortifica-
tion of the body, prayer is greatly helped." ^
Let each one do what she can ; what one can-
not herself do, she does by another who can
do it, if she loves in another that which per-
sonal inability alone hinders her from doing ;
wherefore let her who can do less not keep
back the one who can do more, and let her
who can do more not urge unduly her who
can do less. For your conscience is responsi-
ble to God; to each other owe nothing but
mutual love. May the Lord, who is able to do
above what we ask or think, give ear to your
prayers. 3


' Juliana, the mother of Demetrias.
2 Tobit xii. 8.
^ Eph. iii. 20.


LETTER CXXXL

(a.d. 412.)

to his most excellent daughter, the noble
axd deservedly illustrious lady proba,
augustin sexds greetixg in the lord.

You speak the truth when you say that the
soul, having its abode in a corruptible body, is
restrained by this measure of contact with the
earth, and is somehow so bent and crushed by
this burden that its desires and thoughts go more
easily downwards to many things than upwards
to one. For Holy Scripture says the same :
" The corruptible body presseth down the soul,
and the earthly tabernacle weigheth down the
mind that museth upon many things." ■* But our
Saviour, who by His healing word raised up the
woman in the gospel that had been eighteen
years bowed down s (whose case was, perchance,
a figure of spiritual infirmity), came for this
purpose, that Christians might not hear in vain
the call, " Lift up your hearts," and might truly
reply, "We lift them up to the Lord." Look-
ing to this, you do well to regard the evils of
this world as easy to bear because of the hope
of the world to come. For thus, by being
rightly used, these evils become a blessing, be-
cause, while they do not increase our desires for
this world, they exercise our patience ; as to
which the apostle says, " We know that all things
work together for good to them that love God : " ^
all things, he saith — not only, therefore, those
which are desired because pleasant, but also
those which are shunned because painful ; since
we receive the former without being carried
away by them, and bear the latter without being
crushed by them, and in all give thanks, accord-
ing to the divine command, to Him of whom
we say, " I will bless the Lord at all times ; His
praise shall continually be in my mouth," ^ and,
" It is good for me that Thou hast humbled me,
that I might learn Thy statutes." ** The truth is,
most noble lady, that if the calm of this treach-
erous prosperity were always smiling upon us, the
soul of man would never make for the haven of
true and certain safety. Wherefore, in returning
the respectful salutation due to your Excellency,
and expressing my gratitude for your most pious
care for my welfare, I ask of the Lord that He
may grant to you the rewards of the life to
come, and consolation in the present life ; and
I commend myself to the love and prayers of
all of you in whose hearts Christ dwells by faith.

(/« another hand.) May the true and faith-
ful God truly comfort your heart and preser\'e


< Wisd. ix. 15.

5 Luke xiii. n-13.

6 Rom. viii. 28.

7 Ps. xxxiv. I.

8 Ps. cxix. 71 (LXX.).


470


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


your health, my most excellent daughter and
noble lady, deservedly illustrious.

LETTER CXXXIL

(a.d. 412.)

to volusianus, my noble lord and most justly
distlvguished son, bishop augustin sends
greeting in the lord.

In my desire for your welfare, both in this world
and in Christ, I am perhaps not even surpassed
by the prayers of your pious mother. Wherefore,
in reciprocating your salutation with the respect
due to your worth, I beg to exhort you, as ear-
nestly as I can, not to grudge to devote attention
to the study of the Writings which are truly and
unquestionably holy. For they are genuine and
solid truth, not winning their way to the mind
by artificial eloquence, nor giving forth with flat-
tering voice a vain and uncertain sound. They
deeply interest the man who is hungering not
for words but for things ; and they cause great
alarm at first in him whom they are to render
safe from fear. I exhort you especially to read
the writings of the apostles, for from them you
will receive a stimulus to acquaint yourself with
the prophets, whose testimonies the apostles use.
If in your reading or meditation on what you
have read any question arises to the solution of
which I may appear necessary, write to me,
that I may write in reply. For, with the Lord
helping me, I may perhaps be more able to
serve you in this way than by personally convers-
ing with you on such subjects, partly because,
through the difference in our occupations, it does
not happen that you have leisure at the same
times as I might have it, but especially because
of the irrepressible intrusion of those who are
for the most part not adapted to such discus-
sions, and take more pleasure in a war of words
than in the clear light of knowledge ; whereas,
whatever is written stands always at the service
of the reader when he has leisure, and there can
be nothing burdensome in the society of that
which is taken up or laid aside at your own
pleasure.

LETTER CXXXIIL

(a.d. 412.)

to marcellinus,' my noble lord, justly distin-
guished, my son very much beloved, augustin
sends greeting in the lord.

I. I have learned that the Circumcelliones and
clergy of the Donatist faction belonging to the

' Marcellinus was commissioned by the Emperor Honorius to
convene a conference of Catholic and Donatist bishops, with a view
to the final peaceful settlement of their differences. He accordingly
summoned both parties to a conference, held in the summer of 411, in
which he pronounced the Calholic party to have completely gained


district of Hippo, whom the guardians of public
order had brought to trial for their deeds, have
been examined by your Excellency, and that the
most of them have confessed their share in the
violent death which the presbyter Restitutus suf-
fered at their hands, and in the beating of Inno-
centius, another Catholic presbyter, as well as in
digging out the eye and cutting off the finger of
the said Innocentius. This news has plunged
me into the deepest anxiety, lest perchance your
Excellency should judge them worthy, accord-
ing to the laws, of punishment not less severe
than suffering in their own persons the same in-
juries as they have inflicted on others. Where-
fore I write this letter to implore you by your
faith in Christ, and by the mercy of Christ the
Lord Himself, by no means to do this or permit
it to be done. For although we might silently
pass over the execution of criminals wlio may be
regarded as brought up for trial not upon an ac-
cusation of ours, but by an indictment presented
by those to whose vigilance the preservation of
the public peace is entrusted, we do not wish
to have the sufferings of the servants of God
avenged by the infliction of precisely similar in-
juries in the way of retaliation. Not, of course,
that we object to the removal from these wicked
men of the liberty to perpetrate further crimes ;
but our desire is rather that justice be satisfied
without the taking of their lives or the maiming
of their bodies in any part, and that, by such
coercive measures as may be in accordance with
the laws, they be turned from their insane frenzy
to the quietness of men in their sound judgment,
or compelled to give up mischievous violence
and betake themselves to some useful labour.
This is indeed called a penal sentence ; but who
does not see that when a restraint is put upon
the boldness of savage violence, and the reme-
dies fitted to produce repentance are not with-
drawn, this discipline should be called a benefit
rather than vindictive punishment ?

2. Fulfil, Christian judge, the duty of an affec-
tionate father ; let your indignation against their
crimes be tempered by considerations of human-
ity ; be not provoked by the atrocity of their
sinful deeds to gratify the passion of revenge,
but rather be moved by the wounds which these
deeds have inflicted on their own souls to exer-
cise a desire to heal them. Do not lose now
that fatherly care which you maintained when
prosecuting the examination, in doing which you
extracted the confession of such horrid crimes,


their cause in argument. He proceeded to carry out with consider-
able rigour the laws passed for the repression of the Donatist schism,
and thus becoming obnoxious to that faction, fell at length a victim
to their revenge when a turn of fortune favoured their plots against
ills life. The honour of a place among the martyrs of the early
Church has been ass'igned to him. His character may be learned
from Letters CXXXVI., CXXXVIIL, CXXXIX., and CXLIIL,
and particularly from the beautiful tribute to his worth given in Let-
1 ter CLI., in which the circumstances of his death are recorded.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


4ti


not by stretching them on the rack, not by fur-
rowing their flesh with iron claws/ not by scorch-
ing them with flames, but by beating them with
rods, — a mode of correction used by school-
imasters,^ and by parents themseh'es in chastising
children, and often also by bishops in the sen-
tences awarded by them. Do not, therefore,
now punish with extreme severity the crimes
which you searched out with lenity. The neces-
sity for harshness is greater in the investigation
than in the infliction of punishment ; for even
the gentlest men use diligence and stringency
in searching out a hidden crime, that they may
find to whom they may show mercy. Wherefore
it is generally necessary to use more rigour in
making inquisition, so that when the crime
has been brought to light, there may be scope
for displaying clemency. For all good works
love to be set in the light, not in order to obtain
glory from men, but, as the Lord saith, " that
they seeing your good works may glorify your
Father who is in heaven." ^ And, for the same
reason, the apostle was not satisfied with merely
exhorting us to practise moderation, but also
commands us to make it known : " Let your
moderation," he says, " be known unto all men ;"■*
and in another place, " Showing all meekness
unto all men." ^ Hence, also, that most signal
forbearance of the holy David, when he merci-
fully spared his enemy when delivered into his
hand,*^ would not have been so conspicuous had
not his power to act otherwise been manifest.
Therefore let not the power of executing ven-
geance inspire you with harshness, seeing that the
necessity of examining the criminals did not
make you lay aside your clemency. Do not call
for the executioner now when the crime has been
found out, after having forborne from caUing in
the tormentor when you were finding it out.

3. In fine, you have been sent hither for the
benefit of the Church. I solemnly declare that
what I recommend is expedient in the interests
of the Catholic Church, or, that I may not seem
to pass beyond the boundaries of my own charge,
I protest that it is for the good of the Church
belonging to the diocese of Hippo. If you do
not hearken to me asking this favour as a friend,
hearken to me offering this counsel as a bishop ;
although, indeed, it would not be presumption
for me to say — since I am addressing a Chris-
tian, and especially in such a case as this — that
it becomes you to hearkem to me as a bishop
commanding with authority, my noble and justly

' Compare " ungulis sulcantibus latera." Codex Jitstin, ix.
18. 7.

^ Magistrts artium liberalium; doubtless the name of Master
of Arts was originally connected with the office and work of teaching,
instead of being a mere honorary title.

3 Matt. V. 16.

*■ Phil. iv. 5.

5 Titus iii. 2.


Sam.


XXIV. 7.


distinguished lord and much-loved son. I am
aware that the principal charge of law cases con-
nected with the affairs of the Church has been
devolved on your Excellency, but as I believe
that this particular case belongs to the very illus-
trious and honourable proconsul, I have written
a letter ^ to him also, which I beg you not to
refuse to give to him, or, if necessary, recom-
mend to his attention ; and I entreat you both
not to resent our intercession, or counsel, or
anxiety, as officious. And let not the sufferings
of Catholic servants of God, which ought to be
useful in the spiritual upbuilding of the weak, be
sullied by the retaliation of injuries on those who
did them wrong, but rather, tempering the rigour
of justice, let it be your care as sons of the
Church to commend both your own faith and
your Mother's clemency.

May almighty God enrich your Excellency
with all good things, my noble and justly distin-
guished lord and dearly beloved son !


LETTER CXXXV.

(a.d. 412.)

to bishop augustin, my lord truly holy, and
father justly revered, volusianus sends
greeting.

I . O man who art a pattern of goodness and
uprightness, you ask me to apply to you for in-
struction in regard to some of the obscure pas-
sages which occur in my reading. I accept at
your command the favour of this kindness, and
willingly offer myself to be taught by you, ac-
knowledging the authority of the ancient prov-
erb, " We are never too old to learn." With
good reason the author of this proverb has not
restricted by any limits or end our pursuit of
wisdom ; for truth,* secluded in its original prin-
ciples, is never so disclosed to those who ap-
I proach it as to be wholly revealed to their
knowledge. It seems to me, therefore, my lord
truly holy, and father justly revered, worth while
to communicate to you the substance of a con-
versation which recently took place among us.
I was present at a gathering of friends, and a
great many opinions were brought forward there,
such as the disposition and studies of each sug-
gested. Our discourse was chiefly, however, on
the department of rhetoric which treats of proper
arrangement.'^ I speak to one familiar with the
subject, for you were not long ago a teacher of
these things. Upon this followed a discussion

7 This letter, No. CXXXIV., is addressed to Apringius, and in
somewhat similar terms, but at greater length, urges tlie same re-
quest.

8 We read here " Veritas" instead of " virtus."

9 " Partitio" defined thus by Quintilian, vii. i: "Sit igitur di-
visio rerum plurium in singulas — partitio, singularum in partes dis-
cretas ordo et recta qua;dam locatio,"


472


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


regarding " invention " in rhetoric, its nature,
what boldness it requires, how great the labour
involved in methodical arrangement, what is the
charm of metaphors, and the beauty of illustra-
tions, and the power of applying epithets suit-
able to the character and nature of the subject
in hand. Others extolled with partiality the
poet's art. This part also of eloquence is not
left unnoticed or unhonoured by you. We may
appropriately apply to you that line of the poet :
"The ivy is intertwined with the laurels which
reward your victory." ' We spoke, accordingly,
of the embellishments which skilful arrangement
adds to a poem, of the beauty of metaphors, and
of the sublimity of well-chosen comparisons ;
then we spoke of smooth and flowing versifica-
tion, and, if I may use the expression, the har-
monious variation of the pauses in the lines.^
The conversation turned next to a subject with
which you are very familiar, namely, that philos-
ophy which you were wont yourself to cherish,
after the manner of Aristotle and Isocrates. We
asked what had been achieved by the philoso-
pher of the Lyceum, by the varied and inces-
sant doublings of the Academy, by the debater
of the Porch, by the discoveries of natural phi-
losophers, by the self-indulgence of the Epicu-
reans ; and what had been the result of their
boundless zeal in disputation with each other,
and how truth was more than ever unknown by
them after they assumed that its knowledge was
attainable.

2. While our conversation continues on these
topics, one of the large company says : " Who
among us is so thoroughly acquainted with the
wisdom taught by Christianity as to be able to
resolve the doubts by which I am entangled, and
to give firmness to my hesitating acceptance of
its teaching by arguments in which truth or
probability may claim my beUef ?" We are all
dumb with amazement. Then, of his own ac-
cord, he breaks forth in these words : " I wonder
whether the Lord and Ruler of the world did
indeed fill the womb of a virgin ; — did His
mother endure the protracted fatigues of ten
months, and, being yet a virgin, in due season
bring forth her child, and continue even after
that with her virginity intact?" To this he adds
other statements : " Within the small body of a
•crying infant He is concealed whom the universe
:scarcely can contain ; He bears the years of
■childhood. He grows up, He is established in
the vigour of manhood ; this Governor is so
long an exile from His own dwelling-place, and
the care of the whole world is transferred to one
body of insignificant dimensions. Moreover,
He falls asleep, takes food to support Him, is
subject to all the sensations of mortal men. Nor

' Virgil, BhcoI. Eel. 8, line 13.

2 Ctesurarum moUulata vartatio.


did the proofs of so great majesty shine forth
with adequate fulness of evidence ; for the cast-
ing out of devils, the curing of the sick, and the
restoration of the dead to life are, if you con-
sider others who have wrought these wonders,
but small works for God to do." We prevent
him from continuing such questions, and the
meeting having broken up, we referred the mat-
ter to the valuable decision of experience beyond
our own, lest, by too rashly intruding into hidden
things, the error, innocent thus far, should be-
come blameworthy.

You have heard, O man worthy of all honour,
the confession of our ignorance ; you perceive
what is requested at your hands. Your reputa-
tion is interested in our obtaining an answer to
these questions. Ignorance may, without harm
to religion, be tolerated in other priests ; but
when we come to Bishop Augustin, whatever we
find unknown to him is no part of the Chris-
tian system. May the Supreme God protect
your venerable Grace, my lord truly holy and
justly revered !

LETTER CXXXVL

(a.d. 412.)

to augustin, my lord most venerable, and
father singularly worthy of all possible
service fro.m me, i, marcellinus, send greet-
ING.

I. The noble Volusianus read to me the letter
of your Holiness, and, at my urgent solicitation,
he read to many more the sentences which had
won my admiration, for, hke everything else
coming from your pen, they were worthy of
admiration. Breathing as it did a humble spirit,
and rich in the grace of divine eloquence, it
succeeded easily in pleasing the reader. What
especially pleased me was your strenuous effort
to establish and hold up the steps of one who
is somewhat hesitating, by counselling him to
form a good resolution. For I have every day
some discussion with the same man, so far as
my abilities, or rather my lack of talent, may
enable me. Moved by the earnest entreaties of
his pious mother, I am at pains to visit him fre-
quently, and he is so good as to return my visits
from time to time. But on receiving this letter
from your venerable Eminence, though he is
kept back from firm faith in the true God by
the influence of a class of persons who abound
in this city, he was so moved, that, as he him-
self tells me, he was prevented only by the fear
of undue prolixity in his letter from unfolding
to you every possible difficulty in regard to the
Christian faith. Some things, however, he has
very earnestly asked you to explain, expressing
himself in a polished and accurate style, and


-.,


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


473


with the perspicuity and brilliancy of Roman
eloquence, such as you will yourself deem worthy
of approbation. The question which he has
submitted to you is indeed worn threadbare in
controversy, and the craftiness which, from the
same quarter, assails with reproaches the Lord's
incarnation is well known. But as I am con-
fident that whatever you write in reply will be
of use to a very large number, I would approach
you with the request, that even in this ques-
tion you would condescend to give a thoroughly
guarded answer to their false statement that in
His works the Lord performed nothing beyond
what other men have been able to do. They
are accustomed to bring forward their Apolloni-
us and Apuleius, and other men who professed
magical arts, whose miracles they maintained to
have been greater than the Lord's.

2. The noble Volusianus aforesaid declared
also in the presence of a number, that there
were many other things which might not un-
reasonably be added to the question which he
has sent, were it not that, as I have already
stated, brevity had been specially studied by
him in his letter. Although, however, he for-
bore from writing them, he did not pass them
over in silence. For he is wont to say that, even
if a reasonable account of the Lord's incarnation
were now given to him, it would still be very
difficult to give a satisfactory reason why this
God, who is affirmed to be the God also of the
Old Testament, is pleased with new sacrifices
after having rejected the ancient sacrifices. For
he alleges that nothing could be corrected but
that which is proved to have been previously
not rightly done ; or that what has once been
done rightly ought not to be altered in the very
least. That which has been rightly done, he
said, cannot be changed without wrong, espe-
cially because the variation might bring upon
the Deity the reproach of inconstancy. Another
objection which he stated was, that the Christian
doctrine and preaching were in no way consistent
with the duties and rights of citizens ; because,
to quote an instance frequently alleged, among
its precepts we find, " Recompense to no man
evil for evil," ' and, " Whosoever shall smite
thee on one cheek, turn to him the other also ;
and if any man take away thy coat, let him have
thy cloak also ; and whosoever shall compel thee
to go a mile, go with him twain ; " ^ — all which
he affirms to be contrary to the duties and rights
of citizens. For who would submit to have any-
thing taken from him by an enemy, or forbear
from retaliating the evils of war upon an invader
who ravaged a Roman province? The other
precepts, as your Eminence understands, are
open to similar objections. Volusianus thinks

' Rom. xii. 17.

* Matt. V. 39-41.


that all these difiiculties may be added to the
question formerly stated, especially because it
is manifest (though he is silent on this point)
that very great calamities have befallen the com-
monwealth under the government of emperors
observing, for the most part, the Christian re-
ligion.^

3. Wherefore, as your Grace condescends
along with me to acknowledge, it is important
that all these difficulties be met by a full, thor-
ough, and luminous reply (since the welcome
answer of your Holiness will doubtless be put
into many hands) ; especially because, while this
discussion was going on, a distinguished lord and
proprietor in the region of Hippo was present,
who ironically said some flattering things con-
cerning your Holiness, and affirmed that he had
been by no means satisfied when he inquired
into these matters himself.

I, therefore, not unmindful of your promise,
but insisting on its fulfilment, beseech you to
write, on the questions submitted, treatises which
will be of incredible service to the Church, espe-
cially at the present time.

LETTER CXXXVn.

(a.d. 412.)

to my most excellent son, the noble and
justly distinguished lord volusianus, au-
gustin sends greetlxg in the lord.

Chap. i. — 1. 1 have read your letter, containing
an abstract of a notable conversation given with
praiseworthy conciseness. I feel bound to reply
to it, and to forbear from alleging any excuse
for delay ; for it happens opportunely that I
have a short time of leisure from occupation
with the affairs of other persons. I have also
put off in the meantime dictating to my amanu-
ensis certain things to which I had purposed to
devote this leisure, for I think it would be a
grievous injustice to delay answering questions
j which I had myself exhorted the questioner to
! propound. For which of us who are adminis-
\ tering, as we are able, the grace of Christ would
1 wish to see you instructed in Christian doctrine
! only so far as might suffice to secure to yourself
' salvation — not salvation in this present life,
which, as the word of Ciod is careful to remind
us, is but a vapor appearing for a little while
and then vanishing away, but that salvation in
order to the obtaining and eternal possession
I of which we are Christians? It seems to us too
little that you should receive only so much m-
1 struction as suffices to your own deliverance.
! For your gifted mind, and your singularly able
and lucid power of speaking, ought to be of


3 See Gibbon, chap. xv. vol. II, p. 326.


474


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


service to all others around you, against whom,
whether slowness or perversity be the cause, it
is necessary to defend in a competent way the
dispensation of such abounding grace, which
small minds in their arrogance despise, boasting
that they can do very great things, while in fact
they can do nothing to cure or even to curb
their own vices.

2. You ask : " Whether the Lord and Ruler
of the world did indeed fill the womb of a vir-
gin? did His mother endure the protracted fa-
tigues of ten months, and, being yet a virgin,
in due season bring forth her child, and con-
tinue even after that with her virginity intact?
Was He whom the universe is supposed to be
scarcely able to contain concealed within the
small body of a crying infant ? did He bear the
years of childhood, and grow up and become
established in the vigour of manhood? Was
this Governor so long an exile from His own
dwelling-place, and was the care of the whole
world transferred to a body of such insignificant
dimensions? Did He sleep, did He take food
as nourishment, and was He subject to all the
sensations of mortal men?" You go on to say
that " the proofs of His great majesty do not
shine forth with any adequate fulness of evi-
dence ; for the casting out of devils, the curing
of the sick, and the restoration of the dead are,
if we consider others who have performed these
wonders, but small works for God to do." '
This question, you say, was introduced in a cer-
tain meeting of friends by one of the company,
but that the rest of you prevented him from
bringing forward any further questions, and,
breaking up the meetmg, deferred the consid-
eration of the matter till you should have the
benefit of experience beyond your own, lest, by
too rashly intruding into hidden things, the
error, innocent thus far, should become blame-
worthy.

3. Thereupon you appeal to me, and request
me to observe what is desired from me after
this confession of your ignorance. You add,
that my reputation is concerned in your obtain-
ing an answer to these questions, because, though
ignorance is tolerated without injury to religion
in other priests, when an inquiry is addressed
to me, who am a bishop, whatever is not known
to me must be no part of the Christian system.

I begin, therefore, by requesting you to lay
aside the opinion which you have too easily
formed concerning me, and dismiss those senti-
ments, though they are gratifying evidences of
your goodwill, and believe my testimony rather
than any other's regarding myself, if you recip-
rocate my affection. For such is the depth of
the Christian Scriptures, that even if I were at-

' Letter CXXXV. sec. 2, p. 472.


tempting to study them and nothing else from
early boyhood to decrepit old age, with the
utmost leisure, the most unwearied zeal, and
talents greater than I have, I would be still
daily making progress in discovering their treas-
ures ; not that there is so great difficulty in
coming through them to know the things neces-
sary to salvation, but when any one has accepted
these truths with the faith that is indispensable
as the foundation of a life of piety and upright-
ness, so many things which are veiled under
manifold shadows of mystery remain to be in-
quired into by those who are advancing in the
study, and so great is the depth of wisdom not
only in the words in which these have been ex-
pressed, but also in the things themselves, that
the experience of the oldest, the ablest, and the
most zealous students of Scripture illustrates
what Scripture itself has said : " When a man
hath done, then he beginneth." ^

Chap. ii. — 4. But why say more as to this?
I must rather address myself to the question
which you propose. In the first place, I wish
you to understand that the Christian doctrine
does not hold that the Godhead was so blended
with the human nature in which He was born
of the virgin that He either relinquished or
lost the administration of the universe, or trans-
ferred it to that body as a small and limited
material substance. Such an opinion is held
only by men who are incapable of conceiving of
anything but material substances — whether more
dense, like water and earth, or more subtle, like
air and light ; but all alike distinguished by this
condition, that none of them c;in be in its
entirety everywhere, because, by reason of its
many parts, it cannot but have one part here,
another there, and however great or small the
body may be, it must occupy some place, and
so fill it that in its entirety it is in no one part
of the space occupied. And hence it is the
distinctive property of material bodies that they
can be condensed and rarefied, contracted and
dilated, crushed into small fragments and en-
larged to great masses. The nature of the soul
is very far different from that of the body ; and
how much more different must be the nature of
God, who is the Creator of both soul and body !
God is not said to fill the world in the same way
as water, air, and even light occupy space, so
that with a greater or smaller part of Himself
He occupies a greater or smaller part of the
world. He is able to be everywhere present in
the entirety of His being : He cannot be con-
fined in any place : He can come without leav-
ing the place where He was : He can depart
without forsaking the place to which He had
come.

' Ecclus. xviii. 6.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


475


5. The mind of man wonders at this, and be-
cause it cannot comprehend it, refuses, j^erhaps,
to beheve it. Let it, however, not go on to won-
der incredulously at the attributes of the Deity
without first wondering; in like manner at the mvs-
teries within itself;' let it, if possible, raise itself
for a little above the body, and above those things
which it is accustomed to perceive by the bodily
organs, and let it contemplate what that is which
uses the body as its instrument. Perha|)s it can-
not do this, for it requires, as one has said, great
power of mind to call the mind aside from the
senses, and to lead thought away from its wonted
track. ^ Let the mind, then, examine the bodily
senses in this somewhat unusual manner, and
with the utmost attention. There are five distinct
bodily senses, which cannot exist either without
the body or without the soul ; because percep-
tion by the senses is possible, on the one hand,
o;ily while a man lives, and the body receives life
from the soul ; and on the other hand, only by
the instrumentality of the bodily vessels and or-
gans, through which we exercise sight, hearing,
and the three other senses. Let the reasoning
soul concentrate attention upon this subject, and
consider the senses of the body not by these
senses themselves, but by its own intelligence and
reason. A man cannot, of course, perceive by
these senses unless he lives ; but up to the time
when soul and body are separated by death, he
lives in the body. How, then, does his soul,
which lives nowhere else than in his body, per-
ceive things which are beyond the surface of that
body? Are not the stars in heaven very remote
from his body? and yet does he not see the sun
yonder? and is not seeing an exercise of the
bodily senses — nay, is it not the noblest of them
all? What, then? Does he live in heaven as
well as in his body, because he perceives by one
of his senses what is in heaven, and perception
by sense cannot be in a place where there is no
life of the person perceiving? Or does he per-
ceive even where he is not living — because while
he lives only in his own body, his perceptive
sense is active also in those places which, outside
of his body and remote from it, contain the ob-
jects with which he is in contact by sight? Do
you see how great a mystery there is even in a
sense so open to our observation as that which
we call sight? Consider hearing also, and say
whether the soul diffuses itself in some way
abroad beyond the body. For how do we say,
"Some one knocks at the door," unless we ex-
ercise the sense of hearing at the place where
the knock is sounding? In this case also, there-
fore, we live beyond the limits of our bodies.
Or can we perceive by sense in a place in which


' We follow the reading of nine Mss., niirata, instead of that of
the text, itigrnta.

^ Cicero, Qutest. Ttiscul. i.


we are not living? But we know that sense can-
not be in exercise where life is not.

6. The other three senses are exercised through
immediate contact with their own organs. Per-
haps this may be reasonably disputed in regard
to the sense of smell ; but there is no controversy
as to the senses of taste and touch, that we per-
ceive nowhere else than by contact with our
bodily organism the things which we taste and
touch. Let these three senses, therefore, be set
aside from present consideration The senses of
sight and hearing present to us a wonderful ques-
tion, requiring us to explain either how the soul
can perceive by these senses in a place where it
does not live, or how it can live in a place where
it is not. For it is not anywhere but in its own
body, and yet it perceives by these senses in
places beyond that body. For in whatever place
the soul sees anything, in that place it is exercis-
ing the faculty of perception, because seeing
is an act of perception ; and in whatever place
the soul hears anything, in that place it is exer-
cising the faculty of perception, because hearing
is an act of perception. Wherefore the soul is
either living in that place where it sees or hears,
and consecjuently is itself in that place, or it
exercises perception in a place where it is not
living, or it is living in a place and yet at the
same moment is not there. All these things are
astonishing ; not one of them can be stated with-
out seeming absurdity ; and we are speaking only
of senses which are mortal. What, then, is the
soul itself which is beyond the bodily senses, that
is to say, which resides in the understanding
whereby it considers these mysteries ? For it is
not by means of the senses that it forms a judg-
ment concerning the senses themselves. And do
we suppose that something incredible is told us
regarding the omnipotence of God, when it is
affirmed that the W^ord of God, by whom all
things were made, did so assume a body from
the Virgin, and manifest Himself with mortal
senses, as neither to destroy His own immortal-
ity, nor to change His eternity, nor to diminish
His power, nor to relinquish the government of
the world, nor to withdraw from the bosom of the
Father, that is, from the secret place where He
is with Him and in Him?

7. Understand the nature of the Word of God,
by whom all things were made, to be such that
you cannot think of any part of the Word as
passing, and, from being future, becoming past.
He remains as He is, and He is everywhere in
His entirety. He comes when He is manifested,
and departs when He is concealed. But whether
concealed or manifested, He is present with us
as light is present to the eyes both of the seeing
and of the blind ; but it is felt to be present by
the man who sees, and absent by him who is
blind. In like manner, the sound of the voice


476


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


is near alike to the hearing and to the deaf, but
it makes its presence known to the former and is
hidden from the latter. But what is more won-
derful than what happens in connection with the
sound of our voices and our words, a thing, for-
sooth, which passes away in a moment ? For
when we speak, there is no place for even the
next syllable till after the preceding one has
ceased to sound ; nevertheless, if one hearer be
present, he hears the whole of what we say, and
if two hearers be present, both hear the same,
antl to each of them it is the whole ; and if a
multitude listen in silence, they do not break up
the sounds like loaves of bread, to be distributed
among them mdividually, but all that is uttered
is uiiparted to all and to each in its entirety.
Consider this, and say if it is not more incredi-
ble that the abiding Word of God should not
accomplish in the universe what the passing
word of man accomplishes in the ears of listen-
ers, namely, that as the word of man is present
in its entirety to each and all of the hearers, so
the Word of God should be present m the
entirety of His being at the same moment
everywhere.

8. There is, therefore, no reason to fear in
regard to the small body of the Lord in His
infancy, lest in it the Godhead should seem to
have been straitened. For it Js not in vast size
but in power that God is great : He has in His
providence given to ants and to bees senses
superior to those given to asses and camels ;
He forms the huge proportions of the fig-tree '
from one of the minutest seeds, although many
smaller plants spring from much larger seeds ;
He also has furnished the small pupil of the eye
with the power which, by one glance, sweeps
over almost the half of heaven in a moment ;
He diffuses the whole fivefold system of the
nerves over the body from one centre and point
in the brain ; He dispenses vital motion through-
put the whole body from the heart, a member
comparatively small ; and by these and other
similar things. He, who in small things is great,
mysteriously produces that which is great from
things which are exceedingly little. Such is the
greatness of His power that He is conscious of
no difficulty in that which is difficult. It was
this same power which originated, not from with-
out, but from within, the conception of a child
in the Virgin's womb : this same power associ-
ated with Himself a human soul, and through
it also a human body — in short, the whole hu-
man nature to be elevated by its union with Him
— without His being thereby lowered in any
degree ; justly assuming from it the name of
j humanity, while amply giving to it the name of
Godhead. The body of the infant Jesus was

' See Pliny, A^at. Hist. Book vii. 2: "In India sub una ficu
turma: conduutur equitum." See also Book xii. c. 5.


brought forth from the womb of His mother,
still a virgin, by the same power which afterwards
introduced His body when He was a man through
the closed door into the upper chamber.^ Here,
if the reason of the event is sought out, it will
no longer be a miracle ; if an example of a pre-
cisely similar event is demanded, it will no longer
be unique. 3 Let us grant that God can do some-
thing which we must admit to be beyond our
comprehension. In such wonders the whole
explanation of the work is the power of Him
by whom it is wrought.

Chap. hi. — 9. The fact that He took rest in
sleep, and was nourished by food, and experi-
enced all the feelings of humanity, is the evi-
dence to men of the reality of that human nature
which He assumed but did not destroy. Behold,
this was the fact ; and yet some heretics, by a
perverted admiration and praise of His power,
have refused altogether to acknowledge the real-
ity of His human nature, in which is the guaran-
tee of all that grace by which He saves those
who believe in Him, containing deep treasures
of wisdom and knowledge, and imparting faith
to the minds which He raises to the eternal con-
templation of unchangeable truth. What if the
Almighty had created the human nature of Christ
not by causing Him to be born of a mother,
but by some other way, and had presented Him
suddenly to the eyes of mankind? What if the
Lord had not passed through the stages of ])rog-
ress from infancy to manhood, and had taken
neither food nor sleep? Would not this have
confirmed the erroneous impression above re-

^ John XX. 26.

3 This sentence having been misunderstood by Bishop Evodius,
who quotes and comments upon it in Letter CLXI.. Augustin, in re-
plying in Letter CLXlI., writes a few sentences, which, as the letters .
then exchanged with Evodius have been omitted in this selection, we '
here insert; — " Our sense of wonder is excited when either the rea- j
son of a thing is hidden from us, or the thing itself is extraordinary,
that IS, either unique or rare. It was in reference to the former cause
of wonder, namely, the reason of a thing being undiscovered, that,
when answering those who declare it to be incredible that Christ was [
born of a virgin, and that she remained a virgin notwithstanding, I j
said in the letter which you refer to as read by you, ' If the reason i
of this event is sought out, it will be no longer a miracle, ' for I saidi
this not because the event was without a reason, but because the rea- j
son of it is hidden from those to whom it has pleased God that it
should be a miracle. . . . For all the works of God, both ordinary J
and extraordinary , proceed from causes and reasons which are right 1]
and faultless. When the causes and reasons of any of His opera- jj
tions are hidden from us, we are filled with wonder at the event; buti
when the causes and reasons of events are seen by us, we say thatjl
they take place in ordinary course and in harmony with our experi-||
ence, and that they are not to be wondered at since they occur, be-j|
cause they are only what reason required to be done. ... As to the!
latter cause of wonder, namely, that an event is unusual, we have anl
example of this when we read concerning the Lord that He marvelledl
at the faith of the centurion; for the reason of no event whateverl
could be concealed from Him, but His wonder has been recordedl
here for the commendation of one who.se equal had not appearedlj
among the Jews, and accordingly the Lord's wondering is sufhcientlyl
explained by His words; ' I have not found so great faith, no, not inl
Israel ' (Luke vii. g). As to examples of events similar to the mirac-l
ulous birth of Christ, you are Wholly mistaken in supposing that youl
have found such in the production of a worm within an apple, andjl
other examples which you mention. For instances of a certain de-^l
gree of resemblance, more or less remote, have been with considerable
ingenuity alleged; but Christ alone was born of a virgin: whenca
you may understand why I said that this was an event without paran
lei, adding in the letter already referred to the words; ' If ?n examplg
of a precisely similar event Is demanded, U will no longer be unique '
(Letter CLXll. sees, b, j).


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


477


ferred to, and have made it impossible to believe
at all that He had taken to Himself true human
nature ; and, while leaving what was marvellous,
would eliminate the element of mercy from His
actions ? But now He has so appeared as the
Mediator between God and men, that, uniting
the two natures in one person, He both exalted
what was ordinary by what was extraordinary,
and tempered what was extraordinary by what
was ordinary in Himself.

10. But where in all the varied movements of
creation is there any work of God which is not
wonderful, were it not that through familiarity
these wonders have become small in our esteem ?
Nay, how many common things are trodden
under foot, which, if examined carefully, awaken
our astonishment ! Take, for example, the prop-
erties of seeds : who can either comprehend or
declare the variety of species, the vitality, vigour,
and secret power by which they from within small
compass evolve great things? Now the human
body and soul which He took to Himself was
created without seed by Him who in the natural
world created originally seeds from no pre-exist- !
ent seeds. In the body which thus became His,
He who, without any liability to change in Him- !
self, has woven according to His counsel the j
vicissitudes of all past centuries, became subject
to the succession of seasons and the ordinary
stages of the life of man. For His body, as it j
began to exist at a point of time, became devel- \
oped with the lapse of time. But the Word of
God, who was in the beginning, and to whom I
the ages of time owe their existence, did not
bow to time as bringing round the event of His
incarnation apart from His consent, but chose
the point of time at which He freely took our
nature to Himself. The human nature was
brought into union with the divine ; God did
not withdraw from Himself.'

11. Some insist upon being furnished with an
explanation of the manner in which the Godhead
was so united with a human soul and body as to
constitute the one person of Christ, when it was
necessary that this should be done once in the
world's history, with as much boldness as if they
were themselves able to furnish an explanation
of the manner in which the soul is so united to
the body as to constitute the one person of a
man, an event which is occurring every day.
For just as the soul is united to the body in one
person so as to constitute man, in the same way
is God united to man in one person so as to con-
stitute Christ. In the former personality there
is a combination of soul and body ; in the latter
there is a combination of the Godhead and man.
Let my reader, however, guard against borrowing
his idea of the combination from the properties

' Ho»io quippe Deo nccessit, nan Deus a se recesiit.


of material bodies, by which two fluids when
combined are so mixed that neither preserves its
original character ; although even among material
bodies there are exceptions, such as light, which
sustains no change when combined with the at-
mosphere. In the person of man, therefore,
there is a combination of soul and body ; in the
person of Christ there is a combination of the
Godhead with man ; for when the Word of God
was united to a soul having a body. He took into
union with Himself both the soul and the body.
The former event takes place daily in the begin-
ning of life in individuals of the human race ;
the latter took place once for the salvation of
men. And yet of the two events, the combina-
tion of two immaterial substances ought to be
more easily believed than a combination in which
the one is immaterial and the other material.
For if the soul is not mistaken in regard to its
own nature, it understands itself to be immate-
rial. Much more certainly does this attribute
belong to the Word of God ; and conse(]uently
the combination of the Word with the human
soul is a combination which ought to be much
more credible than that of soul and body. The
latter is realized by us in ourselves ; the former
we are commanded to believe to have been real-
ized in Christ. But if both of them were alike
foreign to our experience, and we were enjoined
to believe that both had taken place, which of
the two would we more readily believe to have
occurred? Would we not admit that two imma-
terial substances could be more easily combined
than one immaterial and one material ; unless,
perhaps, it be unsuitable to use the word combi-
nation in connection with these things, because
of the difference between their nature and that
of material substances, both in themselves and
as known to us?

12. Wherefore the Word of God, who is also
the Son of God, co-eternal with the Father, the
Power and the \\'isdom of God,^ mightil)- per-
vading and harmoniously ordering all tilings, from
the highest limit of the intelligent to the lowest
limit of the material creation, ^ revealed and con-
cealed, nowhere confined, nowhere divided, no-
where distended, but without dimensions, every-
where present in His entirety, — this Word of
God, I say, took to Himself, in a manner entirely
different from that in which He is present to
other creatures, the soul and body of a man, and
made, by the union of Himself therewith, the
one person Jesus Christ, Mediator between God
and men,* in His Deity equal with the Father,
in His flesh, i.e. in His human nature, inferior to
the Father, — unchangeably immortal in respect
of the divine nature, in which He is equal with


2 T Cor. \. 24.

3 W'isd. viii. i.
* I Tim. ii. 5.


478


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


the Father, and yet changeable and mortal in
respect of the infirmity which was His through
participation with our nature.

In this Christ there came to men, at the time
which He knew to be most fitting, and which
He had fixed before the world began, the in-
struction and the help necessary to the obtaining
of eternal salvation. Instruction came by Him,
because those truths which had been, for men's
advantage, spoken before that time on earth not
only by the holy prophets, all whose words were
true, but also by philosophers and even poets
and authors in every department of literature
(for beyond question they mixed much truth
with what was false), might by the actual pres-
entation of His authority in human nature be
confirmed as true for the sake of those who
could not perceive and distinguish them in the
light of essential Truth, which Truth was, even
before He assumed human nature, present to all
who were capable of receiving truth. Moreover,
by the fact of His incarnation. He taught this
above all other things for our benefit, — that
whereas men longing after the Divine Being
supposed, from pride rather than piety, that they
must approach Him not directly, but through
heavenly j^owers which they regarded as gods,
and through various forbidden rites which were
holy but profane, — in which worship, devils suc-
ceed, through the bond which pride forms be-
tween mankind and them, in taking the place of
holy angels, — now men might understand that
the God whom they were regarding as far re-
moved, and whom they approached not directly
but through mediating powers, is actually so
very near to the pious longings of men after Him,
that He has condescended to take a human soul
and body into such union with Himself that this
complete man is joined to Him in the same way
as the body is joined to the soul in man, except-
ing that whereas both body and soul have a
common progressive development. He does not
participate in this growth, because it implies mu-
tability, a property which God cannot assume.
Again, in this Christ the help necessary to salva-
tion was brought to men, for without the grace
of that faith which is from Him, no one can
either subdue vicious desires, or be cleansed by
pardon from the guilt of any power of sinful de-
sire which he may not have wholly vanquished.
As to the effects produced by His instruction, is
there now even an imbecile, however weak, or a |
silly woman, however low, that does not believe j
in the immortality of the soul and the reality of
a life after death? Yet these are truths which,
when Pherecydes ' the Assyrian for the first time
maintained them in discussion among the Greeks

' Pherecydes, a native not of Assyria, but of Syros, one of the
Cyclades, was a disciple of Pittacus of Mitylene, and teacher of
Pythagoras. He flourished B.C. 544.


of old, moved Pythagoras of Samos so deeply
by their novelty, as to make him turn from the
exercises of the athlete to the studies of the phi-
losopher. But now what Virgil said we all behold :
" Tlie balsam of Assyria grows everywhere." ^
And as to the help given through the grace of
Christ, in Him truly are the words of the same
poet fulfilled : " With Thee as our leader, the ob-
literation of all the traces of our sin which remain
shall deliver the earth from perpetual alarm." ^

Chap. iv. — 13. " But," they say, " the proofs
of so great majesty did not shine forth with ade-
quate fulness of evidence ; for the casting out of
devils, the healing of the sick, and the restoration
of the dead to life are but small works for God
to do, if the others who have wrought similar
wonders be borne in mind." ■♦ We ourselves ad-
mit that the prophets wrought some miracles like
those performed by Christ. For among these mir-
acles what is more wonderful than the raising of
the dead? Yet both Elijah and Elisha did this.5
As to the miracles of magicians, and the ques-
tion whether they also raised the dead, let those
pronounce an opinion who strive, not as accu-
sers, but as panegyrists, to prove Apuleius guilty
of those charges of practising magical arts from
which he himself takes abundant ]jains to defend
his reputation. We read that the magicians of
Egypt, the most skilled in these arts, were van-
quished by Moses, the servant of God, when
they were working wonderfully by impious en-
chantments, and he, by simply calling upon God
in prayer, overthrew all their machinations.^ But
this Moses himself and all the other true proph-
ets prophesied concerning the Lord Christ, and
gave to Him great glory ; they predicted that
He would come not as One merely equal or
superior to them in the same power of work-
ing miracles, but as One who was truly God the
Lord of all, and who became man for the bene-
fit of men. He was pleased to do also some
miracles, such as they had done, to prevent the
incongruity of His not doing in person such
things as He had done by them. Nevertheless,
He was to do also some things peculiar to Him-
self, namely, to be born of a virgin, to rise from
the dead, to ascend to heaven. I know not
what greater things he can look for who thinks
these too little for God to do.

14. For I think that such signs of divine
power are demanded by these objectors as were
not suitable for Him to do when wearing the
nature of men. The Word was in the beginning,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God, and by Him all things were made.** Now,


" " Assyrium vulgo nascetur amomum." — Eclogue iv.

3 Ibid.

* Letter CXXXV. sec. 2, p. 472.

S I Kings xvii. 22; 2 Kings iv. 35.

*> Ex. vii., viii.

' John i. I.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


479


when the Word became flesh, was it necessary
for Him to create another world, that we might
beheve Him to be the person by whom the
world was made? But within this world it would
have been impossible to make another greater
than itself, or equal to it. If, however, He were
to make a world inferior to that which now ex-
ists, this, too, would be considered too small a
work to prove His deity. Wherefore, since it
was not necessary that He should make a new
world, He made new things ii\ the world. For
that a man should be born of a virgin, and
raised from the dead to eternal life, and exalted
above the heavens, is perchance a work involv-
ing a greater exertion of power than the creat-
ing of a world. Here, probably, objectors may
answer that they do not believe that these things
took place. What, then, can be done for men
who despise smaller evidences as inadequate,
and reject greater evidences as incredible ? That
life has been restored to the dead is believed,
because it has been accomplished by others, and
is too small a work to prove him who performs
it to be God : that a true body was created in a
virgin, and being raised from death to eternal
life, was taken up to heaven, is not believed,
because no one else has done this, and it is what
God alone could do. On this principle every man
is to accept with equanimity whatever he thinks
easy for himself not indeed to do, but to con-
ceive, and is to reject as false and fictitious what-
ever goes beyond that limit. I beseech you, do
not be like these men.

15. These topics are elsewhere more amply
discussed, and in fundamental questions of doc-
trine every intricate point has been opened up
by thorough investigation and debate ; but faith
gives the understanding access to these things,
unbelief closes the door. What man might not
be moved to faith in the doctrine of Christ by
such a remarkable chain of events from the
beginning, and by the manner in which the
epochs of the world are linked together, so that
our faith in regard to present things is assisted
by what happened in the past, and the record
of earlier and ancient things is attested by later
and more recent events? One is chosen from
among the Chaldeans, a man endowed with
most eminent piety and faith, that to him may
be given divine promises, appointed to be ful-
filled in the last times of the world, after the
lapse of so many centuries ; and it is foretold
that in his seed shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed.' This man, worshipping the one
true God, the Creator of the universe, begets in
his old age a son, when sterility and advanced
years had made his wife give up all expectation
of becoming a mother. The descendants of

' Gen. xii.


this son become a very numerous tribe, being
increased in Egypt, to which place they had
been removed from the East, by Divine Provi-
dence multiplying as time went on both the
promises given and the works wrought on their
behalf. From Egypt they come forth a mighty
nation, being brought out with terrible signs and
wonders ; and the wicked nations of the prom-
ised land being driven out from before them,
they are brought into it and settled there, and
exalted to the position of a kingdom. There-
after, frequently provoking by prevailing sin and
idolatrous impieties the true God, who had be-
stowed on them so many benefits, and experi-
encing alternately the chastisements of calamity
and the consolations of restored prosperity, the
history of the nation is brought down to the
incarnation and the manifestation of Christ.
Predictions that this Christ, being the Word of
God, the Son of God, and God Himself, was to
become incarnate, to die, to rise again, to ascend
into heaven, to have multitudes of all nations
through the power of His name surrendering
themselves to Him, and that by Him pardon of
sins and eternal salvation would be given to all
who believe in Him, — these predictions, I say,
have been published by all the promises given to
that nation, by all the prophecies, the institution
of the priesthood, the sacrifices, the temple,
and, in short, by all their sacred mysteries.

16. Accordingly Christ comes : in His birth,
life, words, deeds, sufferings, death, resurrection,
ascension, all which the prophets had foretold is
fulfilled.^ He sends the Holy Spirit ; fills with
this Spirit the believers when they are assembled
in one house, and expecting with prayer and ar-
dent desire this promised gift. Being thus filled
with the Holy Spirit, they speak immediately in
the tongues of all nations, they boldly confute
errors, they preach the truth that is most profit-
able for mankind, they exhort men to repent of
their past blameworthy lives, and promise pardon
by the free grace of God. Signs and miracles
suitable for confirmation follow their preaching
of piety and of the true religion. The cruel en-
mity of unbelief is stirred up against them ; they
bear predicted trials, they hope for promised
blessings, and teach that which they had been
commanded to make known. Few in number
at first, they become scattered like seed through-
out the world ; they convert nations with won-
drous facility ; they grow in number in the midst
of enemies ; they become increased by perse-
cutions ; and, under the severity of hardships,
instead of being straitened, they extend their
influence to the utmost boundaries of the earth.
From being very ignorant, despised, and few,
they become enlightened, distinguished, and nu-

' Matt. i. 23.


48o


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


merous, men of illustrious talents and of pol-
ished eloquence ; they also bring under the yoke
of Christ, and attract to the work of preaching
the way of holiness and salvation, the marvel-
lous attainments of men remarkable for genius,
eloquence, and erudition. Amid alternations of
adversity and prosperity, they watchfully prac-
tise patience and self-control ; and when the
world's day is drawing near its close, and the ap-
proaching consummation is heralded by the calam-
ities which exhaust its energies, they, seeing
in this the fulfilment of prophecy, only expect
with increased confidence the everlasting bless-
edness of the heavenly city. Moreover, amidst
all these changes, the unbelief of the heathen
nations continues to rage against the Church of
Christ ; she gains the victory by patient endur-
ance, and by the maintenance of unshaken faith
in the face of the cruelties of her adversaries.
The sacrifice of Him in whom the truth, long
veiled under mystic promises, is revealed, hav-
ing been offered, those sacrifices by which it was
prefigured are finally abolished by the utter de-
struction of the Jewish temple. The Jewish na-
tion, itself rejected because of unbelief, being
now rooted out from its own land, is dispersed
to every region of the world, in order that it
may carry everywhere the Holy Scriptures, and
that in this way our adversaries themselves may
bring before mankind the testimony furnished by
the prophecies concerning Christ and HisChurch,
thus precluding the possibility of the supposition
that these predictions were forged by us to suit
the time ; in which prophecies, also, the unbe-
lief of these very Jews is foretold. The tem-
ples, images, and impious worship of the heathen
divinities are overthrown gradually and in suc-
cession, according to the prophetic intimations.
Heresies bud forth against the name of Christ,
though veiling themselves under His name, as
had been foretold, by which the doctrine of the
holy religion is tested and developed. All these
things are now seen to be accomplished, in ex-
act fulfilment of the predictions which we read
in Scripture ; and from these important and
numerous instances of fulfilled prophecy, the
fulfilment of the predictions which remain is
confidently expected. Where, then, is the mind,
having aspirations after eternity, and moved by
the shortness of this present life, which can re-
sist the clearness and perfection of these evi-
dences of the divine origin of our faith?

Chap. v. — 17. What discourses or writings of
philosophers, what laws of any commonwealth
in any land or age, are worthy for a moment to
be compared with the two commandments on
which Christ saith that all the law and the proph-
ets hang : " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, and thou shalt love thy neighbour


as thyself"? ' All philosophy is here, — physics,
ethics, logic : the first, because in God the Cre-
ator are all the causes of all existences in nature ;
the second, because a good and honest life is
not produced in any other way than by loving,
in the manner in which they should be loved,
the proper objects of our love, namely, God and
our neighbour ; and the third, because God alone
is the Truth and the Light of the rational soul.
Here also is security for the welfare and re-
nown of a commonwealth ; for no state is per-
fectly established and preserved otherwise than
on the foundation and by the bond of faith and
of firm concord, when the highest and truest
common good, namely, God, is loved by all, and
men love each other in Him without dissimula-
tion, because they love one another for His sake
from whom they cannot disguise the real char-
acter of their love.

18. Consider, moreover, the style in which
Sacred Scripture is composed, — how accessible
it is to all men, though its deeper mysteries are
penetrable to very few. The plain truths which
it contains it declares in the artless language of
familiar friendship to the hearts both of the un-
learned and of the learned ; but even the truths
which it veils in symbols it does not set forth in
stiff and stately sentences, which a mind some-
what sluggish and uneducated might shrink from
approaching, as a poor man shrinks from the
presence of the rich ; but, by the condescension
of its style, it invites all not only to be fed with
the truth which is plain, but also to be exercised
by the truth which is concealed, having both m
its simple and in its obscure portions the same
truth. Lest what is easily understood should
beget satiety m the reader, the same truth being
in another place more obscurely expressed be-
comes again desired, and, being desired, is some-
how invested with a new attractiveness, and thus
IS received with pleasure into the heart. By
these means wayward minds are corrected, weak
minds are nourished, and strong minds are filled
with pleasure, in such a way as is profitable to
all. This doctrine has no enemy but the man
who, being in error, is ignorant of its incom-
parable usefulness, or, being spiritually diseased,
is averse to its healing power.

19. You see what a long letter I have written.
If, therefore, anything perplexes you, and you
regard it of sufficient importance to be discussed
between us, let not yourself be straitened by
keeping within the bounds of ordinary letters ;
for you know as well as any one what long letters
the ancients wrote when they were treating of
any subject which they were not able briefly to
explain. And even if the custom of authors in
other departments of literature had been differ-

' Matt. xxii. 37-39.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


481


ent, the authority of Christian writers, whose
example has a worthier claim upon our imitation,
might be set before us. Observe, therefore, the
length of the apostolic epistles, and of the com-
mentaries written on these divine oracles, and
do not hesitate either to ask many questions if
you have many difficulties, or to handle more
fully the questions which you propound, in order
that, in so far as it can be achieved with such
abilities as we possess, there may remain no
cloud of doubt to obscure the light of truth.

20. For I am aware that your Excellency
has to encounter the most determined opposi-
tion from certain persons, who think, or would
have others think, that Christian doctrine is
incompatible with the welfare of the common-
wealth, because they wish to see the common-
wealth established not by the stedfast practice
of virtue, but by granting impunity to vice. But
with God the crimes in which many are banded
together do not pass unavenged, as is often the
case with a king, or any other magistrate who is
only a man. Moreover, His mercy and grace,
published to men by Christ, who is Himself man,
and imparted to man by the^ same Christ, who
is also God and the Son of God, never fail those
who live by faith in Him and piously worship
Him, in adversity patiently and bravely bearing
the trials of this life, in prosperity using with
self-control and with compassion for others the
good things of this life ; destined to receive, for
faithfulness in both conditions, an eternal rec-
ompense in that divine and heavenly city in
which there shall be no longer calamity to be
painfully endured, nor inordinate desire to be
with laborious care controlled, where our only
work shall be to preserve, without any difficulty
and with perfect liberty, our love to God and to
our neighbour.

May the infinitely compassionate omnipotence
of God preserve you in safety and increase your
happiness, my noble and distinguished Lord, and
my most excellent son. With profound respect,
as is due to your worth, I salute your pious and
most truly venerable mother, whose prayers on
your behalf may God hear ! My pious brother
and fellow bishop, Possidius, warmly salutes your
Grace.

LETTER CXXXVIIL

(a.d. 412.)

to marcelunus, my noble and justly famous
lord, my son most beloved and longed for,
augustin sends greeting in the lord.

Chap. i. — i. In writing to the illustrious and
most eloquent Volusianus, whom we both sin-
cerely love, I thought it right to confine myself
to answering the questions which he thought
proper himself to state ; but as to the questions


which you have submitted to me in your letter
for discussion and solution, as suggested or pro-
posed either by Volusianus himself or by others,
it is fitting that such reply to these as I may be
able to give should be addressed to you. I shall
attempt this, not in the manner in which it would
require to be done in a formal treatise, but in
the manner which is suitable to the conversa-
tional familiarity of a letter, in order that, if you,
who know their state of mind by daily discus-
sions, think it expedient, this letter also may be
read to your friends. But if this communica-
tion be not adapted to them, because of their
not being prepared by the piety of faith to give
ear to it, let what you consider adapted to them
be in the first place prepared between ourselves,
and afterwards let what may have been thus pre-
pared be communicated to them. For there are
many things from which their minds may in the
meantime shrink and recoil, which they may
perhaps by and by be persuaded to accept as
j true, either by the use of more copious and skil-
ful arguments, or by an appeal to authority
which, in their opinion, may not without impro-
priety be resisted.

2. Li your letter you state that some are per-
plexed by the question, " Why this God, who is
proved to be the God also of the Old Testa-
ment, is pleased with new sacrifices after having
rejected the ancient ones. For they allege that
nothing can be corrected but that which is proved
to have been previously not rightly done, or that
what has once been done rightly ought not to be
altered in the very least : that which has been
rightly done, they say, cannot be changed with-
out wrong." ' I quote these words from your
letter. Were I disposed to give a copious reply
to this objection, time would fail me long before
I had exhausted the instances in wliich the
processes of nature itself and the works of men
undergo changes according to the circumstances
of the time, while, at the same time, there is
nothing mutable in the plan or principle by
which these changes are regulated. Of these I
may mention a few, that, stimulated by them,
your wakeful observation may run, as it were,
from them to many more of the same kind.
Does not summer follow winter, the temperature
gradually increasing in warmth? Do not night
and day in turn succeed each other? How
often do our own lives experience changes !
Boyhood departing, never to return, gives place
to youth ; manhood, destined itself to continue
only for a season, takes in turn the place of
youth ; and old age, closing the term of man-
hood, is itself closed by death.^ All these things
are changed, but the plan of Divine Providence


1 Letter CXXXVI. sec. 2, p. 473.

2 Augustin's four stages of human life are: Piieritia, adoles-
ce>itta,juveiitus, iencctus.


482


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


which appoints these successive changes is not
changed. I suppose, also, that the principles
of agriculture are not changed when the farmer
appoints a different work to be done in summer
from that which he had ordered in winter. He
who rises in the morning, after resting by night,
is not supposed to have changed the plan of his
life. The schoolmaster gives to the adult dif-
ferent tasks from those which he was accus-
tomed to prescribe to the scholar in his boyhood ;
his teaching, consistent throughout, changes the
instruction when the lesson is changed, without
itself being changed.

3. The eminent physician of our own times,
Vindicianus, being consulted by an invalid, pre-
scribed for his disease what seemed to him a
suitable remedy at that time ; health was re-
stored by its use. Some years afterwards, find-
ing himself troubled again with the same disorder,
the patient supposed that the same remedy
should be applied ; but its application made his
illness worse. In astonishment, he again returns
to the physician, and tells him what had hap-
pened ; whereupon he, being a man of very
quick penetration, answered : " The reason of
your having been harmed by this application is,
that I did not order it ; " upon which all who
heard the remark and did not know the man
supposed that he was trusting not in the art of
medicine, but in some forbidden supernatural
power. When he was afterwards questioned by
some who were amazed at his words, he ex-
plained what they had not understood, namely,
that he would not have prescribed the same
remedy to the patient at the age which he had
now attained. While, therefore, the principle
and methods of art remain unchanged, the
change which, in accordance with them, may be
made necessary by the difference of times is
very great.

4. To say, then, that what has once been done
.rightly must in no respect whatever be changed,
is to affirm what is not true. For if the circum-
stances of time which occasioned anything be
changed, true reason in almost all cases demands
that what had been in the former circumstances
rightly done, be now so altered that, although
they say that it is not rightly done if it be
changed, truth, on the contrary, protests that it
is not rightly done unless it be changed ; be-
cause, at both times, it will be rightly done if
the difference be regulated according to the dif-
ference in the times. For just as in the cases
of different persons it may happen that, at the
same moment, one man may do with impunity
what another man may not, because of a differ-
ence not in the thing done but in the person
who does it, so in the case of one and the same
person at different times, that which was duty
formerly is not duty now, not because the per-


son is different from his former self, but because
the time at which he does it is different.

5. The wide range opened up by this question
may be seen by any one who is competent and
careful to observe the contrast between the beau-
tiful and the suitable, examples of which are
scattered, we may say, throughout the universe.
For the beautiful, to which the ugly and deformed
is opposed, is estimated and praised according
to what it is in itself. But the suitable, to which
the incongruous is opposed, depends on some-
thing else to which it is bound, and is estimated
not according to what it is in itself, but accord-
ing to that with which it is connected : the con-
trast, also, between becoming and unbecoming
is either the same, or at least regarded as the
same. Now apply what we have said to the sub-
ject in hand. The divine institution of sacrifice
was suitable in the former dispensation, but is
not suitable now. For the change suitable to
the present age has been enjoined by God, who
knows infinitely better than man what is fitting
for every age, and who is, whether He give or
add, abolish or curtail, increase or diminish, the
unchangeable Governor as He is the unchange-
able Creator of mutable things, ordering all
events in His providence until the beauty of the
completed course of time, the component parts
of which are the dispensations adapted to each
successive age, shall be finished, like the grand
melody of some ineffably wise master of song,
and those pass into the eternal immediate con-
templation of God who here, though it is a time
of faith, not of sight, are acceptably worshipping
Him.

6. They are mistaken, moreover, who think
that God appoints these ordinances for His own
advantage or pleasure ; and no wonder that,
being thus mistaken, they are perplexed, as if it
was from a changing mood that He ordered one
thing to be offered to Him in a former age, and|
something else now. But this is not the case.|
God enjoins nothing for His own advantage, but
for the benefit of those to whom the injunction
is given. Wherefore He is truly Lord, for He
does not need His servants, but His servant?
stand in need of Him. In those same Old TeS'
tament Scriptures, and in the age in which sacri^
fices were still being offered that are now abro
gated, it is said : " I said unto the Lord, Thoiji
art my God, for Thou dost not need my goodi
things." ' Wherefore God did not stand in need
of those sacrifices, nor does He ever need any-
thing ; but there are certain acts, symbolical of
these divine gifts, whereby the soul receives eithel
present grace or eternal glory, in the celebratioi)
and practice of which, pious exercises, service
able not to God but to ourselves, are performed


' Ps. xvi. 2. OTi tCiv ayaSuiv ixov oil \pt:i.av ixei.%, LXX, ; qti
tiiam boHorum meoritin no it eges, Aug.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


483


7. It vvoild, however, take too long to discuss
with adequate fuhiess the differences between
the symboical actions of former and present
times, wliich, because of their pertaining to di-
vine things, are called sacraments.' For as
the man is not fickle who does one thing in the
morning end another in the evening, one thing
this month and another in the next, one thing
this year and another next year, so there is no
variableness with God, though in the former pe-
riod of the world's history He enjoined one kind
of offerings, and in the latter period another,
therein ordering the symbohcal actions pertain-
ing to the blessed doctrine of true religion in
harmony with the changes of successive epochs
without any change in Himself. For in order
to let those whom these things perplex under-
stand that the change was alreadv in the divine
counsel, and that, when the new ordinances were
appointed, it was not because the old had sud-
denly lost the divine approbation through incon-
stancy in His will, but that this had been already
fixed and determined by the wisdom of that
God to whom, in reference to much greater
changes, these words are spoken m Scripture :
"Thou shalt change them, and they shall be
changed; but Thou art the same,"' — it is ne-
cessarv to convince them that this exchange of
the sacraments of the Old Testament for those
of the New had been predicted by the voices of
the prophets. For thus they will see, if they can
see anything, that what is new in time is not new
in relation to Him who has appointed the times,
and who possesses, without succession of time,
all those things which He assigns according to
their variety to the several ages. For in the
psalm from which I have quoted above the
words : " I said unto the Lord, Thou art my
God, for Thou dost not need my good things,"
in proof that God does not need our sacrifices.
It is added shortly after by the Psalmist in
Christ's name : " I will not gather their assem-
blies of blood ; " 3 that is, for the offering of
animals from their flocks, for which the Jewish
assemblies were wont to be gathered together ;
and in another place he says : "I will take no
bullock out of thy house, nor he-goat from thy
folds ; " •♦ and another prophet says : " Behold,
the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make
a new covenant with the house of Israel, and
with the house of Judah : not according to the
covenant that I made with their fathers in the
day when I took them by the hand to bring them
out of the land of Egypt." 5 There are, besides
these, many other testimonies on this subject in

' Observe Augustin's definition of the word sacramentum as
used by him: " cum ad res divinas pertinent sacramenta appellantur."
^ Ps. cii. 26, 27.
3 Ps. xvi. 3. oil \L1\ <tvva.y6.yu> Tas <i\iva.-fio-fa.<i aimav e'J ai/udTuf,

■• Ps. 1. 9.

5 Jer. xxxi, 32.


which it was foretold that Gotl would do as He
has done ; but it would take too long to men-
tion them.

8. If it is now established that that which was
for one age rightly ordained may be in another
age rightly thanged, — the alteration indicating
a change in the work, not in the plan, of Him
who makes the change, the plan being framed
by His reasoning faculty, to which, unconditioned
by succession in time, those things are simulta-
neously present which cannot be actually done
at the same time because the ages succeed each
other, — one might perhaps at this point expect
to hear from me the causes of the change in
question. You know how long it would take to
discuss these fully. The matter may be stated
summarily, but sufficiently for a man of shrewd
judgment, in these words : It was fitting that
Christ's future coming should be foretold by
some sacraments, and that after His coming
other sacraments should proclaim this ; just as
the difference in the facts has compelled us to
change the words used by us in speaking of the
advent as future or past : to be foretold is one
thing, to be proclaimed is another, and to be
about to come is one thing, to have come is
another.

Chap. ii. — 9. Let us now obser\'e, in the
second place, what follows in your letter.'' You
have added that they said that the Christian doc-
trine and preaching were in no way consistent
with the duties and rights of citizens, because
among its precepts we find : " Recompense to
no man evil for evil," 7 and, " Whosoever shall
smite thee on one cheek, turn to him the other
also ; and if any man take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also ; and whosoever will
compel thee to go a mile with him, go with him
twain,"^ — all which are affirmed to be contrary
to the duties and rights of citizens ; for who
would submit to have anything taken from him
by an enemy, or forbear from retaliating the evils
of war upon an invader who ravaged a Roman
province ? To these and similar statements of
persons speaking slightingly, or perhaps I should
rather say speaking as inquirers regarding the
truth, I might have given a more elaborate an-
swer, were it not that the persons with whom the
discussion is carried on are men of liberal edu-
cation. In addressing such, why should we pro-
long the debate, and not rather begin by inquiring
for ourselves how it was possible that the Repub-
lic of Rome was governed and aggrandized from
insignificance and poverty to greatness and opu-
lence by men who, when they had suffered wrong,
would rather pardon than punish the offender ; '^

6 Letter CXXXVI. sec. 2, p. 473.

7 Rom. xii. 17.

5 Matt. V. 39-41.

9 " Accepta injuria ignoscere quani persequi malebant." — Sallust,
Catilina, c. 9.


4S4


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


or how Cicero, addressing Caesar, the greatest
statesman of his time, said, in praising his char-
acter, that he was wont to forget nothing but the
wrongs which were done to him?" For in this
Cicero spoke either praise or flattery : if he
spoke praise, it was because he knew Cresar to
be such as he affirmed ; if he spoke flattery, he
showed that the chief magistrate of a common-
wealth ought to do such things as he falsely com-
mended in Cresar. But what is " not rendering
evil for evil," but refraining from the passion of
revenge — in other words, choosing, when one
has suffered wrong, to pardon rather than to pun-
ish the offender, and to forget nothing but the
wronsfs done to us?

10. When these things are read in their own
authors, they are received with loud apj)lause ;
they are regarded as tlie record and recommen-
dation of virtues in the practice of which the
Republic deserved to hold sway over so many
nations, because its citizens preferred to pardon
rather than punish those who wronged them.
But when the precept, " Render to no man evil
for evil," is read as given by divine authority,
and when, from the pulpits in our churches, this
wholesome counsel is published in the midst of
our congregations, or, as we might say, in places
of instruction open to all, of both sexes and of
all ages and ranks, our religion is accused as an
enemy to the Republic ! Yet, were our religion
listened to as it deserves, it would establish,
consecrate, strengthen, and enlarge the common-
wealth in a way beyond all that Romulus, Numa,
Brutus, and all the other men of renown in Ro-
man history achieved. For what is a republic
but a commonwealth? Therefore its interests
are common to all ; they are the interests of the
State. Now what is a State but a multitude of
men bound together by some bond of concord ?
In one of their own autjiors we read : " \Miat
was a scattered and unsettled multitude had by
concord become in a short time a State." But
what exhortations to concord have they ever
a])pointed to be read in their temples? So far
from this, they were unhappily compelled to de-
vise how they might worship without giving of-
fence to any of their gods, who were all at such
variance among themselves, that, had their wor-
shippers imitated their quarrelling, the State
must have fallen to pieces for want of tlie bond
of concord, as it soon afterwards began to do
through civil wars, when the morals of the peo-
ple were changed and corrupted.

1 1 . But who, even though he be a stranger to
our religion, is so deaf as not to know how many
precepts enjoining concord, not invented by the
discussions of men, but written with the author-
ity of God, are continually read in the churches


' " Oblivisci soles nihil nisi injurias.'
c 12.


•Cicero, />ro Ligario,


of Christ? For this is the tendency even of
those precepts which they are much more will-
ing to debate than to follow : "Thnt to him who
smites us on one cheek we should oifer the other
to be smitten ; to him who would tike away our
coat we sliould give our cloak also ; and that
with him wlio compels us to go O'le mile we
should go twain." P'or these things are done
only that a wicked man may be overcome by
kindness, or rather tliat the evil which is in the
wicked man may be overcome by good, and
that the man may be delivered from the evil —
not from anv evil that is external and foreign to
himself, but from that which is within and is his
own, under which he suffers loss more severe and
fatal than could be inflicted by the cruelty of any
enemy from without. He, therefore, who is over-
coming evil by good, submits patiently to the
loss of temporal advantages, that he may show
how those things, through excessive love of
which the other is made wicked, deserve to be
despised when compared with faith and right-
eousness ; in order that so the injurious person
may learn from him whom he wronged what is
the true nature of the things for the sake of
which he committed the wrong, and may be won
back witli sorrow for his sin to that concord,
than wliich nothing is more serviceable to the
State, being overcome not by the strength of one
passionately resenting, but by the good-nature
of one patienUy bearing wrong. For then it is
rightly done when it seems that it will benefit
him for whose sake it is done, by producing in
him amendment of his ways and concord with
others. At all events, it is to be done with this
intention, even though the result may be differ-
ent from what was expected, and the man, with
a view to whose correction and conciliation this
healing and salutary medicine, so to speak, was
employed, refuses to be corrected and recon-
ciled.

Moreover, if we pay attention to the
of tlie precept, and consider ourselves
bondage to the literal interpretation, the
cheek is not to be presented by us if the
left has been smitten. " Whosoever," it is said,
" shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to
him the other also ; " ^ but the left cheek is more
liable to be smitten, because it is easier for the
ricrht hand of the assailant to smite it than the
other. But the words are commonly understood
as if our Lord had said : If any one has acted
injuriously to thee in respect of the higher pos-
sessions which thou hast, offer to him also the
inferior possessions, lest, being more concerned
about revenge than about forbearance, thou
shouldst despise eternal things in comparison
with temporal things, whereas temporal things

2 Matt. V. 39.


12.

words
under
right


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


48;


ought to be despised in comparison with eternal
things, as the left is in comparison with the
right. This has been always the aim of the
holy martyrs ; for final vengeance is righteously
demanded only when there remains no room for
amendment, namely, m the last great judgment.
But meanwhile we must be on our guard, lest,
through desire for revenge, we lose patience
itself, — a virtue which is of more value than all
which an enemy can, in spite of our resistance,
take away from us. For another evangelist, in
recording the same precept, makes no mention
of the right cheek, but names merely the one and
the other ; ' so that, while the duty may be some-
what more distinctly learned from Matthew's
gospel, he simply commends the same exercise
of patience. Wherefore a righteous and pious
man ought to be prepared to endure with pa-
tience injury from those whom he desires to make
good, so that the number of good men may be
increased, instead of himself being added, by
retaliation of injury, to the number of wicked
men.

13. In fine, that these precepts pertain rather
to the inward disposition of the heart tlian to
the actions wliich are done in the sight of men,
requiring us, in the inmost heart, to cherish pa-
tience along with benevolence, but in the out-
ward action to do that which seems most likely
to benefit those whose good we ought to seek,
is manifest from the fact that our Lord Jesus
Himself, our perfect example of patience, when
He was smitten on the face, answered : " If I
have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, but
if not, why smitest thou me ? " ^ If we look
only to the words, He did not in this obey His
own precept, for He did not present the other
side of his face to him who had smitten Him,
but, on the contrary, prevented him who had
done the wrong from adding thereto ; and yet
He had come prepared not only to be smitten
on the face, but even to be slain upon the cross
for those at whose hands He suffered crucifixion,
and for whom, when hanging on the cross, He
prayed, " Father, forgive them, they know not
what they do ! " ^ In like manner, the Apostle
Paul seems to have failed to obey the precept
of his Lord and Master, when he, being smitten
on the face as He had been, said to the chief
priest : " God shall smite th-^e, thou whited wall,
for sittest thou to judge me after the law, and
commandest me to be smitten contrary to the
law? " And when it was said by them that stood
near, " Revilest thou God's high priest?" he
took pains sarcastically to indicate what his
words meant, that those of them who were dis-
cerning might understand that now the whited


' Luke vi. 29.
^ John xviii. 23.
3 Luke xxiii. 34.


wall, i.e. the hypocrisy of the Jewish priesthood,
was appointed to be thrown down by the coming
of Christ J for He said : " I wist not, brethren,
that he was the high priest, for it is written,
Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy
people ; " ■• although it is perfectly certain that
he who had grown up in that nation, and had
been in that place trained in the law, could
not but know that his judge was the chief priest,
and could not, by professing ignorance on this
point, impose upon those to whom he was so
well known.

14. These precepts concerning patience ought
to be always retained in the habitual discipline
of the heart, and the benevolence which pre-
vents the recompensing of evil for evil must be
alwa}'s fully cherished in the disposition. At
the same time, many things must be done in
correcting with a certain benevolent severity,
even against their own wishes, men whose wel-
fare rather than their wishes it is our duty to
consult ; and the Christian Scriptures have most
unambiguously commended this virtue in a
magistrate. For in the correction of a son,
even with some sternness, there is assuredly no
diminution of a father's love ; yet, in the cor-
rection, that is done which is received with reluc-
tance and pain by one whom it seems necessary
to heal by pain. And ©n this principle, if the
commonwealth observe the precepts of the Chris-
tian religion, even its wars themselves will not
be carried on without the benevolent design
that, after the resisting nations have been con-
quered, provision may be more easily made for
enjoying in peace the mutual bond of piety and
justice. For the person from whom is taken
away the freedom which he abuses in doing
wrong is vanquished with benefit to himself;
since nothing is more truly a misfortune than
that good fortune of offenders, by which perni-
cious impunity is maintained, and the evil dis-
position, like an enemy within the man, is
strengthened. But the perverse and froward
hearts of men think human affairs are prosper-
ous when men are concerned about magnificent
mansions, and indifferent to the ruin of souls ;
when mighty theatres are built up, and the
foundations of virtue are undermined ; when
the madness of extravagance is highly esteemed,
and works of mercy are scorned ; when, out of
the wealth and affluence of rich men, luxurious
provision is made for actors, and the poor are
grudged the necessaries of life ; when that God
who, by the public declarations of His doctrine,
protests against public vice, is blasphemed by
impious communities, which demand gods of
such character that even those theatrical repre-
sentations which bring disgrace to both body


* Acts xxiii. 3-5.


486


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


and soul are fitly performed in honour of them.
If God permit these things to prevail, He is in
that permission showing more grievous displeas-
ure : if He leave these crimes unpunished, such
impunity is a more terrible judgment. When,
on the other hand. He overthrows the props of
vice, and reduces to poverty those lusts which
were nursed by plenty, He afflicts in mercy.
And in mercy, also, if such a thing were possi-
ble, even wars might be waged by the good, in
order that, by bringing under the yoke 'the un-
bridled lusts of men, those vices might be abol-
ished which ought, under a just government, to
be either extirpated or suppressed.

15. For if the Christian religion condemned
wars of every kind, the command given in the
gospel to soldiers asking counsel as to salvation
would rather be to cast away their arms, and
withdraw themselves wholly from military ser-
vice ; whereas the word spoken to such was,
" Do violence to no man, neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your wages," ' —
the command to be content with their wages
manifestly implying no prohibition to continue
m the service. Wherefore, let those who say
that the doctrine of Christ is incompatible with
the State's well-being, give us an army composed
of soldiers such as the doctrine of Christ re-
quires them to be ; let them give us such sub-
jects, such husbands and wives, such parents
and children, such masters and servants, such
kings, such judges — in fine, even such tax-
payers and tax-gatherers, as the Christian reli-
gion has taught that men should be, and then let
them dare to say that it is adverse to the State's
well-being ; yea, rather, let them no longer hesi-
tate to confess that this doctrine, if it were
obeyed, would be the salvation of the common-
wealth.

Chap. hi. — 16. But what am I to answer to
the assertion made that many calamities have
befallen the Roman Empire through some Chris-
tian emperors? This sweeping accusation is a
calumny. For if they would more clearly quote
some indisputable facts in su})port of it from the
history of past emperors, I also could mention
similar, perhaps even greater calamities in the
reigns of other emperors who were not Chris-
tians ; so that men may understand that these
were either faults in the men, not in their religion,
or were due not to the emperors themselves, but
to others without whom emperors can do nothing.
As to the date of the commencement of the
downfall of the Roman Republic, there is ample
evidence ; their own literature speaks plainly as
to this. Long before the name of Christ had
shone abroad on the earth, this was said of
Rome : " O venal city, and doomed to perish


' Luke iii. 14.


speedily, if only it could find a purchaser ! " ^
In his book on the Catilinarian conspiracy,
which was before the coming of Christ, the
same most illustrious Roman historian declares
plainly the time when the army of the Roman
people began to be wanton and drunken ; to set
a high value on statues, paintings, and embossed
vases ; to take these by violence both from indi-
viduals and from the State ; to rob temples and
pollute everything, sacred and profane. When,
therefore, the avarice and grasping violence of
the corrupt and abandoned manners of the time
spared neither men nor those whom they es-
teemed as gods, the famous honour and safety
of the commonwealth began to decline. "What
progress the worst vices made from that time
forward, and with how great mischief to the
interests of mankind the wickedness of the Em-
pire went on, it would take too long to rehearse.
Let them hear their own satirist speaking play-
fully yet truly thus : —

" Once poor, and therefore chaste, in former times
Our matrons were no lu.xury found room
In low-roofed houses and bare walls of loam ;
Their hands with labour burdened while 'tis light,
A frugal sleep supplied the quiet night ;
While, ]3inched with want, their hunger held them strait,
When Hannibal was hovering at the gate;
But wanton now, and lolling at our ease,
We suffer all the inveterate ills of peace
And wasteful riot, whose destructive charms
Revenge the vanquished world of our victorious arms.
No crime, no lustful postures are unknown,
Since poverty, our guardian-god, is gone."''

Why, then, do you expect me to multiply ex-
amples of the evils which were brought in by
wickedness uplifted by prosperity, seeing that
among themselves, those who observed events
with somewhat closer attention discerned that
Rome had more reason to regret the departure
of its poverty than of its opulence ; because in j
its poverty the integrity of its virtue was secured,
but through its opulence, dire corruption, more
terrible than any invader, had taken violent pos-
session not of the walls of the city, but of the
mind of the State?

17. Thanks be unto the Lord our God, who
has sent unto us unprecedented help in resisting
these evils. For whither might not men have I
been carried away by that flood of the appallingJ
wickedness of the human race, whom would it|
have spared, and in what depths would it notl
have engulfed its victims, had not the cross off
Christ, resting on such a solid rock of authorityj
(so to speak), been planted too high and too|
strong for the flood to sweep it away ? so that
by laying hold of its strength we may becomejj
stedfast, and not be carried off our feet and
overwhelmed in the mighty whirlpool of the


2 Sallust, Bell. Jugnrth.

3 Juvenal, vi. 277-295 (Dryden's translation).


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


487


evil counsels and evil impulses of this world.
For when the empire was sinking in the vile
abyss of utterly depraved manners, and of the '
effete ancient religion, it was signally important i
that heavenly authority should come to the res- !
cue, persuadmg men to the practice of voluntary
poverty, continence, benevolence, justice, and [
concord among themseh-es, as well as true piety
towards God, and all the other bright and ster- ,
ling virtues of life, — not only with a view to the [
spending of this present life in the most honour- j
able way, nor only with a view to secure the most :
perfect bond of concord m the earthly common-
wealth, but also in order to the obtaining of
eternal salvation, and a place m the divine and
celestial republic of a people which shall en-
dure for ever — a republic to the citizenship
of which faith, hope, and charity admit us ; so
that, while absent from it on our pilgrimage
here, we may patiently tolerate, if we cannot
correct, those who desire, by leaving vices un-
punished, to give stability to that republic which
the early Romans founded and enlarged by
their virtues, when, though they had not the
true piety towards the true God which could
bring them, by a religion of saving power, to
the commonwealth which is eternal, they did
nevertheless observe a certain integrity of its
own kind, which might suffice for founding,
enlarging, and preserving an earthly common-
wealth. For in the most opulent and illustrious
Empire of Rome, God has shown how great is
the influence of even civil virtues without true
religion, in order that it might be understood
that, when this is added to such virtues, men are
made citizens of another commonwealth, of
which the king is Truth, the law is Love, and
the duration is Eternity.

Chap. iv. — 18. Who can help feeling that
there is something simply ridiculous in their at-
tempt to compare with Christ, or rather to put
in a higher place, Apollonius and Apuleius, and
others who were most skilful in magical arts?
Yet this is to be tolerated with less impatience,
because they bring into comparison with Him
these men rather than their own gods ; for Apol-
lonius was, as we must admit, a much worthier
character than that author and perpetrator of
innumerable gross acts of imr^orality whom they
call Jupiter. " These legends about our gods,"
they reply, "are fables." Why, then, do they
go on praising that luxurious, licentious, and
manifestly profane prosperity of the Republic,
which invented these infamous crimes of the
gods, and not only left them to reach the ears
of men as fables, but also exhibited them to the
eyes of men in the theatres ; in which, more
numerous than their deities were the crimes which
the gods themselves were well pleased to see
openly perpetrated in their honour, whereas


they should have punished their worshippers for
even tolerating such spectacles? "But," they
reply, " those are not the gods themselves whose
worship is celebrated according to the lying in-
vention of such fables." Who, then, are they
who are propitiated by the practising in wor-
sliip of such abominations? Because, forsooth,
Christianity has exposed the perversity and chi-
canery of those devils, by whose power also
magical arts deceive the minds of men, and
because it has made this patent to the world,
and, having brought out the distinction between
the holy angels and these malignant adversaries,
has warned men to be on their guard against
them, showing them also how this may be done,
— it is called an enemy to the Republic, as
if, even though temporal prosperity could be
secured by their aid, any amount of adversity
would not be preferable to the prosperity ob-
tained through such means. And yet it pleased
God to prevent men from being perplexed in
this matter ; for in the age of the comparative
darkness of the Old Testament, in which is the
covering of the New Testament, He distinguished
the first nation which worshipped the true God
and despised false gods by such remarkable
prosperity in this world, that any one may per-
ceive from their case that prosperity is not at the
disposal of devils, but only of Him whom angels
serve and devils fear.

19. Apuleius (of whom I choose rather to
speak, because, as our own countryman, he is
better known to us Africans), though born in a
place of some note," and a man of superior edu-
cation and great eloquence, never succeeded,
with all his magical arts, in reaching, I do not
say the supreme power, but even any subordi-
nate office as a magistrate in the Empire. FJoes
it seem probable that he, as a philosopher, vol-
untarily despised these things, who, being the
priest of a province, was so ambitious of great-
ness that he gave spectacles of gladiatorial com-
bats, provided the dresses worn by those who
fought with wild beasts in the circus, and, in
order to get a statue of himself erected in the
town of Coea, the birthplace of his wife, appealed
to law against the opposition made by some of
the citizens to the proposal, and then, to prevent
this from being forgotten by posterity, published
the speech delivered by him on that occasion?
So far, therefore, as concerns worldly prosperity,
that magician did his utmost in order to success ;
whence it is manifest that he failed not because
he was not wishful, but because he was not able
to do more. At the same time we admit that
he defended himself with brilliant eloquence
against some who imputed to him the crime of
practising magical arts ; which makes me wonder

' Madaura.


488


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


at his panegyrists, who, in affirming that by these
arts he wrought some miracles, attempt to bring
evidence contradicting his own defence of him-
self from the charge. Let them, however, examine
whether, indeed, they are bringing true testimony,
and he was guilty of pleading what he knew to
be false. Those who pursue magical arts only
with a view to worldly prosperity or from an
accursed curiosity, and those also who, though
innocent of such arts, nevertheless praise them
with a dangerous admiration, I would exhort to
give heed, if they be wise, and to observe how,
without any such arts, the position of a shepherd
was exchanged for the dignity of the kingly
office by David, of whom Scripture has faithfully
recorded both the sinful and the meritorious
actions, in order that we might know both how
to avoid offending God, and how, when He has
been offended. His wrath may be appeased.

20. As to those miracles, however, which are
performed in order to excite the wonder of men,
they do greatly err who compare heathen magi-
cians with the holy prophets, who completely
eclipse them by the fame of their great mira-
cles. How much more do they err if they com-
pare them with Christ, of whom the prophets,
so incomparably superior to magicians of every
name, foretold that He would come both in the
human nature, which he took in being born of
the Virgin, and in the divine nature, in which
He is never separated from the Father !

I see that I have written a very long letter,
and yet have not said all concerning Christ which
meet the case either of those who from
of intellect are unable to compre-
hend divine things, or of those who, though
endowed with acuteness, are kept back from
discerning truth through their love of contradic-
tion and the prepossession of their minds in
favour of long-cherished error. Howbeit, take
note of anything which influences them against
our doctrine, and write to me again, so that, if
the Lord help us, we may, by letters or by trea-
tises, furnish an answer to all their objections. '
May you, by the grace and mercy of the Lord, '
be happy in Him, my noble and justly distin-
guished lord, my son dearly beloved and longed
for!

LEITER CXXXIX.

(a.d. 412.)

to marcellinus, my lord justly distingui3hed,
■ my son very much beloved and longed for,
augustlv sends greeting in the lord.

I. The Acts ' which your Excellency promised
to send I am eagerly expecting, and I am long-
ing to have them read as soon as possible in the


might
sluggishness


' Gesta — records of judicial procedure.


church at Hippo, and also, if it can be done, in
all the churches established within the diocese,
that all may hear and become thoroughly famil-
iar with the men who have confessed their crimes,
not because the fear of God subdued them to
repentance, but because the rigour of their judges
broke through the hardness of their most cruel
hearts, — some.of them confessing to the murder
of one presbyter [Restitutus], and the blinding
and maiming of another [Innocentius] ; others
not daring to deny that they might have known
of these outrages, although they say that they
disapproved of them, and persisting in the im-
piety of schism in fellowship with such a multi-
tude of atrocious villains, while deserting the
peace of the Catholic Church on the pretext
of unwillingness to be polluted by other men's
crimes ; others declaring that they will not for-
sake the schismatics, even though the certainty
of Catholic truth and the perversity of the Do-
natists have been demonstrated to them. The
work, which it has pleased God to entrust to
your diligence, is of great importance. My
heart's desire is, that many similar Donatist
cases may be tried and decided by you as these
have been, and that in this way the crimes and
the insane obstinacy of these men may be often
brought to light ; and that the Acts recording
these proceedings may be published, and brought
to the knowledge of all men.

As to the statement in your Excellency's let-
ter, that you are uncertain whether you ought to
command the said Acts to be published in The-
oprepia,^ my reply is. Let this be done, if a large
multitude of hearers can be gathered there ; if
this be not the case, some other place of more
general resort must be provided ; it must not,
however, be omitted on any account.

2. As to the punishment of these men, I be-
seech you to make it something less severe than
sentence of death, although they have, by their
own confession, been guilty of such grievous
crimes. I ask this out of a regard both for our
own consciences and for the testimony thereby
given to Catholic clemency. For this is the
special advantage secured to us by their confes-
sion, that the Catholic Church has found an
opportunity of maintaining and exhibiting for-
bearance towards her most violent enemies ;
since in a case where such cruelty was practised,
any punishment short of death will be seen by
all men to proceed from great leniency. And
although such treatment appears to some of our
communion, whose minds are agitated by these
atrocities, to be less than the crimes deserve,
and to have somewhat the aspect of weakness
and dereliction of duty, nevertheless, when the
feelings, which are wont to be immoderately ex-

^ This is supposed to be the name of a Donatist church in
Carthage.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


489


cited while sucii events are recent, have subsided
after a time, the kindness shown to the guilty
will shine with most conspicuous brightness, and
men will take much more pleasure in reading
these Acts and showing them to others, my lord
justly distinguished, and son very much beloved
and longed for.

My holy brother and co-bishop Boniface is on
the spot, and I have forwarded by the deacon
Peregrinus, who travelled along with him, a let-
ter of instructions ; accept these as representing
me. And whatever may seem in your joint
opinion to be for the Church's interest, let it be
done with the help of the Lord, who is able in
the midst of so great evils graciously to succour
you. One of their bishops, Macrobius, is at
present going round in all directions, followed
by bands of wretched men and women, and
has opened for himself the [Donatist] churches
which fear, however slight, had moved their
owners to close for a time. By the presence,
however, of one whom I have commended and
again heartily commend to your love, namely,
Spondeus, the deputy of the illustrious Celer, their
presumption was indeed somewhat checked ;
but now, since his departure to Carthage, Ma-
crobius has opened the Donatist churches even
within his property, and is gathering congrega-
tions for worship in them. In his company,
moreover, is Donatus, a deacon, rebaptized by
them even when he was a tenant of lands belong-
ing to the Church, who was implicated as a ring-
leader in the outrage [on Innocentius]. When
this man is his associate, who can tell what kind
of followers may be in his retinue ? If the sen-
tence on these men is to be pronounced by the
Proconsul,' or by both of you together, and if
he perchance insist upon inflicting capital pun-
ishment, although he is a Christian and, so far
as we have had opportunity of observing, not
disposed to such severity — if, I say, his delfcr-
mination make it necessary, order those letters
of mine, which I deemed it my duty to address
to you severally on this subject,^ to be brought
before you while the trial is still going on ; for
j I am accustomed to hear that it is in the power
of the judge to mitigate the sentence, and in-
, flict a milder penalty than the law prescribes.
If, however, notwithstanding these letters from
me, he refuse to grant this request, let him at
least allow that the men be remanded for a time ;
and we will endeavour to obtain this concession
from the clemency of the Emperors, so that the
sufferings of the martyrs, which ought to shed
bright glory on the Church, may not be tar-
nished by the blood of their enemies ; for I
know that in the case of the clergy in the val-


' Apringius. See note, p. 471.

» Letters CXXXIII. and CXXXIV.


ley of Anaunia,3 who were slain by the Pagans,
and are now honoured as martyrs, the Emperor
granted readily a petition that the murderers,
who had been discovered and imprisoned, might
not be visited with a capital punishment.

3. As to the books concerning the baptism of
infants, of which I had sent the original manu-
script to your Excellency, I have forgotten for
what reason I received them again from you ;
unless, perhaps, it was that, after examining
them, I found them faulty, and wished to make
some corrections, which, by reason of extraor-
dinary hindrances, I have not yet been able to
overtake. I must also confess that the letter
intended to be addressed to you and added to
these books, and which I had begun to dictate
when I was with you, is still unfinished, little
having been added to it since that time. If,
however, I could set before you a statement of
the toil which it is absolutely necessary for me
to devote, both by day and by night, to other
duties, you would deeply sympathize with me,
and would be astonished at the amount of busi-
ness not admitting of delay which distracts my
mind and hinders me from accomplishing those
things to which you urge me in entreaties and
admonitions, addressed to one most willing to
oblige you, and inexpressibly grieved that it is
beyond his power ; for when I obtain a little
leisure from the urgent necessary business of
those men, who so press me into their service ■*
that I am neither able to escape them nor at
liberty to neglect them, there are always subjects
to which I must, in dictating to my amanuenses,
give the first place, because they are so con-
nected with the present hour as not to admit of
being postponed. Of such things one instance
was the abridgement of the proceedings at our
Conference, 5 a work involving much labour, but
necessary, because I saw that no one would
attempt the perusal of such a mass of writing ;
another was a letter to the Donatist laity ^ con-
cerning the said Conference, a document which
I have just completed, after labouring at it for
several nights ; another was the composition of
two long letters,^ one addressed to yourself, my
beloved friend, the other to the illustrious Volu-
sianus, which I suppose you both have received ;
another is a book, with which I am occupied at
present, addressed to our friend Honoratus,^ in
regard to five questions proposed by him in a
letter to me, and you see that to him I was un-
questionably in duty bound to send a prompt

3 Anaunia, a valley not far from Trent, destined to be so famous
for the Council held there. In the month of May, 397 a.d., Mar-
tyrius, Sisinnius, and Alexander were killed there by the heathen.

* Angariaut. See Matt. v. 41.

5 The Conference presided over by this Marcellinus at Carthage,
in the preceding year.

6 Letter CXLI.

7 Letters CXXXVIL and CXXXVIII.

8 Letter CXL.


490


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


reply. For love deals with her sons as a nurse
does with children, devoting her attention to
them not in the order of the love felt for each,
but according to the urgency of each case ; she
gives a preference to the weaker, because she
desires to impart to them such strength as is
possessed by the stronger, whom she passes by
meanwhile not because of her slighting them,
but because her mind is at rest in regard to
them. Emergencies of this kind, compelling
me to employ my amanuenses in writing on sub-
jects which prevent me from using their pens in
work much more congenial to the ardent desires
of my heart, can never fail to occur, because I
have difficulty in obtaining even a very little
leisure, amidst the accumulation of business into
which, in spite of my own inclinations, I am
dragged by other men's wishes or necessities ;
and what I am to do, I really do not know.

4. You have heard the burdens, for my de-
liverance from which I wish you to join your
prayers with mine ; but at the same time I do
not wish you to desist from admonishing me, as
you do, with such importunity and frequency ;
your words are not without some effect. I com-
mend at the same time to your Excellency a
church planted in Numidia, on behalf of which,
in its present necessities, my holy brother and
co-bishop Delphinus has been sent by my breth-
ren and co-bishops who share the toils and the
dangers of their work in that region. I write
no more on this matter, because you will hear
all from his own lips when he comes to you.
All other necessary particulars you will find in
the letters of instruction, which are sent by me
to the presbyter either now or by the deacon
Peregrinus, so that I need not again repeat them.

May your heart be ever strong in Christ, my
lord justly distinguished, and son very much
beloved and longed for !

I commend to your Excellency our son Ruf-
finus, the Provost ' of Cirta.


LETTER CXLIIL

(a.d. 412.)

to marcellinus, my noble lord, justly dis-
tinguished, my son very much beloved,
augustin sends greeting in the lord.

I. Desiring to reply to the letter which I re-
ceived from you through our holy brother, my
co-bishop Boniface, I have sought for it, but
have not found it. I have recalled to mind,
however, that you asked me in that letter how
the magicians of Pharaoh could, after all the
water of Egypt had been turned into blood,
find any with which to imitate the miracle.


• Principalis,


There are two ways in which the question is
commonly answered : either that it was possible
for water to have been brought from the sea, or,
which is more credible, that these plagues were
not inflicted on the district in which the chil-
dren of Israel were ; for the clear, express state-
ments to this effect in some parts of that scrip-
tural narrative entitle us to assume this in places
where the statement is omitted.

2. In your other letter, brought to me by the
presbyter Urbanus, a question is proposed, taken
from a passage not in the Divine Scriptures, but
in one of my own books, namely, that which I
wrote on F7-ee Will. On questions of this kind,
however, I do not bestow much laljour ; because,
even if the statement objected to does not admit
of unanswerable vindication, it is mine only ; it
is not an utterance of that Author whose words
it is impiety to reject, even when, through our
misapprehension of their meaning, the interpre-
tation which we put on them deserves to be
rejected. I freely confess, accordingly, that I
endeavour to be one of those who write because
they have made some progress, and who, by
means of writing, make further progress. \i,
therefore, through inadvertence or want of knowl-
edge, anything has been stated by me which may
with good reason be condemned, not only by
others who are able to discover this, but also by
myself (for if I am making progress, I ought,
at least after it has been pointed out, to see it),
such a mistake is not to be regarded with surprise
or grief, but rather forgiven, and made the occa-
sion of congratulating me, not, of course, on
having erred, but on having renounced an error.
For there is an extravagant perversity in the
self-love of the man who desires other men to
be in error, that the fact of his having erred may
not be discovered. How much better and more
profitable is it that in the points in which he
hsft erred others should not err, so that he may
be delivered from his error by their advice, or,
if he refuse this, may at least have no followers
in his error. For, if God permit me, as I desire,
to gather together and point out, in a work de-
voted to this express purpose, all the things which
most justly displease me in my books, men will
then see how far I am from being a partial judge
in my own case.

3. As for you, however, who love me warmly,
if, in opposing those by whom, whether through
malice or ignorance or superior intelligence, I
am censured, you maintain the position that I
have nowhere in my writings made a mistake,
you labour in a hopeless enterprise — you have
undertaken a bad cause, in which, even if I my-
self were judge, you must be easily worsted ; for
it is no pleasure to me that my dearest friends
should think me to be such as I am not, since
assuredly they love not me, but instead of me


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


491


another under my name, if they love not what
I am, but what I am not ; for in so far as they
know me, or beheve what is true concerning me,
I am loved by them ; but in so far as they ascribe
to me what they do not know to be in me, they
love another person, such as they suppose me
to be. Cicero, the prince of Roman orators,
says of some one, " He never uttered a word
which he would wish to recall." This commen-
dation, though it seems to be the highest possi-
ble, is nevertheless more likely to be true of a
consummate fool than of a man perfectly wise ;
for it is true of idiots," that the more absurd and
foolish they arc, and the more their opinions
diverge from those universally held, the more
likely are they to utter no word which they will
wish to recall ; for to regret an evil, or foolish,
or ill-timed word is characteristic of a wise man.
If, however, the words quoted are taken in a
good sense, as intended to make us believe that
some one was such that, by reason of his speak-
ing all things wisely, he never uttered any word
which he would wish to recall, — this we are, m
accordance with sound piety, to believe rather
concerning men of God, who spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, than concerning the
man whom Cicero commends. For my part, so
far am I from this excellence, that if I have
uttered no word which I would wish to recall, it
must be because I resemble more the idiot than
the wise man. The man whose writings are
most worthy of the highest authority is he who
has uttered no word, I do not say which it would
be his desire, but which it would be his duty to
recall. Let him that has not attained to this
occupy the second rank through his humility,
since he cannot take the first rank through his
wisdom. Since he has been unable, with all his
care, to exclude every expression whose use may
be justly regretted, let him acknowledge his re-
gret for anything which, as he may now have
discovered, ought not to have been said.

4. Since, therefore, the words spoken by me
which I would if I could recall, are not, as my very
dear friends suppose, few or none, but perhaps
even more than my enemies imagine, I am not
gratified by such commendation as Cicero's sen-
tence, "He never uttered a word which he would
wish to recall," but I am deeply distressed by
the saying of Horace, "The word once uttered
cannot be recalled."' This is the reason why I
keep beside me, longer than you wish or patiently
bear, the books which I have written on difficult
and important questions on the book of Genesis
and the doctrine of the Trinity, hoping that, if it
be impossible to avoid having some things which
may deservedly be found fault with, the number
of these may at least be smaller than it might

' Qtios vulgo mortP7ics z'ocant.
* Nescit vox missa rezerii.


have been, if, through impatient haste, the works
had been published without due deliberation ;
for you, as your letters indicate (our holy brother
and co-bishop Florentius having written me to
this effect), are urgent for the publication of
these works now, in order that they may be
defended in my own lifetime by myself, when,
perhaps, they may begin to be assailed in some
particulars, either through the cavilling of ene-
mies or the misapprehensions of friends. You say
this doubtless because you think there is nothing
in them which might with justice be censured,
othenvise you would not exhort me to publish
the books, but rather to revise them more care-
fully. But I fix my eye rather on those who are
true judges, sternly impartial, between whom and
myself I wish, in the first place, to make sure of
my ground, so that the only faults coming to be
censured by them maybe those which it was im-
possible for me to observe, though using the most
diligent scrutiny.

5. Notwithstanding what I have just said, I am
prepared to defend the sentence in the third
book of my treatise on Free Will, in which, dis-
coursing on the rational substance, I have ex-
pressed my opinion in these words : " The soul,
appointed to occupy a body inferior in nature to
itself after the entrance of sin, governs its own
body, not absolutely according to its free will, but
only in so far as the laws of the universe permit."

j I bespeak the particular attention of those who
, think that I have here fixed and defined, as ascer-
i tained concerning the human soul, either that it
comes by propagation from the parents, or that
it has, through sins committed in a higher celes-
tial Hfe, incurred the penalty of being shut up in
a corruptible body. Let them, I say, observe
: that the words in question have been so careful-
ly weighed by me, that while they hold fast what
; I regard as certain, namely, that after the sin of
the first man, all other men have been born and
continue to be born in that sinful flesh, for the
healing of which "the likeness of sinful flesh "3
came in the person of the Lord, they are also so
chosen as not to pronounce upon any one of
those four opinions which I have in the sequel
expounded and distinguished — not attempting
to establish any one of them as preferable to
\ the others, but disposing in the meantime of the
matter under discussion, and reserving the con-
sideration of these opinions, so that whichever
of them may be true, praise should unhesitating-
ly be given to God.

6. For whether all souls are derived by propaga-
tion from the first, or are in the case of each in-
dividual specially created, or being created apart
from the body are sent into it, or introduce them-
selves into it of their own accord, without doubt

3 Rom. viu. 3.


492


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


this creature endowed with reason, namely, the
human soul — appointed to occupy an inferior,
that is, an earthly body — after the entrance of
sin, does not govern its own body absolutely ac-
cording to its free will.' For I did not say,
"after his sin," or "after he sinned," but after
the entrance of sin, that whatever might after-
wards, if possible, be determined by reason as to
the question whether the sin was his own or the
sin of the first parent of mankind, it might be per-
ceived that in saying that " the soul, appointed,
after the entrance of sin, to occupy an inferior
body, does not govern its body absolutely accord-
ing to its own free will," I stated what is true ;
for " the fiesh lusteth against the spirit,^ and in
this we groan, being burdened," ^ and " the cor-
ruptible body weighs down the soul," * — in short,
who can enumerate all the evils arising from the
infirmity of the flesh, which shall assuredly cease
when " this corruptible shall have put on incor-
ruption," so that " that which is mortal shall be
swallowed up of life " ?5 In that future condition,
therefore, the soul shall govern its spiritual body
with absolute freedom of will ; but in the mean-
time its freedom is not absolute, but conditioned
by the laws of the universe, accordmg to which
it is fixed, that bodies having experienced birth
experience death, and having grown to maturity
decline in old age. For the soul of the first man
did, before the entrance of sin, govern his body
with perfect freedom of will, although that body
was not yet spiritual, but animal ; but after the
entrance of sin, that is, after sin had been com-
mitted in that flesh from which sinful flesh was
thenceforward to be propagated, the reasonable
soul is so appointed to occupy an inferior body,
that it does not govern its body wtih absolute
freedom of will. That infant children, even be-
fore they have committed any sin of their own,
are partakers of sinful flesh, is, in my opinion,
proved by their requiring to have it healed in
them also, by the application in their baptism of
the remedy provided in Him who came in the
likeness of sinful flesh. But even those who do
not acquiesce in this view have no just ground
for taking offence at the sentence quoted from
my book ; for it is certain, if I am not mistaken,
that even if the infirmity be the consequence not
of sin, but of nature, it was at all events only
after the entrance of sin that bodies having this
infirmity began to be produced ; for Adam was
not created thus, and he did not beget any off-
spring before he sinned.

7. Let my critics, therefore, seek other pas-
sages to censure, not only in my other more


' The text being here obscure, we have followed the MSS., which
omit the words, " interim quod constat peccatum priml hominis."
- Gal. V. 17.
3 2 Cor. V. 4.
* Wisd. ix. 15.
S I Cor. XV. 53.


hastily published works, but also in these books
of mine on J^ree Will. For I by no means deny
that they may in this search discover opportuni-
ties of conferring a benefit on me ; for if the
books, having passed into so many hands, can-
not now be corrected, I myself may, being still
alive. Those words, however, so carefully se-
lected by me to avoid committing myself to any
one of the four opinions or theories regarding
the soul's origin, are hable to censure only from
those who think that my hesitation as to any defi-
nite view in a matter so obscure is blameworthy ;
against whom I do not defend myself by saying
that I think it right to pronounce no opinion
whatever on the subject, seeing that I have no
doubt either that the soul is immortal — not in the
same sense in which God is immortal, who alone
hath immortality,'^ but in a certain way peculiar
to itself — or that the soul is a creature and not
a part of the substance of the Creator, or as to
any other thing which I regard as most certain
concerning its nature. But seeing that the ob-
scurity of this most mysterious subject, the origin
of the soul, compels me to do as I have done,
let them rather stretch out a friendly hand to
me, confessing my ignorance, and desiring to
know whatever is the truth on the subject ; and
let them, if they can, teach or demonstrate to
me what they may either have learned by the
exercise of sound reason, or have believed on
indisputably plain testimony of the divine ora-
cles. For if reason be found contradicting the
authority of Divine Scriptures, it only deceives
by a semblance of truth, however acute it be, for
its deductions cannot in that case be true. On
the other hand, if, against the most manifest and
reliable testimony of reason, anything be set up
claiming to have the authority of the Holy Scrip-
tures, he who does this does it through a misap-
prehension of what he has read, and is setting
up against the truth not the real meaning of
Scripture, which he has failed to discover, but
an opinion of his own ; he alleges not what he
has found in the Scriptures, but what he has
found in himself as their interpreter.

8. Let me give an example, to which I solicit
your earnest attention. In a passage near the
end of Ecclesiastes, where the author is speak-
ing of man's dissolution through death separat-
ing the soul from the body, it is written, " Then
shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and
the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." ^
A statement having the authority on which this
one is based is true beyond all dispute, and is
not intended to deceive any one ; yet if any one
wishes to put upon it such an interpretation as
may help him in attempting to support the the-
ory of the propagation of souls, according to

6 I Tim. vi. 16.
' Eccles. xii. 7.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


493


which all other souls are derived from that one
which (iod gave to the first man, what is there
said concerning the body under the name of
" dust " (for obviously nothing else than body
and soul are to be understood by " dust " and
"spirit" in this passage) seems to favour his
view ; for he may affirm that the soul is said
to return to God because of its being derived
from the original stock of that soul which God
gave to the first man, in the same way as the
body is said to return to the dust because of its
being derived from the original stock of that
body which was made of dust in the first man,
and therefore may argue that, from what we
know perfectly as to the body, we ought to be-
lieve what is hidden from our observation as to
the soul ; for there is no difference of opinion as
to the original stock of the body, but there is
as to the original stock of the soul. In the text
thus brought forward as a proof, statements are
made concerning both, as if the manner of the
return of each to its original was precisely simi-
lar in both, — the body, on the one hand, re-
turning to the earth as it was, for thence was it
taken when the first man was formed ; the soul,
on the other hand, returning to God, for He
gave it when He breathed into the nostrils of the
man whom He had formed the breath of life,
and he became a living soul,' so that thencefor-
ward the propagation of each part should go on
from the corresponding part in the parent.

9. If, however, the true account of the soul's
origin be, that God gives to each individual man
a soul, not propagated from that first soul, but
created m some other way, the statement that the
*' spirit returns to God who gave it," is equally
consistent with this view. The two other opin-
ions regarding the soul's origin are, then, the
only ones which seem to be excluded by this
text. For in the first place, as to the opinion
every man's soul is made separately within
at the time of his creation, it is supposed
that, if this were the case, the soul should have
been spoken of as returning, not to God who |
gave it, but to God who made it ; for the word I
'• gave " seems to imply that that which could {
be given had already a separate existence. The
words " returneth to God " are further insisted
upon by some, who say, How could it return to
a place where it had never been before ? Ac-
cordingly they maintain that, if the soul is to be
believed to have never been with God before,
the words should have been " it goes," or " goes
on," or " goes away," rather than it " returns " !
to God. In like manner, as to the opinion that
each soul glides of its own accord into its body, 1
it is not easy to explain how this theory is recon- j
cilable with the statement that God gave it.


that
him


The words of this scriptural passage are conse-
quently somewhat adverse to these two opinions,
namely, the one which supposes each soul to be
created in its own body, and the one which sup-
poses each soul to introduce itself into its own
body spontaneously. But there is no difficulty
in showing that the words are consistent with
either of the other two opinions, namely, that
all souls are derived by propagation from the
one first created, or that, having been created
and kept in readiness wnth God, they are given
to each body as required.

10. Nevertheless, even if the theory that each
soul is created in its own body may not be
wholly excluded by this text, — for if its advo-
cates affirm that God is here said to have given
the spirit (or the soul) in the same way as He
is said to have given us eyes, ears, hands, or other
such members, which were not made elsewhere
by Him, and kept in store that He might give
them, i.e. add and join them to our bodies, but
are made by Him in that body to which He is
said to have given them, — I do not see what
could be said in reply, unless, perchance, the
opinion could be refuted, either by other pas-
sages of Scripture, or by valid reasoning. In like
manner, those who think that each soul flows of
its own accord into its body take the words
" God gave it " in the sense in which it is said,
" He gave them up to uncleanness, through the
lusts of their own hearts."^ Only one word,
therefore, remains apparently irreconcilable with
the theory that each soul is made in its own
body, namely, the word " returneth," in the ex-
pression " returneth to God ; " for in what sense
can the soul return to Him with whom it has
not formerly been? By this one word alone are
the supporters of this one of the four opinions
embarrassed. And yet I do not think that this
opinion ought to be held as refuted by this one
word, for it may be possible to show that in
the ordinary style of scriptural language it may
be quite correct to use the word " return," as
signifying the spirit created by God returns to
Him not because of its having been with Him
before its union with the body, but because of
its having received being from His creative
power.

11. I have written these things in order to
show that whoever is disposed to maintain and
vindicate any one of these four theories of the
soul's origin, must bring forward, either from the
Scriptures received into ecclesiastical authority,
passages which do not admit of any other in-
terpretation, — as the statement that God made
man, — or reasonings founded on premises so
obviously true that to call them in question
would be madness, such as the statement that


' Gen.


It. 7.


Rom. L 24.


494


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


none but the living are capable of knowledge or
of error ; for a statement like this does not re-
quire the authority of Scripture to prove its truth,
as if the common sense of mankind did not of
itself announce its truth with such transparent
cogency of reason, that whoever contradicts it
must be held to be hopelessly mad. If any one
is able to produce such arguments in discussing
the very obscure question of the soul's origin,
let him helj) me in my ignorance ; but if he can-
not do this, let him forbear from blaming my
hesitation on the question.

12. As to the virginity of the Holy Mary, if
what I have written on this subject does not
suffice to prove that it was possible, we must re-
fuse to believe every record of anything miracu-
lous having taken place in the body of any. If,
however, the objection to believing this miracle
is, that it happened only once, ask the friend
who is still perplexed by this, whether instances
may not be quoted from secular literature of
events which were, like this one, unique, and
which, nevertheless, are believed, not merely as
fables are believed by the simple, but with that
faith with which the history of facts is received
— ask him, I beseech you, this question. For
if he says that nothing of this kind is to be
found in these writings, he ought to have such
instances pointed out to him ; if he admits this,
the question is decided by his admission.


LETTER CXLIV.

(a.d. 412.)

to my honourable and justly esteemed lords,
the inhabitants of cirta, of all ranks,
brethren dearly beloved and longed for,
bishop augustin sends greeting.

I. If that which greatly distressed me in your
town has now been removed ; if the obduracy
of hearts which resisted most evident and, as
we might call it, notorious truth, has by the force
of truth been overcome ; if the sweetness of
peace is relished, and the love which tends to
unity is the occasion no longer of pain to eyes
diseased, but of light and vigour to eyes restored
to health, — this is God's work, not ours ; on
no account would I ascribe these results to hu-
man efforts, even had such a remarkable conver-
sion of your whole community taken place when
I was with you, and in connection with my own
preaching and exhortations. The operation and
the success are His who, by His servants, calls
men's attention outwardly by the signs of things,
and Himself teaches men inwardly by the things
themselves. The fact, however, that whatever
praiseworthy change has been wTought among ,
you is to be ascribed not to us, but to Him who i


alone doeth wonderful works,' is no reason for
our being more reluctant to be persuaded to
visit you. For we ought to hasten much more
readily to see the works of God than our own
works, for we ourselves also, if we be of service
in any work, owe this not to men but to Him ;
wherefore the apostle says, " Neither is he that
planteth anything, neither he that watereth : but
God that giveth the increase." ^

2. You allude in your letter to a fact which I
also remember from classic literature, that by
discoursing on the benefits of temperance, Xen-
ocrates suddenly converted Polemo from a dissi-
pated to a sober life, though this man was not
only habitually intemperate, but was actually in-
toxicated at the time. Now although this was,
as you have wisely and truthfully apprehended,
a case not of conversion to God, but of emanci-
pation from the thraldom of self-indulgence, I
would not ascribe even the amount of improve-
ment wrought in him to the work of man, but
to the work of God. For even in the body,
the lowest part of our nature, all excellent
things, such as beauty, vigour, health, and so on,
are the work of God, to whom nature owes its
creation and perfection ; how much more cer-
tain, therefore, must it be that no other can
impart excellent properties to the soul ! For
what imagination of human folly could be more
full of pride and ingratitude than the notion
that, although God alone can give comeliness to
the body, it belongs to man to give purity to the
soul? It is written in the book of Christian
Wisdom, " I perceived that no one can have
self-restraint unless God give it to him, and that
this is a part of true wisdom to know whose
gift it is." 3 If, therefore, Polemo, when he ex-
changed a life of dissipation for a life of sobri-
ety, had so understood whence the gift came,
that, renouncing the superstitions of the heathen,
he had rendered worship to the Divine Giver,
he would then have become not only temperate,
but truly wise and savingly religious, which would
have secured to him not merely the practice of
virtue in this life, but also the possession of im-
mortality in the life to come. How much less,
then, should I presume to take to myself the
honour of your conversion, or of that of your
people which you have now reported to me,
which, when I was neither speaking to you nor
even present with you, was accomplished un-
questionably by divine power in all in whom it
has really taken place. This, therefore, know
above all things, meditate on this with devout
humility. To God, my brethren, to God give
thanks. Fear Him, that ye may not go back-
ward : love Him, that ye may go forward.^

• Ps. Ixxii. 18.

2 I Cor. iii. 7.

3 W'isd. viii. 21.

■t Deutn tiinete tie de/iciatis, amate ut proficiatis.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


495


3. If, however, love of men still keeps some
secretly alienated from the flock of Christ, while
fear of other men constrains them to a feigned
reconciliation, I charge all such to consider that
before God the conscience of man has no cov-
ering, and that they can neither impose on Him
as a Witness, nor escape from Him as a Judge.
But if, by reason of anxiety as to their own.salva-
tion, anything as to the question of the unity of
Christ's flock perplex them, let them make this
demand upon themselves, — and it seems to me
a most just demand, — that in regard to the
Catholic Church, i.e. the Church spread abroad
over the whole world, they believe rather the
words of Divine Scripture than the calumnies of
human tongues. Moreover, with respect to the
schism which has arisen among men (who as-
suredly, whatsoever diey may be, do not frus-
trate the promises of God to Abraham, "In
thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed," ' — promises believed when brought to
their ears as a prophecy, but denied, forsooth,
when set before their eyes as an accomplished
fact), let them meanwhile ponder this one very '■
brief, but, if I mistake not, unanswerable argu-
ment: the question out of which the dispute
arose either has or has not been tried before
ecclesiastical tribunals beyond the sea ; if it has
not been tried before these, then no guilt in this
matter is chargeable on the whole flock of Christ
in the nations beyond the sea, in communion
with which we rejoice, and therefore their sepa-
ration from these guiltless communities is an act
of impious schism ; if, on the other hand, the
question has been tried before the tribunal of
these churches, who does not understand and
feel, nay, who does not see, that those whose
communion is now separated from these churches
were the party defeated in the trial? Let them
therefore choose to whom they should prefer
to give credence, whether to the ecclesiastical
judges who decided the question, or to the com-
plaints of the vanquished litigants. Observe
wisely how impossible it is for them reasonably
to answer this brief and most intelligible di-
lemma; nevertheless, it were easier to turn
Polemo from a life of intemperance, than to
drive them out of the madness of inveterate
error.

Pardon me, my noble and worthy lords, breth-
ren most dearly beloved and longed for, for
writing you a letter more prolix than agreeable,
but fitted, as I think, to benefit rather than to
flatter you. As to my coming to you, may God
fulfil the desire which we both equally cherish !
For I cannot express in words, but I am sure
you will gladly believe, with what fervour of love
I burn to see you.


LETTER CXLV.
(a.d. 412 or 413.)

TO ANASTASIUS, MY HOLY AND BELOVED LORD AND
BROTHER, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING IN THE
LORD.

I. A most satisfactory opportunity of saluting
your genuine worth is lurnished by our brethren
Lupicinus and Concordialis, honourable servants
of God, from whom, even without my writing,
I you might learn all that is going on among us
here. But knowing, as I do, how much you
love us in Christ, because of your knowing how
warmly your love is reciprocated by us in Him,
I was sure that it might have disappointed you
if you had seen them, and could not but know
that they had come directly from us, and were
most intimately united in friendship with us, and
yet had received with them no letter from me.
Besides this, I am owing you a reply, for I am
not aware of having written to you since I re-
ceived your last letter ; so great are the cares by
which I am encumbered and distracted, that I
know not whether I have written or not before
now.


Gen.


2. We desire eagerly to know how you are,
and whether the Lord has given you some rest,
so far as in this world He can bestow it; for
" if one member be honoured, all the members
rejoice with it;"^ and so it is almost always
our experience, that when, in the midst of our
anxieties, we turn our thoughts to some of our
brethren placed in a condition of comparative
rest, we are in no small measure revived, as if
in them we ourselves enjoyed a more peaceful
and tranquil life. At the same time, when vexa-
tious cares are multiplied in this uncertain life,
they compel us to long for the everlasting rest.
For this world is more dangerous to us in pleas-
ant than in painful hours, and is to be guarded
against more when it allures us to love it than
when it warns and constrains us to despise it.
For although " all that is in the wodd " is " the
lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life," 3 nevertheless, even in the
case of men who prefer to these the things
which are spiritual, unseen, and eternal, the
sweetness of earthly things insinuates itself into
our affections, and accompanies our steps on the
path of duty with its seductive allurements. For
the violence with which present things acquire
sway over our weakness is exactly proportioned
to the superior value by which future things
command our love. And oh that those who
have learned to observe and bewail this may
succeed in overcoming and escaping from this
power of terrestrial things ! Such victory and


- I Cor. xii. 26.
^ I John li. 16.


496


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


emancipation cannot, without God's grace, be
achieved by the human will, which is by no
means to be called free so long as it is subject
to prevailing and enslaving lusts ; " For of whom
a man is overcome, of the same is he brought
in bondage." ' And the Son of God has Him-
self said, " If the Son shall make you free, ye
shall be free indeed." ^

3, The law, therefore, by teaching and com-
manding what cannot be fulfilled without grace,
demonstrates to man his weakness, in order that
the weakness thus proved may resort to the Sa-
viour, by whose healing the will may be able to
do what in its feebleness it found impossible.
So, then, the law brings us to faith, faith obtains
the Spirit in fuller measure, the Spirit sheds love
abroad in us, and love fulfils the law. For this
reason the law is called a "schoolmaster," ^ under
whose threatenings and severity "whosoever shall
call upon the name of the Lord shall be deliv-
ered." ■* But how shall they call on Him in
whom they have not believed ? " s Wherefore
unto them that believe and call on Him the
quickening Spirit is given, lest the letter without
the Spirit should kill them.^ But by the Holy
Ghost, which is given unto us, the love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts, ? so that the words
of the same apostle, " Love is the fulfilling of
the law,"^ are realized. So the law is good to
the man who uses it lawfully ; ^ and he uses it
lawfully who, understanding wherefore it was
given, betakes himself, under the pressure of its
threatenings, to grace, which sets him free.
Whoever unthankfuUy despises this grace, by
which the ungodly are justified, and trusts in his
own strength, as if he thereby could fulfil the
law, being ignorant of God's righteousness, and
going about to establish his own righteousness,
is not submitting himself to the righteousness of
God ; '° and thus the law becomes to him not a
help to pardon, but the bond fastening his guilt
to him. Not that the law is evil, but because
sin worketh death in such persons by that which
is good." For by occasion of the command-
ment he sins more grievously who, by the com-
mandment, knows how evil are the sins which
he commits.

4. In vain, however, does any one think him-
self to have gained the victory over sin, if,
through nothing but fear of punishment, he re-
frains from sin ; because, although the outward
action to which an evil desire prompts him is


' 2 Pet. ii. 19.
^ John viii. 36.
3 Gal. iii. 24.
* Joel ii. 32.
5 Rom. X. 14.
^ 2 Cor. iii. 6.
^ Rom. V. 5.

8 Rom. xiii. 10.

9 I Tim. i. 8.

10 Rom X. 3.
'' Rom. vii. 13.


not performed, the evil desire itself within the
man is an enemy unsubdued. And who is found
innocent in God's sight who is willing to do
the sin which is forbidden if you only remove the
punishment which is feared? And consequent-
ly, even in the volition itself, he is guilty of sin
who wishes to do what is unlawful, but refrains
from doing it because it cannot be done with
impunity ; for, so far as he is concerned, he
would prefer that there were no righteousness
forbidding and punishing sins. And assuredly,
if he would prefer that there should be no right-
eousness, who can doubt that he would if he
could abolish it altogether? How, then, can
that man be called righteous who is such an
enemy to righteousness that, if he had the
power, he would abolish its authority, that he
might not be subject to its threatenings or its
penalties? He, then, is an enemy to righteous-
ness who refrains from sin only through fear of
punishment ; but he will become the friend of
righteousness if through love of it he sin not,
for then he will be really afraid to sin. For the
man who only fears the flames of hell is afraid
not of sinning, but of being burned ; but the
man who hates sin as much as he hates hell is
afraid to sin. This is the " fear of the Lord,"
which " is pure, enduring for ever." "^ For the
fear of punishment has torment, and is not in
love ; and love, when it is perfect, casts it out. "^
5. Moreover, every one hates sin just in pro-
portion as he loves righteousness ; which he will
be enabled to do not through the law putting
him in fear by the letter of its prohibitions, but
by the Spirit healing him by grace. Then that
is done which the apostle enjoins in the admoni-
tion, " I speak after the manner of men because of
the infirmity of your flesh : for as ye have yielded
your members servants to uncleanness and to in-
iquity unto iniquity, even so now yield your mem-
bers servants to righteousness unto holiness." ''♦
For what is the force of the conjunctions " as "
and " even so," if it be not this : " As no fear
compelled you to sin, but the desire for it, and
the pleasure taken in sin, even so let not the fear
of punishment drive you to a life of righteous-
ness ; but let the pleasure found in righteousness
and the love you bear to it draw you to prac-
tise it "? And even this is, as it seems to me, a
righteousness, so to speak, somewhat mature,
but not perfect. For he would not have pref-
aced the admonition with the words, " I speak
after the manner of men because of the infirmity
of your flesh," had there not been something
else that ought to have been said if they had
been by that time able to bear it. For surely
more devoted service is due to righteousness


12 Ps. xix. 9.
'3 1 John iv. i8.
'■♦ Rom. vi. 19.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


497


than men are wont to yield to sin. For pain of
body restrains men, if not from the desire of sin,
at least from the commission of sinful actions ;
and we should not easily find anyone who would
openly commit a sin procuring to him an impure
and unlawful gratification, if it was certain that
the penalty of torture would immediately follow
the crime. But righteousness ought to be so
loved that not even bodily sufferings should hin-
der us from doing its works, but that, even when
we are in the hands of cruel enemies, our good
works should so shine before men that those who
are capable of taking pleasure therein may glo-
rify our Father who is in heaven."

6. Hence it comes that that most devoted
lover of righteousness exclaims, " Who shall sep-
arate us from the love of Christ? shall tribula-
tion, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword ? (As it is written,
For Thy sake we are killed all the day long ; w-e
are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.) Nay,
in all these things we are more than conquerors
through Him that loved us. For I am per-
suaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels,
nor principalities, nor pow-ers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord." ^ Observe how he does not say sim-
ply, " ^Vho shall separate us from Christ? " but,
indicating that by which we cling to Christ, he
says, " Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? " We cling to Christ, then, by love, not
by fear of punishment. Again, after having
enumerated those things which seem to be suffi-
ciently fierce, but have not sufficient force to
effect a separation, he has, in the conclusion,
called that the love of God which he had pre-
viously spoken of as the love of Christ. And
what is this " love of Christ " but love of right-
eousness? for it is said of Him that He "is
made of God unto us wisdom, and righteous-
ness, and sanctification, and redemption : that,
according as it is written. He that glorieth, let him
glory in the Lord." ^ As, therefore he is super-
latively wicked who is not deterred even by the
penalty of bodily sufferings from the vile works
of sordid pleasure, so is he superlatively right-
eous who is not restrained even by the fear of
bodily sufferings from the holy works of most
glorious love.

7. This love of God, which must be maintained
by unremitting, devout meditation, " is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which
is given to us," ■♦ so that he who glories in it must
glory in the Lord. Forasmuch, therefore, as we


« Matt. V. 16.

^ Rom. viii. 35-39.

3 I Cor. i. 30, 31; Jer. ix. 24.

* Rom. V. 5.


feel ourselves to be poor and destitute of that
love by which the law is most truly fulfilled, we
ought not to expect and demand its riches from
our own indigence, but to ask, seek, and knock
in prayer, that He with whom is " the fountain
of life " " may satisfy us abundantly with the
fatness of His house, and make us drink of
the river of His pleasures," 5 so that, watered and
revived by its full flood, we may not only escape
from being swallowed up by sorrow, but may
even " glory in tribulations : knowing that tribu-
lation worketh patience ; and patience, experi-
ence ; and experience, hope : and hope maketh
not ashamed ; " — not that we can do this of
ourselves, but " because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which
is given to us." ^

8. It has been a pleasure to me to say, at least
by a letter, these things which I could not say
when you were present. I write them, not
in reference to yourself, for you do not affect
high things, but are contented with that which
is lowly,7 but in reference to some who arro-
gate too much to the human will, imagining
that, the law being given, the will is of its own
strength sufficient to fulfil that law, though not
assisted by any grace imparted by the Holy
Spirit, in addition to instruction in the law ; and
by their reasonings they persuade the wretched
and impoverished weakness of man to believe
that it is not our duty to pray that we may not
enter into temptation. Not that they dare
openly to say this ; but this is, whether they
acknowledge it or not, an inevitable consequence
of their doctrine.* For wherefore is it said to
us, " Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation ; " 9 and wherefore was it that, when
He was teaching us to pray, He prescribed, in
accordance with this injunction, the use of the
petition " lead us not into temptation," '° if this
be wholly in the power of the will of man, and
does not require the help of divine grace in.
order to its accomplishment ?

\\' hy should I say more ? Salute the brethren;
who are with you, and pray for us, that we may
be sa\'ed with that salvation of which it is said,.
" They that are whole need not a physician, but
they that are sick : I came not to call the right-
eous, but sinners." " Pray, therefore, for us that
we may be righteous, — an attainment wholly
beyond a man's reach, unless he know righteous-
ness and be willing to practise it, but one which
is immediately realized when he is perfectly
willing ; but this full consent of his will can

s Ps. xxxvi. 8, g,

6 Rom. V. 3-5.

7 Rom. xii. 16.

* The heresy of Pelagius is obviously alluded to here as having
begun thus early (ad. 413) to command attention.
9 Matt. xxiv. 41.
'° Matt. vi. 13.
*' Matt. ix. 12, 13.


498


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


never be in him unless lie is healed and assisted
by the grace of the Spirit.

LETTER CXLVI.
(A.D. 413.)

TO PELAGIUS, MY LORD GREATLY BELOVED, AND
BROTHER GREATLY LONGED FOR, AUGUSTIN SENDS
GREETING IN THE LORD.

I thank you very much for your consideration
in making me glad by a letter from you, and
inform mg me of your welfare. May the Lord
recompense you with those blessings by the pos-
session of which you may be good for ever, and
may live eternally with Him who is eternal, my
lord greatly beloved, and brother greatly longed
for. Although I do not acknowledge that any-
thing in me deserves the eulogies which the
letter of your Benevolence contains concerning
me, nevertheless I cannot but be grateful for the
goodwill therein manifested towards one so in-
significant, while suggesting at the same time
that you should rather pray for me that I may j
be made by the Lord such as you suppose me
already to be.

{In another hand) May you enjoy safety and
the Lord's favour, and be mindful of us ! '

LETTER CXLVIII.
(a.d. 413.)

A LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS (cOMMONITORIUM) TO
THE HOLY BROTHER FORTUNATIANUS.^

Chap. i. — i. I write this to remind you of the
request which I made when I was with you, that
you would do me the kindness of visiting our
brother, whom we mentioned in conversation,
in order to ask him to forgive me, if he has con-
strued as a harsh and unfriendly attack upon
himself any statement made by me in a recent
letter (which I do not regret having written),
affirming that the eyes of this body cannot see
God, and never shall see Him. I added imme-
diately the reason why I made this statement,
namely, to prevent men from believing that God
Himself is corporeal and visible, as occupying a
place determined by size and by distance from
us (for the eye of this body can see nothing ex-
cept under these conditions), and to prevent
men from understanding the expression " face
to face "3 as if God were limited within the


• Pelagius made use of this letter at the Council of Diospolis, in
A.D. 415, which compelled Augustin to vindicate himself in reference
to it in his narrative of the proceedings of Pelagius. See A nti-Pela-
gian Writings, vol. 1. p. 413.

^ Fortunatianus, Bishop of Sicqua, was one of the seven bishops
selected to represent the Catholics in the Conference of Carthage with
the Donatists in 4'i. He was probably a neighbour of the bishop
who had regarded himself as aggrieved by the arguments with which
Augustin confuted some extravagant speculations of his.

3 1 Cor. xiii. 12.


members of a body. Therefore I do not regret
having made this statement, as a protest against
our forming such unworthy and profane ideas
concerning God as to think that He is not every-
where in His totality, but susceptible of division,
and distributed through localities in space ; for
such are the only objects cognizable through
these eyes of ours.

2. But if, while holding no such opinion as
this concerning God, but believing Him to be a
Spirit, unchangeable, incorporeal, present in His
whole Being everywhere, any one thinks that the
change on this body of ours (when from being a
natural body it shall become a spiritual body)
will be so great that in such a body it will be
possible for us to see a spiritual substance not
susceptible of division according to local dis-
tance or dimension, or even confined within the
limits of bodily members, but everywhere pres-
ent in its totality, I wish him to instruct me in
this matter, if what he has discovered is true ;
but if in this opinion he is mistaken, it is far less
objectionable to ascribe to the body something
that does not belong to it, than to take away
from God that which belongs to Him. And
even if that opinion be correct, it will not con-
tradict my words in that letter ; for I said that
the eyes of this body shall not see God, mean-
ing that the eyes of this body of ours can see
nothing but bodies which are separated from
them by some interval of space, for if there be
no interval, even bodies themselves cannot
through the eyes be seen by us.

3. Moreover, if our bodies shall be changed
into something so different from what they now
are as to have eyes by means of which a sub-
stance shall be seen which is not diffused through
space or confined within limits, having one part
in one place, another in another, a smaller in a
less space, a greater in a larger, but in its total-
ity spiritually present everywhere, — these bodies
shall be something very different from what they
are at present, and shall no longer be themselves,
and shall be not only freed from mortality, and
corruption, and weight, but somehow or other
shall be changed into the quality of the mind
itself, if they shall be able to see in a manner
which shall be then granted to the mind, but
which is meanwhile not granted even to
mind itself. For if, when a man's habits
changed, we say he is not the man he was, -
when our age is changed, we say that the body
is not what it was, how much more may we say
that the body shall not be the same when it shall
have undergone so great a change as not only to j
have immortal life, but also to have power to see
Him who is invisible ? Wherefore, if they shall
thus see God, it is not with the eyes of this body
that He shall be seen, because in this also it
shall not be the same body, since it has been


the
are
•if,


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


499


this opinion is, therefore, not con-
words of my letter. If, however,


changed to so great an extent in capacity and
power ; and
trary to the
the body shall be changed only to this extent,
that whereas now it is mortal, then it shall be
immortal, and whereas now it weighs down the
soul, then, devoid of weight, it shall be most
ready for every motion, but unchanged in the
faculty of seeing objects which are discerned by
their dimensions and distances, it will still be ut-
terly impossible for it to see a substance that is
incorporeal and is in its totality present every-
where. \Vhether, therefore, the former or the
latter supposition be correct, in both cases it re-
mains true that the eyes of this body shall not
see God ; or if they are to see Him, they shall
not be the eyes of /his body, since after so great
a change they shall be the eyes of a body very
different from this.

4. But if this brother is able to propound any-
thing better on this subject, I am ready to learn
either from himself or from his instructor. If I
were saying this ironically, I would also say that
I am prepared to learn concerning God that He
has a body having members, and is divisible in
different localities in space ; which I do not say,
because I am not speaking ironically, and I am
perfectly certain that God is not in any respect
of such a nature ; and I wrote that letter to pre-
vent men from believing Him to be such. In
that letter, being carried away by my zeal to
warn against error, and writing more freely be-
cause I did not name the person whose views I
assailed, I was too vehement and not sufficiently
guarded, and did not consider as I ought to have
done the respect which was due by one brother
and bishop to the office of another : this I do
not defend, but blame ; this I condemn rather
than excuse, and beg that it may be forgiven.
I entreat him to remember our old friendship,
and forget my recent offence. Let him do that
which he is displeased with me for not having
done ; let him exhibit in granting pardon the
gentleness which I have failed to show in writing
that letter. I thus ask, through your kindly me-
diation, what I had resoh-ed to ask of him in per-
son if I had had an opportunity. I indeed made
an effort to obtain an interview with him (a ven-
erable man, worthy of being honoured by us all,
writing to request it in my name), but he de-
clined to come, suspecting, I suppose, that, as
very often happens among men, some plot was
prepared against him. Of my absolute inno-
cence of such guile, I beg you to do your utmost
to assure him, which by seeing him personally
you can more easily do. State to him with what
deep and genuine grief I conversed with you
about my having hurt his feelings. Let him
know how far I am from slighting him, how
much in him I fear God, and am mindful of


our Head in whose body we are brethren. My
reason for thinking it better not to go to the
place in which he resides was, that we might not
make ourselves a laughing-stock to those with-
out the pale of the Church, thereby bringing grief
to our friends and shame to ourselves. All this
may be satisfactorily arranged through the good
offices of your Holiness and Charity ; nay, rather,
the satisfactory issue is in the hands of Him who,
by the faith which is His gift, dwells in your
heart, whom I am confident that our brother
does not refuse to honour in you, since he knows
Christ experimentally as dwelling in himself.

5. I, at all events, do not know what I
could do better in this case than ask pardon
from the brother who has complained that he
was wounded by the harshness of my letter.
He will, I hope, do what he knows to be en-
joined on him by Him who, speaking through
the apostle, says : " Forgiving one another, if
any man have a quarrel against any : even as
God in Christ has forgiven you ; " ' " Be ye
therefore followers of God, as dear children ;
and walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us." ^
Walking in this love, let us inquire with oneness
of heart, and, if possible, with yet greater dili-
gence than hitherto, into the nature of the spiritual
body which we shall have after our resurrection.
" And if in anything we be diversely minded,
God shall reveal even this unto us," ^ if we abide
in Him. Now he who dwelleth in love dvvelleth
in God, for "God is love,"-* — whether as the
fountain of love in its inefiable essence, or as
the fountain whence He freely gives it to us by
His Spirit. If, then, it can be shown that love
can at any time become visible to our bodily
eyes, then we grant that possibly God shall be so
too ; but if love never can become visible, much
less can He who is Himself its Fountain or
whatever other figurative name more excellent
or more appropriate can be employed in speak-
ing of One so great.

Chap. ii. — 6. Some men of great gifts, and
very learned in the Holy Scriptures, who have,
when an opportunity presented itself, done much
by their writings to benefit the Church and pro-
mote the instruction of believers, have said that
the invisible God is seen in an invisible manner,
that is, by that nature which in us also is invisi-
ble, namely, a pure mind or heart. The holy
Ambrose, when speaking of Christ as the Word,
says : " Jesus is seen not by the bodily, but by
the spiritual eyes ; " and shortly after he adds :
" The Jews saw Him not, for their foolish heart
was blinded," 5 showing in this way how Christ
is seen. Also, when he was speaking of the

* Col. iii. 13.

2 Eph. V. I, 2.

3 Phil. iii. 15, 16.

* I John iv. 16.

5 Ambrosius, Lib. i. in Luc. c. L


500


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


Holy Spirit, he introduced the words of the
Lord, saying : " I will pray the Father, and He
shall give you another Comforter, that He may
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth ;
whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth
Him not, neither knoweth Him ; " ' and adds :
"With good reason, therefore, did He show
Himself in the body, since in the substance of
His Ciodhead He is not seen. We have seen
the Spirit, but in a bodily form : let us see the
Father also ; but since we cannot see Him, let
us hear Him." A little after he says : " Let us
hear the Father, then, for the Father is invisible;
but the Son also is invisible as regards His God-
head, for ' no man hath seen God at any time ; ' ^
and since the Son is God, He is certainly not
seen in that in which He is God." ^

7. The holy Jerome also says: "The eye of
man cannot see God as He is in His own na-
ture ; and this is true not of man only ; neither
angels, nor thrones, nor powers, nor principali-
ties, nor any name which is named can see God,
for no creature can see its Creator." By these
words this very learned man sufficiently shows
what his opinion was on this subject in regard
not only to the present life, but also to that
which is to come. For however much the eyes
of our body may be changed for the better, they
shall only be made equal to the eyes of the
angels. Here, however, Jerome has affirmed
that the nature of the Creator is invisible even
to the angels, and to every creature without ex-
ception in heaven. If, however, a question arise
on this point, and a doubt is expressed whether
we shall not be superior to the angels, the mind
of the Lord Himself is plain from the words
which He uses in speaking of those who shall
rise again to the kingdom : " They shall be equal
unto the angels." ■♦ Whence the same holy Jer-
ome thus expresses himself in another passage :
" Man, therefore, cannot see the face of God,
but the angels of the least in the Church do
always behold the face of God. 5 And now we
see as in a mirror darkly, in a riddle, but then
face to face ; ^ when from being men we shall
advance to the rank of angels, and shall be able
to say with the apostle, ' W^e all, with unveiled
face, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image, from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord ; ' ^ although no creature can see the face
of God, according to the essential properties of
His nature, and He is, in these cases, seen by
the mind, since He is believed to be invisible." ^


' John xiv. 16, 17.

2 I John iv. 12.

3 Ambrosius, Lib. i!. in Luc. c. iii. v. 22.
< Luke XX. j5.

5 Matt, xviii. 10.

*> I Cor. xiii. 12.

7 2 Cor. iii. 18.

' HieroD. lib. i. in Isai, L


8. In these words of this man of God there
are many things deserving our consideration :
first, that in accordance with the very clear
declaration of the Lord, he also is of opinion
that we shall then see the face of God when we
shall have advanced to the rank of angels, that
is, shall be made equal to the angels, which
doubtless shall be at the resurrection of the
dead. Next, he has sufficiently explained by
the testimony of the apostle, that the face is to
be understood not of the outward but of the
inward man, when it is said we shall " see face to
face ; " for the aposde was speaking of the face
of the heart when he used the words quoted in
this connection by Jerome : " We, with unveiled
face, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image." ^ If
any one doubt this, let him examine the passage
again, and notice of what the apostle was speak-
ing, namely, of tlie veil, which remains on the
heart of every one in reading the Old Testa-
ment, until he pass over to Christ, that the veil
may be removed. For he there says : " We
also, with unveiled face, beholding as in a mirror
the glory of the Lord," — which face had not
been unveiled in the Jews, of whom he says,
" the veil is upon their heart," — in order to
show that the face unveiled in us when the veil
is taken away is the face of the heart. In fine,
lest any one, looking on these things with too
little care and therefore failing to discern their
meaning, should believe that God now is or shall
hereafter be visible either to angels or to men,
when they shall have been made equal to the
angels, he has most plainly expressed his opinion
by affirming that " no creature can see the face
of God according to the essential properties of
His nature," and that " He is, in these cases,
seen by the mind, since He is believed to be in-
visible." From these statements he sufficiently
showed that when God has been seen by men
through the eyes of the body as if He had a
body. He has not been seen as to the essential
properties of his nature, in which He is seen by
the mind, since He is believed to be invisible —
invisible, that is to say, to the bodily perception
even of celestial beings, as Jerome had said
above, of angels, and powers, and principalities.
How much more, then, is He invisible to terres-
trial beings !

g. Wherefore, in another place, Jerome says in
still plainer terms, it is true not only of the divin-
ity of the Father but equally of that of the Son
and of that of the Holy Spirit, forming one na-
ture in the Trinity, that it cannot be seen by the
eyes of the flesh, but by the eyes of the mind,
of which the Saviour Himself says : " Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." '°

9 2 Cor. iii. 18.
'° Hieron. lib. iii. in ha, i.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


501


What could be more clear than this statement ?
For if he had merely said that it is impossible
for the divinity of the Father, or of the Son,
or of the Holy Spirit, to be seen by the eyes
of the flesh, and had not added the words,
" but only by the eyes of the mind," it might
perhaps have been said, that when the body
shall have become spiritual it can no longer
be called " flesh ; " but by adding the words,
" but only by the eyes of the mind," he has
excluded the vision of God from every sort of
body. Lest, however, any one should suppose
that he was speaking only of the present state
of being, observe that he has subjoined also a
testimony of the Lord, quoted with the design
of defining the eyes of the mind of which he
had spoken ; in which testimony a promise is
given not of present, but of future vision :
" Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God."

10. The very blessed Athanasius, also. Bishop
of Alexandria, when contending against the
Arians, who affirm that the Feather alone is in-
visible, but suppose the Son and the Holy Spirit
to be visible, asserted the equal invisibility of all
the Persons of the Trinity, proving it by testi-
monies from Holy Scripture, and arguing with
all his wonted care in controversy, labouring ear-
nestly to convince his opponents that (iod has
never been seen, except through His assuming
the form of a creature ; and that in His essen-
tial Deity God is invisible, that is, that the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are invisi-
ble, except in so far as the Divine Persons can
be known by the mind and the spirit. Gregory,
also, a holy Eastern bishop, very plainly says
that God, by nature invisible, had, on those oc-
casions on which He was seen by the fathers (as
by Moses, with whom He talked face to face),
made it possible for Himself to be seen by as-
suming the form of something material and dis-
cernible.' Our Ambrose says the same : "That
the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
when visible, are seen under forms assumed by
choice, not prescribed by the nature of Deity ; " ^
thus clearing the truth of the saying, " No man
hath seen God at any time," ^ which is the word
of the Lord Christ Himself, and of that other
saying, " Whom no man hath seen, nor can
see," ■♦ which is the word of the apostle, yea,
rather, of Christ by His aposde ; as well as
vindicating the consistency of those passages of
Scripture in which God is related to have been
seen, because He is both invisible in the essen-
tial nature of His Deity, and able to become


■ See the 49th of the discourses published under the name of
Gregory of Nazianzum. M. Dupin has shown that the discourse in
question must have been the work of some Latin author.

2 Ambrose on Luke, c. i. 11.

3 John i. 18.

* I Tira. vi. 16.


visible when He pleases, by assuming such cre-
ated form as shall seem good to Him.

Chap. hi. ii. Moreover, if invisibility is a
property of the divine nature, as incorruptibility
is, that nature shall assuredly not undergo such
a change in the future world as to cease to be
invisible and become visible ; because it shall
never be possible for it to cease to be incorrup-
tible and become corruptible, for it is in both
attributes alike immutable. The apostle assur-
edly declared the excellence of the divine na-
ture when he placed these two together, saying,
j " Now, unto the King of ages, invisible, incor-
ruptible, the only God, be honour and glory for
ever and ever." s Wherefore I dare not make
such a distinction as to say incorruptible, indeed,
for ever and ever, but invisible — not for ever
and ever, but only in this world. At the same
time, since the testimonies which we are next to
quote cannot be false, — " Blessed are the pure
m heart, for they shall see God,"*" and, "We
know that, when He shall appear, we shall be
like Him ; for we shall see Him as He is," ^ —
we cannot deny that the sons of God shall see
God ; but they shall see Him as invisible things
are seen, in the manner in which He who ap-
peared in the flesh, visible to men, promised that
He would manifest Himself to men, when, speak-
ing in the presence of the disciples and seen by
their eyes, He said : " I will love him, and zuill
manifest myself to him." Li what other man-
ner are invisible things seen than by the eyes
of the mind, concerning which, as the instru-
ments of our vision of God, I have shortly be-
fore quoted the opinion of Jerome?

12. Hence, also, the statement of the Bishop
of Milan, whom I have quoted before, who says
that even in the resurrection it is not easy for
any but those who have a pure heart to see God,
and therefore it is written, " Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God." " How many,"
he says, " had He already enumerated as blessed,
and yet to them He had not promised the power
of seeing God ; " and he adds this inference,
" If, therefore, the pure in heart shall see God,
it is obvious that others shall not see Him ; "
and to prevent our understanding him to refer
to those others of whom the Lord had said,
" Blessed are the poor, blessed are the meek,"
he immediately subjoined, " For those that are
unworthy shall not see God," intending it to be
understood that the unworthy are those who,
although they shall rise again, shall not be able
to see God, since they shall rise to condemna-
tion, because they refused to purify their hearts
through that true faith which " worketh by
love." ** For this reason he goes on to say,

5 I Tim. i. 17.
*> Malt. V. 8.

7 I John iii. 2.

8 Gal. V. 6.


I


502


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


" Whosoever has been unwilling to see God
cannot see Him." Then, since it occurred to
him that, in a sense, even all wicked men have a
desire to see God, he immediately explains that
he used the words, " AV'hosoever has been unwill-
ing to see God," because the fact that the wicked
do not desire to purify the heart, by which alone
God can be seen, shows that they do not desire
to see God, and follows up this statement with
the words : " God is not seen in space, but in
tlie pure heart ; nor is He sought out by the eyes
of the body ; nor is He defined in form by our
faculty of sight ; nor grasped by the touch ; His
voice does not fall on the ear ; nor are His goings
perceived by the senses." ' By these words the
blessed Ambrose desired to teach the preparation
which men ought to make if they wish to see God,
viz. to purify the heart by the faith which worketh
by love, through the gift of the Holy Spirit, from
whom we have received the earnest by which we
are taught to desire that vision.^

Chap. iv. — 13. For as to the members of God
which the Scripture frequently mentions, lest
any one should suppose that we resemble God
as to the form and figure of the body, the same
Scripture speaks of God as having also wings,
which we certainly have not. As then, when we
hear of the " wings " of God, we understand
the divine protection, so by the " hands " of
God we ought to understand His working, — by
His " feet," His presence, — by His " eyes,"
His power of seeing and knowing all things, —
by His face, that whereby He reveals Himself to
our knowledge ; and I believe that any other
such expression used in Scripture is to be spirit-
ually understood. In this opinion I am not
singular, nor am I the first who has stated it.
It is the opinion of all who by any spiritual in-
terpretation of such language in Scripture resist
those who are called Anthropomorphites. Not
to occupy too much time by quoting largely
from the writings of these men, I introduce here
one extract from the pious Jerome, in order
that our brother may know that, if anything
moves him to maintain an opposite opinion, he
is bound to carry on the debate with those who
preceded me not less than with myself.

14. In the exposition which that most learned
student of Scripture has given of the psalm in
which occur the words, " Understand, ye brutish
among the people : and ye fools, when will ye
be wise ? He that planted the ear, shall he not
hear? or He that formed the eye, doth He not
behold? " 3 he says, among other things : "This
passage furnishes a strong argument against those
who are Anthropomorphites, and say that God
has members such as we have. For example,

' Ambrose on Luke, i. ii.
^ 2 Cor. V. 4-8.
3 Ps. xciv. 8, 9.


God is said by them to have eyes, because ' the
eyes of the Lord behold all things : ' in the same
literal manner they take the statements that the
hand of the Lord doeth all things, and that
Adam ' heard the sound of the feet of the Lord
walking in the garden,' and thus they ascribe the
infirmities of men to the majesty of God. But
I affirm that God is all eye, all hand, all foot :
all eye, because He sees all things ; all hand,
because He worketh all things ; all foot, because
He is everywhere present. See, therefore, what
the Psalmist saith : ' He that planted the ear,
shall He not hear? He that formed the eye,
doth He not behold ? ' He doth not say : ' He
that planted the ear, has He not an ear? and He
that formed the eye, has He not an eye ? ' But
what does he say ? ' He that planted the ear,
shall He not hear? He that formed the eye,
doth He not behold?' The Psalmist has as-
cribed to God the powers of seeing and hear-
ing, but has not assigned members to Him." ■♦

15. I have thought it my duty to quote all
these passages from the writings of both Latin
and Greek authors who, being in the Catholic
Church before our time, have written commen-
taries on the divine oracles, in order that our
brother, if he hold any different opinion from
theirs, may know that it becomes him, laying
aside all bitterness of controversy, and preserv-
ing or reviving fully the gentleness of brotherly
love, to investigate with diligent and calm con-
sideration either what he must learn from others,
or what others must learn from him. For the
reasonings of any men whatsoever, even though
they be Catholics, and of high reputation, are
not to be treated by us in the same way as the
canonical Scriptures are treated. We are at
liberty, without doing any violence to the re-
spect which these men deserve, to condemn and
reject anything in their writings, if perchance
we shall find that they have entertained opinions
differing from that which others or we ourselves
have, by the divine help, discovered to be the
truth. I deal thus with the writings of others,
and I wish my intelligent readers to deal thus
with mine. In fine, I do by the help of the
Lord most stedfastly believe, and, in so far as He
enables me, I understand what is taught in all
the statements which I have now quoted from
the works of the holy and learned Ambrose,
Jerome, Athanasius, Gregory, and in any other
similar statements in other writers which I have
read, but have for the sake of brevity forborne
from quoting, namely, that God is not a body,
that He has not the members of the human
frame, that He is not divisible through space,
and that He is unchangeably invisible, and ap-
peared not in His essential nature and substance,

* Jerome, in loc.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


503


but in such visible form as He pleased to those
to whom he appeared on the occasions on which
Scripture records that He was seen by holy per-
sons with the eyes of the body.

Chap. v. — 16. As to the spiritual body which
we siiall have in the. resurrection, how great a
change for the better it is to undergo, — whether
it shall become pure spirit, so that the whole
man shall then be a spirit, or shall (as I rather
think, but do not yet confidently maintain) be-
come a spiritual body in such a way as to be
called spiritual because of a certain ineffable
facility in its movements, but at the same time
to retain its material substance, which cannot
live and feel by itself, but only through the spirit
which uses it (for in our present state, in like
manner, although the body is spoken of as ani-
mated [animal], the nature of the animating
principle is different from that of the body), —
and whether, if the properties of the body then ]
immortal and incorruptible shall remain un-
changed, it shall then in some degree aid the
spirit to see visible, i.e. material things, as at
present we are unable to see anything of that
kind except through the eyes of the body, or
our spirit shall then be able, even in its higher
state, to know material things without the instru-
mentality of the body (for God Himself does
not know these things through bodily senses), —
on these and on many other things which may per-
plex us in the discussion of this subject, I confess
that I have not yet read anywhere anything which
I would esteem sufficiently established to deserve
to be either learned or taught by men.

17. And for this reason, if our brother will
bear patiently any degree whatever of hesitation
on my part, let us in the meantime, because of
that which is written, " We shall see Him as
He is," prepare, so far as with the help of God
Himself we are enabled, hearts purified for that
vision. Let us at the same time inquire more
calmly and carefully concerning the spiritual
body, for it may be that God, if He know this
to be useful to us, may condescend to show us
some definite and clear view on the subject, in
accordance with His written word. For if a
more careful investigation shall result in the dis-
covery that the change on the body shall be so
great that it shall be able to see things that are
invisible, such power imparted to the body will
not, I think, deprive the mind of the power of
seeing, and thus give the outward man a vision
of God which is denied to the inward man ;
as if, in contradiction of the plain words of
Scripture, " that God may be all and in all," '
God were only beside the man — without him,
and not in the man, in his inner being ; or as if
He, who is everywhere present in his entirety,
unlimited in space, is so within man that He

1 1 Cor. XV. 28.


can be seen outside only by the outward man,
but cannot be seen inside by the inward man.
If such opinions are palpably absurd, — for, on
the contrary, the saints shall be full of God ;
they shall not, remaining empty within, be sur-
rounded outside by Him ; nor shall they, through
being blind within, fail to see Him of whom they
are full, and, having eyes only for that which is
outside of themselves, behold Him by w^hom
they shall be surrounded, — if, I say, these things
are absurd, it remains for us to rest meanwhile
certainly assured as to the vision of God by the
inward man. But if, by some wondrous change,
the body shall be endowed with this power,
another new faculty shall be added ; the faculty
formerly possessed shall not be taken away.

18. It is better, then, that we affirm that con-
cerning which we have no doubt, — that God
shall be seen by the inward man, which alone is
able, in our present state, to see that love in
commendation of which the apostle says, " God
is love ;" ^ the inward man, which alone is able
to see " peace and holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord." ^ For no fleshly eye
now sees love, peace, and holiness, and such
things ; yet all of them are seen, so far as they
can be seen, by the eye of the mind, and the
purer it is the more clearly it sees ; so that we
may, without hesitation, believe that we shall see
God, whether we succeed or fail in our investi-
gations as to the nature of our future body —
although, at the same time, we hold it to be
certain that the body shall rise again, immortal
and incorruptible, because on this we have the
plainest and strongest testimony of Holy Scrip-
ture. If, however, our brother afifirm now tliat
he has arrived at certain knowledge as to that
spiritual body, in regard to which I am only in-
quiring, he will have just cause to be displeased
with me if I shall refuse to listen calmly to his
instructions, provided only that he also listen
calmly to my questions. Now, however, I en-
treat you, for Christ's sake, to obtain his forgive-
ness for me for that harshness in my letter, by
which, as I have learned, he was, not without
cause, offended ; and may you, by God's help,
cheer my spirit by your answer.

LETTER CL.

(a.d. 413.)

to proba'* and juliana, ladies most worthy of
honour, daughters justly famous and most
distinguished, augustin sends greeting in

THE LORD.

You have filled our heart with a joy singularly
pleasant, because of the love we bear to you, and

2 I John iv. 8.

3 Heb. xii. 14.

* See note lo letter CXXX. p. 459


504


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


singularly acceptable, because of the prompti-
tude with which the tidings came to us. For
while the consecration of the daughter of your
house to a life of virginity is being ];ublished by
most busy fame in all places where you are known,
and that is everywhere, you have outstripped its '
flight by more sure and reliable information in a
letter from yourselves, and have made us rejoice
in certain knowledge before we had time to be
questioning tlie truth of any report concerning
an event so blessed and remarkable. Who can
declare in words, or expound with adequate
praises, how incomparably greater is the glory
and advantage gained by your family in giving
to Christ women consecrated to His service, than
in giving to the world men called to the honours
of the consulship? For if it be a great and
noble thing to leave the mark of an honoured
name upon the revolving ages of this world, how
much greater and nobler is it to rise above it by
unsullied chastity both of heart and of body !
Let this maiden, therefore, illustrious in her pedi-
gree, yet more illustrious in her piety, find greater
joy in obtaining, through espousals to her divine
Lord, a pre-eminent glory in heaven, than she
could have had in becoming, through espousal
to a human consort, the mother of a line of
illustrious men. This daughter of the house of
Anicius has acted the more magnanimous part,
in choosing rather to bring a blessing on that
noble family by forbearing from marriage, than
to increase the number of its descendants, pre-
ferring to be already, in the purity of her body,
like unto the angels, rather than to increase by
the fruit of her body the number of mortals.
For this is a richer and more fruitful condition
of blessedness, not to have a pregnant womb,
but to develop the soul's lofty capacities ; not to
have the breasts flowing with milk, but to have
the heart pure as snow ; to travail not with the
earthly in the j^angs of labour, but with the heaven-
ly in persevering prayer. May it be yours, my
daughters, most worthy of the honour due to your
rank, to enjoy in her that which was lacking to
yourselves ; may she be stedfast to the end,
abiding in the conjugal union that has no end.
May many handmaidens follow the example of
their mistress ; may those who are of humble
rank imitate this high-born lady, and may those
who possess eminence in this uncertain world
aspire to that worthier eminence which humihty
has given to her. Let the virgins who covet the
glory of the Anician family be ambitious rather to
emulate its piety; for the former lies beyond
their reach, however eagerly they may desire it,
but the latter shall be at once in their possession
if they seek it with full desire. May the right
hand of the Most High protect you, giving you
safety and greater happiness, ladies most worthy
of honour, and most excellent daughters ! In


the love of the Lord, and with all becoming
respect, we salute the children of your Holiness,
and above all the one who is above the rest in
holiness. We have received with very great
pleasure the gift sent as a souvenir of her taking
the veil.'

LETTER CLL
(a.d. 413 OR 414.)

TO C^CILIANUS,^ MY LORD JUSTLY RENOWNED,
ANt) SON MOST WORTHY OF THE HONOUR DUE
BY ME TO HIS RANK, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREET-
ING IN THE LORD.

1. The remonstrance which you have ad-
dressed to me in your letter is gratifying to me
in proportion to the love which it manifests. If,
therefore, I attempt to clear myself from blame
in regard to my silence, the thing which I must
attempt is to show that you had no just cause
for being displeased with me. But since noth-
ing gives me greater pleasure than that you con-
descended to take offence at my silence, which
I had supposed to be a matter of no moment in
the midst of your many cares, I will be pleading
against myself if I endeavour thus to clear my-
self from blame. For if you were wrong in
being displeased at me for not writing to you,
this must be because of your having such a poor
opinion of me that you are absolutely indifferent
whether I speak or remain silent. Nay, the
displeasure which arises from your being dis-
tressed by my silence is not displeasure. I
therefore feel not so much grief at my witlihold-
ing, as joy at your desiring a communication
from me. For it is an honour, not a vexation,
to me, that I should have a place in the remem-
brance of an old friend, and a man who is
(though you may not say it, yet it is our duty
to acknowledge it) of such eminent worth and
greatness, holding a position in a foreign country,
and burdened with public responsibilities. Par-
don me, then, for expressing my gratitude that
you did not regard me as a person whose silence
it was beneath you to resent. For now I am
persuaded, through that benevolence which dis-
tinguishes you more even than your high rank,
that in the midst of your numerous and impor-
tant occupations, not of a private nature, but
public, involving the interests of all, a letter
from me may be esteemed by you not burden-
some, but welcome.

2. For when I had received the letter of the
holy father Innocentius, venerable for his emi-
nent merits, which was sent to me by the breth-
ren, and which was, by manifest tokens, shown
to have been forwarded to me from your Excel-

' I'elationis apophoretuni.

2 Caecilianus was raised in 409 to the office oi pm/ecius prir-
torio under Honorius, and is probably the person to whom Augustin
addressed Letter LXXXVl. p. 365, in 405 a.d.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


505


lency, I formed the opinion that the reason why
no letter from you accompanied it was that,
being engrossed with more important affairs, you
were unwilling to be embarrassed by the trouble
of correspondence. For it seemed certainly
not unreasonable to expect, that when you con-
descended to send me the writings of a holy
man, I should receive along with them some
writings of yo«r own. I had therefore made up
my mind not to trouble you with a letter from me,
unless it was necessary for the purpose of com-
mending to you some one to whom I could not
refuse the service of my intercession, a favour
which it is our custom to grant to all, — a cus-
tonT which, though involving much trouble, is
not to be altogether condemned. I accordingly
did this, recommending to your kindness a friend
of mine, from whom I have now received a let-
ter, expressing his thanks, to which I add my
own, for vour service.

3. If, however, I had formed any luifavourable
impression concerning you, especially in regard
to the matter of which, though it was not ex-
pressly named, a subtle odour, so to speak, per-
vaded your whole letter, far would it have been
from me to write to you any such note in order
to ask any favour for myself or another. In
that case I would either have been silent, wait-
ing for a time when I would have an opportunity
of seeing you personally ; or if I considered it
my duty to write on the subject, I would have
given it the first place in my letter, and would
have treated it in such a way as to make it
almost nnpossible for you to show displeasure.
For when, notwithstanding remonstrances which,
under an anxiety shared by you with us, we ad-
dressed to him, — beseeching him vehemendy,
but in vain, to forbear from piercing our hearts
with so great sorrow, and mortally wounding his
own conscience by such grievous sin, — he ' per-
petrated his impious, savage, and perfidious
crime, I left Carthage immediately and secretly,
for this reason, lest the numerous and influen-
tial persons who in terror sought refuge from his
sword within the church should, imagining that
my presence could be of use to them, detain me
by their passionate weeping and groaning, so
that I would be compelled, in order to secure


' From the beginning to the end of this letter, Augustin studious-
ly avoids naniing the persons concerned in the perfidious act of judi-
cial murder, in connection with which the suspicion of many had been
fastened upon Caecilianus. The person by whose orders the sentence
of death was carried into effect was Count Marinus, the general by
whom the attempt of Heraclianus (413 a d.) to seize the imperial
power was defeated, and who afterwards received a commission to
pass into Africa and punish those who had been implicated in the re-
volt of Heraclianus. A commission of this kind opened a wide door
for the gratification of private revenge by enemies who did not scruple
to bring false accusations against the innocent; and among the vic-
tims of such injustice were two brothers who had, by their zeal for the
Catholic Church, made themselves obnoxious to the Donatists The
elder of these was Apringius, a magistrate to whom Augustin wrote
a letter (the 134th) recommending clemency in punishing the Dona-
tists. The younger was Marcellinus, concerning whom see also note
to Letter CXXXllI. p. 470.


the preservation of their bodies, to supplicate a
favour from one whom it was impossible for me
to rebuke in order to the welfare of his soul,
with the severity which his crime deserved. As
for their personal safety, I knew that the walls
of the church sufficed for their protection. But
for myself [if I remained to intercede with him
on their behalf], it could only be in circum-
stances painfully embarrassing, for he would not
have tolerated my acting towards him as I was
bound to do, and I would have been compelled,
moreover, to act in a way which would have
been unbecoming in me. At the same time, I
was truly sorry for the misfortune of my venera-
ble co-bishop, the ruler of such an important
church, who was expected to regard it as his
duty, even after this man had been guilty of such
infamous treachery, to treat him with submissive
deference, in order that the lives of others might
be spared. I confess the reason of my depart-
ure : it was that I would have been unable to
meet with the necessary fortitude so great a
calamity.

4. The same considerations which made me
then depart would have been the cause of my
remaining silent to you, if I believed you to have
used your influence with him to avenge such
wicked injuries. This is believed in regard to
you only by those who do not know how, and
how frequently, and in what terms, you expressed
your mind to us, when we were with anxious so-
licitude doing our utmost to secure that, because
he was so intimate with you, and you were so
constantly visiting him, and so often conversing
alone with him, he should all the more carefully
guard your good name, and save you from being
supposed to have used no endeavour to prevent
him from inflicting that mode of death on per-
sons said to be your enemies. This, indeed, is
not believed of you by me, nor by my brethren
who heard you in conversation, and who saw,
both in your words and in every gesture, the evi-
dences of your heart's good-will to those who
were put to death. But, I beseech you, forgive
those by whom it is believed ; for they are men,
and in the minds of men there are such lurking
places and such depths that, although all suspi-
cious persons deserved to be blamed, they think
themselves that they even deserve praise for their
prudence. There existed reasons for the con-
duct imputed to you : we knew that you had
suffered very grievous injury from one of those
whom he had suddenly ordered to be arrested.
His brother, also, in whose person especially he
persecuted the Church, was said to have an-
swered you in terms implying as it were some
harsh accusation. Both were thought to be
looked upon by you with suspicion. When they,
after being summoned, had gone away, you still
remained in the place, and were engaged, it was


5o6


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


said, in conversation of a more private kind than
usual with him [Marinus], and then they were
suddenly ordered to be detained. Men talked
much of your friendship with him as not recent,
but of long standing. The closeness of your
intimacy, and the frequency of your private con-
versations with him, confirmed this report. His
power was at that time great. The ease with
which false accusations could be made against
any one was notorious. It was not a difficult
thing to find some person who would upon the
promise of his own safety make any statements
which he might order to be made. All things
at that time made it easy for any man to be
brought to death without any examination on
the part of him who ordered the execution, if
even one witness brought forward what seemed
to be an odious and, at the same time, credible
accusation.

5. Meanwhile, as it was rumored that the'
power of the Church might deliver them, we
were mocked with false promises, so that not
only with the consent, but, as it seemed, at the
urgent desire of Marinus, a bishop was sent to
the Imperial Court to intercede for them, the
promise having been brought to the ear of the
bishops that, until some pleading should be heard
there on behalf of the prisoners, no examina-
tion of their case would be proceeded with. At
last, on the day before they were put to death,
your Excellency came to us ; you gave us en-
couragement such as you had never before given,
that he might grant their lives as a favour to you
before your departure [for Rome], because you
had solemnly and prudently said to him that all
his condescension in admitting you so constantly
to famiUar and private conversation would bring
to you disgrace rather than distinction, and
would have the effect, after the death of these
men had been a subject of conversation and
consultation between you, of making every one I
say that there could be no doubt what was to be
the issue of these conferences. When you in-
formed us that you had said these things to him,
you stretched out your hand as you spoke
towards the place at which the sacraments of
behevers are celebrated, and while we listened
in amazement, you confirmed the statement that
you had used these words with an oath so
solemn, that not only then, but even now after
the dreadful and unexpected death of the pris-
oners, it seems to me, recalling to memory your
whole demeanour, that it would be an aggravated
insult if I were to believe any evil concerning
you. You said, moreover, that he was so moved
by these words of yours, that he purposed to
give the lives of these men to you as a present,
in token of friendship, before you set out on
your journey.

6. Wherefore, I solemnly assure your Grace,


that when on the following day (the day on
which the infamous crime thus conceived was
consummated) tidings were unexpectedly brought
to us that they had been led forth from prison
to stand before him as their judge, although we
were in some alarm, nevertheless, after reflecting
on what you had said to us on the preceding day,
and on the fact that the day following was the an-
niversary of the blessed Cyprian, i supposed that
he had even purposely selected a day on which
he might not only grant your request, but also
might aspire, by giving sudden joy to the whole
Church of Christ, to emulate the virtue of so
great a martyr, proving himself truly greater in
using clemency in sparing life than in possessing
power to inflict death. Such were my thoughts,
when lo ! a messenger burst into our presence,
from whom, before we could ask him how their
trial was being conducted, we learned that they
had been beheaded. For care had been taken
to arrange, as the scene of execution, a place
immediately adjojning, not appointed for the
punishment of criminals, but used for the recre-
ation of the citizens, on which spot he had
ordered some to be executed a few days previ-
ously, with the design (as is with good reason
believed) of avoiding the odium of applying it
to this purpose for the first time in the case of
these men, whom he hoped to be able to snatch
secretly from the Church interposing on their be-
half, by thus not only ordering their immediate
execution, but also ordering it to take place on
the nearest available spot. He therefore made it
sufficiently manifest that he did not fear to cause
cruel pain to that Mother whose intervention he
feared, namely, to the holy Church, among whose
faithful children, baptized in her bosom, we
knew that he himself was reckoned. Therefore,
after the issue of so great a plot, in which so
much care had been used in negotiating with us
that we were made, even by you also, though
unwittingly, almost free from solicitude, and
almost sure of their safety on the preceding day,
who, judging of the circumstances in the way in
which ordinary men would judge of them, could
avoid regarding it as beyond question that by
you also words were given to us and life taken
from them? Pardon, then, as I have said, those
who believe these things against you, although
we do not believe them, O excellent man.

7. Far be it, however, from my heart and from
my practice, however defective in many things,
to intercede with you for any one, or ask a favour
from you for any one, if I believed you to be
responsible for this monstrous wrong, this vil-
lanous cruelty. But I frankly confess to you, that
if you continue, even after that event, to be on
the same footing of intimate friendship with him
as you were formerly, you must excuse my claim-
ing freedom to be grieved j for by this you would


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


507


compel us to believe much which we would
rather disbelieve. It is, however, fitting that,
as I do not believe you guilty of the other things
laid by some to your charge, I should not be-
lieve this either. This friend of yours has, in
the unexpected triumph of sudden accession to
power, done violence not less to your reputation
than to these men's lives. Nor is it my design
in this statement to kindle hatred in your mind ;
in so doing I would belie my own feelings and
profession. But I exhort you to a more faithful
exercise of love towards him. For the man
who so deals with the wicked as to make them
repent of their evil doings, is one who knows
how to be angry with them, and yet consult
for their good ; for as bad companions hinder
men's welfare by compliance, so good friends j
help them by opposition to their evil ways. The
same weapon with which, in the proud abuse of
power, he took away the lives of others, inflicted
a much deeper and more serious wound on his
own soul ; and if he do not remedy this by re-
pentance, using wisely the long-suffering of God,
he will be compelled to find it out and feel it
when this life is ended. Often, moreover, God
in His wisdom permits the life of good men in
this world to be taken from them by the wicked,
that He may prevent men from believing that to
suffer such things is in their case a calamity.
For what harm can result from the death of the
body to men who are destined to die some time ?
Or what do those who fear death accomplish by
their care but a short postponement of the time
at which they die ? All the evil to which mortal
men are liable comes not from death but from
life ; and if in dying they have the soul sus-
tained by Christian grace, death is to them not
the night of darkness in which a good life ends,
but the dawn in which a better life begins.'

8. The life and conversation of the elder of
the two brothers appeared indeed more con-
formed to this world than to Christ, although he
also had after his marriage corrected to a great
extent the faults of his early irreligious years.
It may, nevertheless, have been not otherwise
than in mercy that our merciful God appointed
him to be the companion of his brother in deatli.
But as to that younger brother, he lived reli-
giously, and was eminent as a Christian both in
heart and in practice. The report that he would
approve himself such when commissioned to
serve the Church ^ came before him to Africa,
and this good report followed him still when he
had tome. In his conduct, what innocence !
in his friendship, what constancy ! in his study
of Christian truth, what zeal ! in his religion,


' In the original of this sentence there is a characteristic an-
tithesis of phrases: " Non sane mors eorum bonx vitae occasus fuit
sed meUoris occasio."

^ See note to Letter CXXXIII. p. 470.


what sincerity ! in his domestic life, what purity !
in his official duties, what integrity ! What pa-
tience he showed to enemies, what affability to
friends, what humility to the pious, what charity
to all men ! How great his promptitude in
granting, and his bashfulness in asking a favour !
How genuine his satisfaction in the good deeds,
and his sorrow over the faults of men ! What
spotless honour, noble grace, and scrupulous
piety shone in him ! In rendering assistance,
how compassionate he was ! in forgiving injuries,
how generous ! in prayer, how confiding ! When
well informed on any subject, with what modesty
he was wont to communicate useful knowledge !
when conscious of ignorance, with what dili-
gence did he endeavour by investigation to over-
come the disadvantage ! How singular was his
contempt for the things of time ! how ardent
his hope and his desires in regard to the bless-
ings that are eternal ! He would have relin-
quished all secular business and girded himself
with the insignia of the Christian warfare, had he
not been prevented by his having entered into
the married state ; for he had not begun to de-
sire better things before the time when, being
already involved in these bonds, it would have
been, notwithstanding their inferiority, an unlaw-
ful thing for him to rend them asunder.

9. One day when they were confined in prison
together, his brother said to him : " If I suffer
these things as the just punishment of my sins,
what ill desert has brought you to the same fate,
for we know that your life was most strictly and
earnestly Christian ? " He replied : " Supposing
even that your testimony as to my life were true,
do you tiiink that God is bestowing a small fa-
vour upon me in appointing that my sins be pun-
ished in these sufferings, even though they should
end in death, instead of being reserved to meet
me in the judgment which is to come? " These
words might perhaps lead some to suppose that
he was conscious of some secret immoralities.
I shall therefore mention what it pleased the
Lord God to appoint that I should hear from his
lips, and know assuredly, to my own great con-
solation. Being anxious about this very thing,
as human nature is liable to fall into such wick-
edness, I asked him, when I was alone with him
after he was confined in prison, if there was no
sin for which he ought to seek reconciliation
with God ^ by some more severe and special pen-
ance. With characteristic modesty he blushed
at the mere mention of my suspicion, groundless
though it was, but thanked me most warmly for
the warning, and with a grave, modest smile he
seized with both hands my right hand, and said :
" I swear by the sacraments which are dispensed
to me by this hand, that I have neither before

•J Deunt sibi placare.


5o8


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


nor since my marriage been guilty of immoral
self-indulgence." '

10. What evil, then, was brought to him by
death ? Nay, rather, was it not the occasion of
the greatest possible good to him, because, in
the possession of these gifts, he departed from
this liie to Christ, in whom alone they are really
possessed? I would not mention these things
in addressing you if I believed that you would
be offended by my praising him. But assuredly,
as I do not believe this, neither do I believe that
his being put to death was even according to
your desire or wish, much less that it was done
at your recjuest. You, therefore, with a sincerity
proportioned to your innocence in this matter,
entertain, doubtless, along with us, the opinion
that the man who put him to death inflicted
more cruel wrong on his own soul than on the
suflerer's body, when, in despite of us, in despite
of his own promises, in despite of so many sup-
plications and warnings from you, and finally,
in despite of the Church of Christ (and in her
of Christ Himself), he consummated his base
machinations by putting this man to death. Is
the high position of the one worthy to be com-
pared with the lot of the otiier, prisoner though
he was, when the man of power was maddened
by anger, while the sufferer in his prison was
filled with joy ? There is nothing in all the dun-
geons of this world, nay, not even in hell itself,
to surpass the dreadful doom of darkness to
which a villian is consigned by remorse of con- '
science. Even to yourself, what evil did he do ?
He did not destroy your innocence, although he |
grievously injured your reputation ; which, never-
theless, remains uninjured, both in the estimation :
of those who know you better than we do, and
in our estimation, in whose presence the anxiety
which, like us, you felt for the prevention of
such a monstrous crime, was expressed with so
much visible agitation that we could almost see !
with our eyes the invisible workings of your heart.
Whatever harm, therefore, he has done, he has
done to himself alone ; he has pierced through
his own soul, his own life, his own conscience ;
in fine, he has by that blind deed of cruelty j
destroyed even his own good name, a thing
which the very worst of men are usually fain to
preserve. For to all good men he is odious in
proportion to his efforts to obtain, or his satis-
faction in receiving, the approbation of the
wicked.

1 1 . Could anything prove more clearly that
he was not under the necessity which he pre-
tended — alleging that he did this evil action as
a good man who had no alternative — than the
fact that the proceeding was disapproved of by
the person whose orders he dared to plead as his

' Me tiulluni esse expertutn concubitum prceter uxorem.


excuse ? The pious deacon by whose hand we
send this was himself associated with the bishop
whom we had sent to intercede for them ; let
him, therefore, relate to your Excellency how it
seemed good to the Emperor not even to give a
formal i:)ardon, lest by this the stigma of a crime
should be in some degree attached to them, but
a mere notice commanding them to be imme-
diately set at liberty from all further annoyance.
By a purely gratuitous act of cruelty, and under
no pressure of necessity (although, perchance,
there may have been other causes which we sus-
pect, but which it is unnecessary to state in writ-
ing), he did outrageously vex the Church, — the
Church to whose sheltering bosom his brother
once, in fear of death, had fled, to be requited
for protecting his life by finding him active in
counselling the perpetration of this crime, — the
Church in which he himself had once, when
under the displeasure of an offended patron,
sought an asylum which could not be denietl to
him. If you love this man, show your detesta-
tion of his crime ; if you do not wish him to
come into everlasting punishment, shrink with
horror from his society. You are bound to take
measures of this kiud, both for your own good
name and for his life ; for he who loves in this
man what God hates, is, in truth, hating not only
this man but also his own soul.

1 2. These things being so, I know your benev-
olence too well to believe that you were the author
of this crime, or an accomplice in its commis-
sion, or that with malicious cruelty you deceived
us : far be such conduct from your life and con-
versation ! .At the same time, I would not wish
your friendship to be of such a character as tends
to make him, to his own destruction, glory in his
crime, and to confirm the suspicions naturally
cherished by men concerning you ; but rather
let it be such as to move him to penitence, and
to penitence corresponding in quality and in
measure to the remedy demanded for the heal-
ing of such dreadful wounds. For the more you
are an enemy to his crimes, the more really will
you be a friend to the man himself. It will be
interesting to us to learn, by your Excellency's
reply to this letter, where you were on the day
on which the crime was committed, how you
received the tidings, and what you did there-
after, and what you said to him and heard from
him when you next saw him ; for I have not
been able to hear anything of you in connec-
tion with this affair since my sudden departure
on the succeeding day.

13. As to the remark in your letter that you
are now compelled to believe that I refuse to
visit Carthage for fear lest you should be seen
there by me, you rather compel me by these
words to state explicitly the reasons of my
absence. One reason is, that the labour which


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


509


I am obliged to undergo in that city, and which
I could not describe without adding as much
again to the length of this letter, is more than I
am able now to bear, since, in addition to my
infirmities peculiar to myself, which are known
to all my more intimate friends, I am burdened
with an infirmity common to the human family,
namely, the weakness of old age. The other
reason is, that, in so far as leisure is granted me
from the work imperatively demanded by the
Church, which my office specially binds me to
serve, I have resolved to devote the time entirely,
if the Lord will, to the labour of studies pertain-
ing to ecclesiastical learning ; in doing which I
think that I may, if it please the mercy of God,
be of some service even to future generations.

14. There is, indeed, one thing in you, since
you wish to hear the truth, which causes me very
great distress : it is that, although qualified by
age, as well as by life and character, to do other-
wise, you still prefer to be a catechumen ; as if
it were not possible for believers, by making
progress in Christian faith and well-doing, to
become so much the more faithful and useful in
the administration of public business. For surely
the promotion of the welfare of men is the one
great end of all your great cares and labours.
And, indeed, if this were not to be the issue of
your public services, it would be better for you
even to sleep both day and night than to sacri-
fice your rest in order to do work which can
contribute nothing to the advantage of your fel-
low-men. Nor do I entertain the slightest doubt
that your Excellency ...

{^CcEtera desient)


LETTER CLVIIL


(a.d. 414.)

to my lord augustix, my brother partner
in the sacerdotal office, most sincerely
loved, with profound respect, and to the
brethren who are with him, evodius ' and
the brethren who are with him send
greeting in the lord.

I. I urgently beg you to send the reply due to
my last letter. Lideed, 1 would have preferred
first to learn what I then asked, and afterwards
to put the questions which I now submit to you.

Give me your attention while I relate an event
in which you will kindly take an interest, and
which has made me impatient to lose no time in
acquiring, if possible in this life, the knowledge
which I de^red. I had a certain youth as a


j clerk, a son of presbyter Armenus of Melonita,
whom, by my humble instrumentality, God res-
j cued when he was becoming already immersed
! in secular affairs, for he was employed as a short-
hand writer by the proconsul's solicitor. - He
was then, indeed, as boys usually are, prompt
and somewhat restless, but as he grew older (for
his death occurred in his twenty-second year)
a gravity of deportment and circumspect probity
of life so adorned him that it is a pleasure to
I dwell upon his memory. He was, moreover, a
' clever stenographer, ^ and indefatigable in writ-
ing : he had begun also to be earnest in read-
insr, so that he even urged me to do more than
1 my indolence would have chosen, in order to
I spend hours of the night in reading, for he read
I aloud to me for a time every night after all was
I still ; and in reading, he would not pass over
I an)' sentence unless he understood it, and would
i go over it 'a third or even a fourth time, and not
leave it until what he wished to know was made
clear. I had begun to regard him not as a mere
boy and clerk, but as a comparatively intimate
and pleasant friend, for his conversation gave me
much delight.

2. He desired also to "depart and to be with
Christ," ^ a desire which has been fulfilled. For
he was ill for sixteen days in his father's house,
and by strength of memory he continually re-
peated portions of Scripture throughout almost
the whole time of his illness. But when he was
I very near to the end of his life, he sang ' so as
to be heard by all, " My soul longeth for and
hastens unto the courts of the Lord,"^ after
which he sang again, "Thou hast anointed my
head with oil, and beautiful is Thy cup, over-
powering my senses with delight ! " ^ Li these
things he was wholly occupied ; in the consola-
tion yielded by them he found satisfaction. At
the last, when dissolution was just coming upon
him, he began to make the sign of the cross
on his forehead, and in finishing this his hand
was moving down to his mouth, which also he
wished to mark with the same sign, but the in-
ward man (which had been truly renewed day
by day) '^ had, ere this was done, forsaken the
tabernacle of clay. To myself there has been
given so great an ecstasy of joy, that I think
that after leaving his own body he has entered
into my spirit, and is there imparting to me a
certain fulness of light from his presence, for I
am conscious of a joy beyond all measure
through his deliverance and safety — indeed it
is ineffable. For I felt no small anxiety on his


' Evodius, Bishop of Uzala, was one of Augustin's early friends.
He was a native of the same town (Tagaste), and joined Augustin
and Alypius in seeking religious retirement after their baptism, in
387 A.D. He was also with them at Ostia when Monica died. (^Con-
fessions, Book ix. ch. 8 and 12).


2 Nam scholastico proconsulis excipiebat.

3 Strenuus in not is.

* Dissolvi et esse cum Ckristo. Phil. J. 23.
5 Psallebat.

*' Ps. Ixxxiv. 2, LXX.
1 Ps. xxiii. 5, 6, LXX.

* 2 Cor. iv. 16.


5IO


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


account, being afraid of the dangers peculiar to
his years. For I was at pains to incjuire of him-
self whether perchance he had been defiled by
intercourse with woman ; he solemnly assured
us that he was free from this stain, by which
declaration our joy was still more increased. So
he died. We honored his memory by suitable
obsequies, such as were due to one so excellent,
for we continued during three days to praise the
Lord with hymns at his grave, and on the third
day we offered the sacraments of redemption.'

3. Behold, however, two days thereafter, a
certain respectable widow from Figentes, an
handmaid from God, who said that she had been
twelve years in widowhood, saw the following
vision in a dream. She saw a certain deacon,
who had died four years ago, preparing a palace,
with the assistance of servants and handmaids
of God (virgins and widows). It was being so
much adorned that the place was refulgent with
splendor, and aj^peared to be wholly made of
silver. On her inquiring eagerly for whom this
palace was being prepared, the deacon aforesaid
answered, " For the young man, the son of the
presbyter, who was cut off yesterday." There
appeared in the same palace an old man robed
in white, who gave orders to two otliers, also
dressed in white, to go, and having raised the
body from the grave, to carry it up with them to
heaven. And she added, that so soon as the
body had been taken up from the grave and
carried to heaven, there sprang from the same
sepulchre branches of the rose, called from its
folded blossoms the virgin rose.

4. I have narrated the event : listen now, if
you please, to my question, and teach me what
I ask, for the departure of that young man's
soul forces such questions from me. While we
are in the body, we have an inward faculty of
perception which is alert in proportion to the
activity of our attention, and is more wakeful
and eager the more earnestly attentive we be-
come : and it seems to us probable that even in
its highest activity it is retarded by the encum-
brance of the body, for who can fully describe
all that the mind suffers through the body ! In
the midst of the perturbation and annoyance
which come from the suggestions, temptations,
necessities, and varied afflictions of which the
body is the cause, the mind does not surrender
its strength, it resists and conquers. Sometimes
it is defeated ; nevertheless, mindful of what is
its own nature, it becomes, under the stimulat-
ing influence of such labours, more active and
more wary, and breaks through the meshes of
wickedness, and so makes its way to better
things. Your Holiness will kindly understand
what I mean to say. Therefore, while we are in


* Redemptionis sacramenta obtulimus.


this life, we are hindered by such deficiencies, and
are nevertheless, as it is written, " more than
conquerors through Him that loved us." ^ When
we go forth from this body, and escape from
every burden, and from sin, with its incessant
activity, what are we?

5. In the first place, I ask whether there may
not be some kind of body (formed, perchance,
of one of the four elements, either air or ether)
which does not depart from the incorporeal prin-
ciple, that is, the substance properly called the
soul, when it forsakes this earthly body. For as
the soul is in its nature incorporeal, if it be abso-
lutely disembodied by death there is now one
soul of all that have left this world. And in that
case where would the rich man, who was clothed
in purple, and Lazarus, who was full of sores,
now be ? How, moreover, could they be distin-
guished according to their respective deserts, so
that the one should have suffering and the other
have joy, if there were only a smgle soul made
by the combination of all disembodied souls,
unless, of course, these things are to be under-
stood in a figurative sense ? Be that as it may,
there is no question that souls which are held in
definite places (as that rich man was in the
flame, and that poor man was in Abraham's
bosom) are held in bodies. If there are dis-
tinct places, there are bodies, and in these bodies
the souls reside ; and even although the punish-
ments and rewards are experienced in the con-
science, the soul which experiences them is
nevertheless in a body. Whatever is the nature
of that one soul made up of many souls, it must
be possible for it in its unbroken unity to be
both grieved and made glad at the same mo-
ment, if it is to approve itself to be really a
substance consisting of many souls gathered into
one. If, however, this soul is called one only in
the same way as the incorporeal minfl is called
one, although it has in it memory, and will, and
intellect, and if it be alleged that all these are
separate incorporeal causes [or powers], and have
their several distinctive offices and work with-
out one impeding another in any way, I think
this might be in some measure answered by say-
ing that it must be also possible for some of
the souls to be under punishment and some of the
souls to enjoy rewards simultaneously in this one
substance consisting of many souls gathered into
one.

6. Or if this be not so [that is, if there be no
such body remaining still in union with the incor-
poreal principle after it quits this earthly body],
what is there to hinder each soul from having,
when separated from the solid body which it here
inhabits, another body, so that the soul always
animates a body of some kind? or in what body

* Rom. viii. 37.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


511


does it pass to any region, if such there be, to
which necessity compels it to go? For the
angels themselves, if they were not numbered by
bodies of some kind which they have, could not
be called many, as they are by the Truth Him-
self when He said in the gospel, " I could pray
the Father, and He will presently give me twelve


legions of angels." ■


Again


it is certain that


Samuel was seen in the body when he was raised
at the request of Saul ; - and as to Moses, whose
body was buried, it is plain from the gospel nar-
rative that he came in the body to the Lord on
the mountain to which He and His disciples had
retired.3 In the Apocrypha, and in the Mys-
teries of Moses, a writing which is wholly devoid
of authority, it is indeed said that, at the time
when he ascended the mount to die, through the
power which his body possessed, there was one
body which was committed to the earth, and
another which was joined to the angel who
accompanied him ; but I do not feel myself
called upon to give to a sentence in apocryphal
writings a preference over the definite statements
quoted above. We must therefore give atten-
tion to this, and search out, by the help either
of the authority of revelation or of the light of
reason, the matter about which we are inquiring.
But it is alleged that the future resurrection of
the body is a proof that the soul was after death
absolutely without a body. This is not, how-
ever, an unanswerable objection, for the angels,
who are like our souls invisible, have at times
desired to appear in bodily forms and be seen,
and (whatever might be the form of body worthy
to be assumed by these spirits) they have ap-
peared, for example, to Abraham ■♦ and to Tobias. 5
Therefore it is quite possible that the resurrec-
tion of the body may, as we assuredly believe,
take place, and yet that the soul may be reunited
to it without its being found to have been at any
moment wholly devoid of some kind of body.
Now the body which the soul here occupies con-
sists of the four elements, of which one, namely
heat, seems to depart from this body at the same
moment as the soul. For there remains after
death that which is made of earth, moisture also
is not wanting to the body, nor is the element of
cold matter gone ; heat alone has fled, which
perhaps the soul takes along with it if it migrates
from place to place. This is all that I say mean-
while concerning the body.

7. It seems to me also, that if the soul while
occupying the living body is capable, as I have
said, of strenuous mental application, how much
more unencumbered, active, vigorous, earnest,


' Matt. xxvi. 53.
^ I Sam. x.\viii. 14.
3 Matt. xvii. 3.
* Gen. xviii. 5.
5 Tob. xii. 16.


resolute, and persevering will it be, how much
enlarged in capacity and imi)roved in character,
if it has while in this body learned to relish vir-
tue ! For after laying aside this body, or rather,
after having this cloud swept away, the soul will
have come to be free from all disturbing influ-
ences, enjoying tranciuillity and exempt from
temptation, seeing whatever it has longed for,
and embracing what it has loved. Then, also,
it will be capable of remembering and recognis-
ing friends, both those who went before it from
this world, and those whom it left here below.
Perhaps this may be true. I know not, but I
desire to learn. But it would greatly distress me
to think that the soul after death passes into a
state of torpor, being as it were buried, just as
it is during sleep while it is in the body, living
only in hope, but having nothing and knowing
nothing, especially if in its sleep it be not even
stirred by any dreams. This notion causes me
very great horror, and seems to indicate that the
life of the soul is extinguished at death.

8. This also I would ask : Supposing that the
soul be discovered to have such a body as we
speak of, does that body lack any of the senses ?
Of course, if there cannot be imposed upon it
any necessity for smelling, tasting, or touching,
as I suppose will be the case, these senses will
be wanting ; but I hesitate as to the senses of
sight and hearing. For are not devils said to
hear (not, indeed, in all the persons whom they
harass, for in regard to these there is a question),
even when they appear in bodies of their own?
And as to the faculty of sight, how can they pass
from one place to another if they have a body
but are void of the power of seeing, so as to
guide its motions? Do you think that this is
not the case with human souls when they go
forth from the body, — that they have still a
body of some kind, and are not deprived of
some at least of the senses proper to this body?
Else how can we explain the fact that very many
dead persons have been observed by day, or by
persons awake and walking abroad during the
night, to pass into houses just as they were wont
to do in their lifetime ? This I have heard not
once, but often ; and I have also heard it said
that in places in which dead bodies are interred,
and especially in churches, there are commotions
and prayers which are heard for the most part
at a certain time of the night. This I remem-
ber hearing from more than one : for a certain
holy presbyter was an eye-witness of such an ap-
parition, having observed a multitude of such
phantoms issuing from the baptistery in bodies
full of light, after which he heard their prayers
in the midst of the church itself. All such things
are either true, and therefore helpful to the in-
quiry which we are now making, or are mere
fables, in which case the fact of their invention


512


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


is wonderful ; nevertheless I would desire to get
some information from the fact that they come
and visit men, and are seen otherwise than in
dreams.

9. These dreams suggest another question. I
do not at this moment concern myself about the
mere creations of fancy, which are formed by
the emotions of the uneducated. I speak of visi-
tations in sleep, such as the apparition to Joseph '
in a dream, in the manner experienced in most
cases of the kind. In the same manner, there-
fore, our own friends also who have departed
this life before us sometimes come and appear
to us in dreams, and speak to us. For I myself
remember that Profuturus, and Privatus, and
Servilius, holy men who within my recollection
were removed by death from our monastery,
spoke to me, ancl that the events of which they
spoke came to pass according to their words.
Or if it be some other higher spirit that assumes
their form and visits our minds, I leave this to
the all-seeing eye of Him before whom every-
thing from the highest to the lowest is uncovered.
If, therefore, the Lord be pleased to speak
through reason to your Holiness on all these
questions, I beg you to be so kind as make me
partaker of the knowledge which you have re-
ceived. There is another thing which I have
resolved not to omit mentioning, for perhaps it
bears upon the matter now under investigation :

10. This same youth, in connection with whom
these questions are brought forward, departed
this life after having received what may be called
a summons^ at the time when he was dying.
For one who had been a companion of his as a
student, and reader, and shorthand writer to
my dictation, who had died eight months before,
was seen by a person in a dream coming towards
him. When he was asked by the person who
then distinctly saw him why he had come, he
said, " I have come to take this friend away ; "
and so it proved. For in the house itself, also,
there appeared to a certain old man, who was
almost awake, a man bearing in his hand a laurel
branch on which something was written. Nay,
more, when this one was seen, it is further reported
that after the death of the young man, his father
the presbyter had begun to reside along with
the aged Theasius in the monastery, in order to
find consolation there, but lo ! on the third day
after his death, the young man is seen entering
the monastery, and is asked by one of the breth-
ren in a dream of some kind whether he knew
himself to be dead. He replied that he knew
he was. The other asked whether he had been
welcomed by God. This also he answered with
great expressions of joy. And when questioned


* Matt. i. 20.

* Exkibittis quodavimodo pergit.


as to the reason why he had come, he answered,
" I have been sent to summon my father." The
person to whom these things were shown awakes,
and relates what had passed. It comes to the
ear of Bishop Theasius. He, being alarmed,
sharply admonished the person who told him,
lest the matter should come, as it might easily
do, to the ear of the presbyter himself, and he
should be disturbed by such tidings. But why
prolong the narration? Within about four days
from this visitation he was saying (for he had
suffered from a moderate feverishness) that he
was now out of danger, and that the physician
had given up attending him, having assured him
that there was no cause whatever for anxiety ;
but that very day this presbyter expired after he
had lain down on his couch. Nor should I for-
bear mentioning, that on the same day on which
the youth died, he asked his father three times
to forgive him anything in which he might
have offended, and every time that he kissed his
father he said to him, " Let us give thanks to
God, father," and insisted upon his father saying
the words along with him, as if he were exhort-
ing one who was to be his companion in going
forth from this world. And in fact only seven
days elapsed between the two deaths. What
shall we say of things so wonderful ? Who shall
be a thoroughly reliable teacher as to these
mysterious dispensations? To you in the hour
of perplexity my agitated heart unburdens itself.
The divine appointment of the death of the
young man and of his father is beyond all doubt,
for two sparrows shall not fall to the ground
without the will of our heavenly Father. ^

1 1 . That the soul cannot exist in absolute
separation from a body of some kind is proved
in my opinion by the fact that to exist without
body belongs to God alone. But I think that
the laying aside of so great a burden as the body,
in the act of passing from this world, proves that
the soul will then be very much more wakeful
than it is meanwhile ; for then the soul appears,
as I think, far more noble when no longer en-
cumbered by so great a hindrance, both in
action and in knowledge, and that entire spirit-
ual rest proves it to be free from all causes of
disturbance and error, but does not make it
languid, and as it were slow, torpid, and embar-
rassed, inasmuch as it is enough for the soul to
enjoy in its fulness the liberty to which it has
attained in being freed from the world and the
body ; for, as you have wisely said, the intellect
is satisfied with food, and applies the lips of the
spirit to the fountain of life in that condition in
which it is happy and blest in the undisputed
lordship of its own faculties. For before I
quitted the monastery I saw brother Servilius in

3 Matt. X. 29.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


513


a dream after his decease, and he said that we
were labouring to attain by the exercise of rea-
son to an understanding of truth, whereas he
and those who were in the same state as he was
were ahvays resting in the pure joy of contem-
plation.

12. I also beg you to explain to me in how
many ways the word wisdom is used ; as God is
wisdom, and a wise mind is wisdom (in which
way It is said to be as light); as we read also of
the wisdom of Bezaleel, who made the taber-
nacle or the ointment, and the wisdom of Solo-
mon, or any other wisdom, if there be such, and
wherein they differ from each other ; and whether
the one eternal Wisdom which is with the Father
is to be understood as spoken of in these differ-
ent degrees, as they are called diverse gifts of
the Holy Si)irit, who divideth to every one sev-
erally according as He will. Or, with the excep-
tion of that Wisdom alone which was not created,
were these created, and have they a distinct exist-
ence of their own ? or are they effects, and have
they received their name from the definition of
their work ? I am asking a great many ques-
tions. May the Lord grant you grace to dis-
cover the truth sought, and wisdom sufficient to
commit it to writing, and to communicate it
without delay to me. I have written in much
ignorance, and in a homely style ; but since you
think it worth while to know that about which
I am inquiring, I beseech you in the name of
Christ the Lord to correct me where I am mis-
taken, and teach me what you know that I am
desirous to learn.


LETTER CLIX.

(a.d. 415.)

to evodius, my lord most blessed, my vener-
able and beloved brother and partner in
the priestly office, and to the brethren
who are with him, augustin and the
brethren who are with him send greeting
in the lord.

I. Our brother Barbarus, the bearer of this
letter, is a servant of God, who has now for a
long time been settled at Hippo, and has been
an eager and diligent hearer of the word of God.
He requested from us this letter to your Holi-
ness, whereby we commend him to you in the
Lord, and convey to you through him the salu-
tations which it is our duty to offer. To reply
to those letters of your Hohness, in which you
have interwoven questions of great difficulty,
would be a most laborious task, even for men
who are at leisure, and who are endowed with
much greater ability in discussing and acute-
ness in apprehending any subject than we possess.
One, indeed, of the two letters in which you ask


many great questions has gone amissing, I know
not how, and though long sought for cannot be
found ; the other, which has been found, con-
tains a very pleasing account of a servant of
God, a good and chaste young man, stating how
he departed from this life, and by what testimo-
nies, communicated through visions of the breth-
ren, his merits were, as you state, made known
to you. Taking occasion from this young man's
case, you propose and discuss an extremely
obscure question concerning the soul, — whether
it is associated when it goes forth from this body
with some other kind of body, by means of
which it can be carried to or confined in places
having material boundaries ? The investigation
of this question, if indeed it admits of satisfac-
tory investigation by beings such as we are,
demands the most diligent care and labour, and
therefore a mind absolutely at leisure from such
occupations as engross my time. My opinion,
however, if you are willing to hear it, summed
up in a sentence, is, that I by no means believe
that the soul in departing from the body is
accompanied by another body of any kind.

2. As to the question how these visions and
predictions of future events are produced, let
him attempt to explain them who understands
by what power we are to account for the great
wonders which are wrought in the mind of every
man when his thoughts are busy. For we see,
and we plainly perceive, that within the mind
innumerable images of many objects discernible
by the eye or by our other senses are produced,
— whether they are produced in regular order
or in confusion matters not to us at present : all
that we say is, that since such images are beyond
all dispute produced, the man who is found able
to state by what power and in what way these
phenomena of daily and perpetual experience
are to be accounted for is the only man who may
warrantably venture to conjecture or propound
any explanation of these visions, which are of
exceedingly rare occurrence. P'or my part, as I
discover more plainly my inability to account for
the ordinary facts of our experience, when awake
or asleep, throughout the whole course of our
lives, the more do I shrink from venturing to
explain what is extraordinary. For while I have
been dictating this epistle to you, I have been
contemplating your person in my mind, — you
being, of course, absent all the while, and know-
ing nothing of my thoughts, — and I have been
imagining from my knowledge of what is in you
how you will be affected by my words ; and I
have been unable to apprehend, either by obser-
vation or by inquiry, how this process was ac-
complished in my mind. Of one thing, however,
I am certain, that although the mental image
was very like something material, it was not pro-
duced either by masses of matter or by qualities


5H


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


of matter. Accept this in the meantime from
one writing under pressure of other duties, and
in haste. In the twelfth of the books which I
have written on Genesis this question is discussed
with great care, and that dissertation is enriched
with a forest of examples from actual experience
or from trustworthy report. How far I have
been competent to handle the question, and
what I have accomplished in it, you will judge
when you have read that work ; if indeed the
Lord shall be pleased m His kmdness to permit
me now to publish those books systematically
corrected to the best of my ability, and thus to
meet the expectation of many brethren, instead
of deferring their hope by continuing further the
discussion of a subject which has already en-
gaged me for a long time.

3. I will narrate briefly, however, one fact
which I commend to your meditation. You
know our brother Gennadius, a physician, known
to almost every one, and very dear to us, who
now lives at Carthage, and was in other years
eminent as a medical practitioner at Rome. You
know him as a man of religious character and
of very great benevolence, actively compassion-
ate and promptly liberal in his care of the poor.
Nevertheless, even he, when still a young man,
and most zealous in these charitable acts, had
sometimes, as he himself told me. doubts as to
whether there was any life after death. Foras-
much, therefore, as God would in no wise forsake
a man so merciful in his disposition and conduct,
there appeared to him in sleep a youth of re-
markable appearance and commanding presence,
who said to him : " Follow me." Following him,
he came to a city where he began to hear on the
right hand sounds of a melody so exquisitely
sweet as to surpass anything he had ever heard.
When he inquired what it was, his guide said :
" It IS the hymn of the blessed and the holy."
What he reported himself to have seen on the
left hand escapes my remembrance. He awoke ;
the dream vanished, and he thought of it as only
a dream.

4. On a second night, however, , the same
youth appeared to Gennadius, and asked whether
he recognised him, to which he replied that he
knew him well, without the slightest uncertainty.
Thereupon he asked Gennadius where he had
become acquainted with him. There also his
memory failed him not as to the proper reply :
he narrated the whole vision, and the hymns of
the saints which, under his guidance, he had been
taken to hear, with all the readiness natural to
recollection of some very recent experience.
On this the youth inquired whether it was in
sleep or when awake that he had seen what he
had just narrated. Gennadius answered : " In
sleep." The youth then said : " You remember
it well ; it is true that you saw these things in


sleep, but I would have you know that even now
you are seeing in sleep." Hearing this, Genna-
dius was persuaded of its truth, and in his reply
declared that he believed it. Then his teacher
went on to say: "Where is your body now?"
He answered : " In my bed." " Do you know,"
said the youth, " that the eyes in this body of
yours are now bound and closed, and at rest, and
that with these eyes you are seeing nothing?"
He answered: "I know it." "What, then,"
said the youth, " are the eyes with which you see
me ? " He, unable to discover what to answer
to this, was silent. While he hesitated, the youth
unfolded to him what he was endeavoring to
teach him by these questions, and forthwith said :
" As while you are asleep and lying on your bed
these eyes of your body are now unemployed
and doing nothing, and yet you have eyes with
which you behold me, and enjoy this vision, so,
after your death, while your bodily eyes shall be
wholly inactive, there shall be in you a life by
which you shall still live, and a faculty of per-
ception by which you shall still perceive. Be-
ware, therefore, after this of harbouring doubts
as to whether the life of man shall continue after
death." This believer says that by this means
all doubts as to this matter were removed from
him. By whom was he taught this but by the
merciful, providential care of God ?

5. Some one may say that by this narrative
I have not solved but complicated the question.
Nevetheless, while it is free to every one to be-
lieve or disbelieve these statements, every man
has his own consciousness at hand as a teacher
by whose help he may apply himself to this
most profound question. Every day man wakes,
and sleeps, and thinks ; let any man, therefore,
answer whence proceed these things which, while
not material bodies, do nevertheless resemble the
forms, properties, and motions of material bo-
dies : let him, I say, answer this if he can. But
if he cannot do this, why is he in such haste to
pronounce a definite opinion on things which
occur very rarely, or are beyond the range of his
experience, when he is unable to explain matters
of daily and perpetual observation? For my
part, although I am wholly unable to explain in
words how those semblances of material bodies,
without any real body, are produced, I may say
that I wish that, with the same certainty with
which I know that these things are not produced
by the body, I could know by what means those
things are perceived which are occasionally seen
by the spirit, and are supposed to be seen by
the bodily senses ; or by what distinctive marks
we may know the visions of men who have been
misguided by delusion, or, most commonly, by
impiety, since the examples of such visions
closely resembling the visions of pious and holy
men are so numerous, that if I wished to quote


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


515


them, time, rather than abundance of examples,
would fail me.

May you, through the mercy of the Lord,
grow in grace, most blessed lord and venerable
and beloved brother !


LETTER CLXIIL

(a.d. 414.)

to bishop augustin, bishop evodius sends
greeting.

Some time ago I sent two questions to your
HoHness ; the first, which was sent, I think, by
Jobinus, a servant in the nunnery,' related to
God and reason, and the second was m regard
to the opinion that the body of the Saviour is
capable of seeing the substance of the Deity.
I now propound a third question : Does the
rational soul which our Saviour assumed along
with His body fall under any one of the theories
commonly advanced in discussions on the origin
of souls (if any theory indeed can be with cer-
tainty established on the subject), — or does
His soul, though rational, belong not to any of
the species under which the souls of living crea-
tures are classified, but to another?

I ask also a fourth question : Who are those
spirits in reference to whom the Apostle Peter
testifies concerning the Lord in these words :
" Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened
in the spirit, in which also He went and preached
to the spirits in prison? " giving us to understand
that they were in hell, and that Christ descending
into hell, preached the gospel to them all, and
by grace delivered them all from darkness and
punishment, so that from the time of the resur-
rection of the Lord judgment is expected, hell
having then been completely emptied.

What your Holiness believes in this matter I
earnestly desire to know.


LETTER CLXIV.

(a.d. 414.)

to my lord evodius most blessed, my brother

AND PARTNER IN THE EPISCOPAL OFFICE, AUGUS-
TIN SENDS GREETING IN THE LORD.

I . The question which you have proposed to
me from the epistle of the Apostle Peter is one
which, as I think you are aware, is wont to per-
plex me most seriously, namely, how the words
which you have quoted are to be understood on
the supposition that they were spoken concern-
ing hell ? I therefore refer this question back to
yourself, that if either you yourself be able, or
can find any other person who is able to do so,

' Qui servit ancillis D»i.


you may remove and terminate my perplexities
on the subject. If the Lord grant to me ability
to understand the words before you do, and it be
in my power to impart what I receive from Him
to you, I will not withhold it from a friend so
truly loved. In the meantime, I will communi-
cate to you the things in the passage which
occasion difficulty to me, that, keeping in view
these remarks on the words of the apostle, you
may either exercise your own thoughts on them,
or consult any one whom you find competent to
pronounce an opinion.

2. After having said that " Christ was put to
death in the flesh, and quickened in the spirit,"
the apostle immediately went on to say : " in
which also He went and preached unto the
spirits in prison ; which sometime were unbe-
lieving,^ when once the long-suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a
preparing, wherein {q\v, that is, eight souls were
saved by water ; " thereafter he added the words :
"which baptism also now by a like figure has
saved you." 3 This, therefore, is felt by me to
be difficult. If the Lord when He died preached
in hell to spirits in prison, why were those who
continued unbelieving while the ark was a pre-
paring the only ones counted worthy of this
favour, namely, the Lord's descending into hell ?
For in the ages between the time of Noah and
the passion of Christ, there died many thousands
of so many nations whom He might have found
in hell. I do not, of course, speak here of those
who in that period of time had believed in God,
as, e.g. the prophets and patriarchs of Abraham's
hne, or, going father back, Noah himself and his
house, who had been saved by water (excepting
perhaps the one son, who afterwards was re-
jected), and, in addition to these, all others out-
side of the posterity of Jacob who were believers
in God, such as Job, the citizens of Nineveh, and
any others, whether mentioned in Scripture or
existing unknown to us in the vast human family
at any time. I speak only of those many thou-
sands of men who, ignorant of God and devoted
to the worship of devils or of idols, had passed
out of this life from the time of Noah to the
passion of Christ. How was it that Christ, find-
ing these in hell, did not preach to them, but
preached only to those who were unbelieving in
the days of Noah when the ark was a preparing ?
Or if he preached to all, why has Peter men-
tioned only these, and passed over the innumer-
able multitude of others?

Chap. ii. 3. — It is established beyond question
that the Lord, after He had been put to death in
the flesh, " descended into hell ; " for it is im-
possible to gainsay either that utterance of
prophecy, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in'

2 Increditli.

3 I Pet. iii. 18-21.


5i6


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


hell,'" — an utterance which Peter himself ex-
pounds in the Acts of the Apostles, lest any one
should venture to put upon it another interpre-
tation,— or the words of the same apostle, in
which he affirms that the Lord " loosed the pains
of hell, in which it was not possible for Him to
be holden." ^ Who, therefore, except an infidel,
will deny that Christ was in hell ? As to the dif-
ficulty which is found in reconciling the state-
ment that the pains of hell were loosed by Him,
with the fact that He had never begun to be in
these pains as in bonds, and did not so loose
them as if He had broken off chains by which
He had been bound, this is easily removed when
we understand that they were loosed in the same
way as the snares of huntsmen may be loosed to
prevent their holding, not because they have
taken hold. It may also be understood as teach-
ing us to believe Him to have loosed those pains
which could not possibly hold Him, but which
were holding those to whom He had resolved to
grant deliverance.

4. But who these were it is presumptuous for
us to define. For if we say that all who were
found there were then delivered without excep-
tion, who will not rejoice if we can prove this ?
Especially will men rejoice for the sake of some
who are intimately known to us by their literary
labours, whose eloquence and talent we admire,
— not only the poets and orators who in many
parts of their writings have held up to contempt
and ridicule these same false gods of the nations,
and have even occasionally confessed the one
true God, although along with the rest they ob-
served superstitious rites, but also those who have
uttered the same, not in poetry or rhetoric, but
as philosophers : and for the sake of many more
of whom we have no literary remains, but in re-
gard to whom we have learned from the writings
of these others that their lives were to a certain
extent praiseworthy, so that (with the exception
of their service of God, in which they erred,
worshipping the vanities which had been set up
as objects of public worship, and serving the
creature rather than the Creator) they may be
justly held up as models in all the other virtues
of frugality, self-denial, chastity, sobriety, braving
of death in their country's defence, and faith
kept inviolate not only to fellow-citizens, but also
to enemies. All these things, indeed, when they
are practised with a view not to the great end
of right and true piety, but to the empty pride
of human praise and glory, become in a sense
worthless and unprofitable ; nevertheless, as in-
dications of a certain disposition of mind, they
please us so much that we would desire those in
whom they exist, either by special preference or

^ Ps. xvi. 10.

* Acts ii. 24, 27, in which the words rendered by Augustin
" inferni dolores " are J to? diSivai tov fla^arou.


along with the others, to be freed from the pains
of hell, were not the verdict of human feehng
different from that of the justice of the Creator.
5. These things being so, if the Saviour de-
livered all from that place, and, to quote the
terms of the question in your letter, "emptied
hell, so that now from that time forward the last
judgment was to be expected," the following
things occasion not unreasonable perplexity on
this subject, and are wont to present themselves
to me in the meantime when 1 think on it. First,
by what authoritative statements can this opinion
be confirmed ? For the words of Scripture, that
" the pains of hell were loosed " by the death
of Christ, do not establish this, seeing that this
statement may be understood as referring to
Himself, and meaning that he so far loosed (that
is, made ineffectual) the pains of hell that He
Himself was not held by them, especially since
it is added that it was " impossible for Him to
be holden of them." Or if any one [objecting
to this interpretation] ask the reason why He
chose to descend into hell, where those pains
were which could not possibly hold Him who
was, as Scripture says, " free among the dead," ^
in whom the prince and captain of death found
nothing which deserved punishment, the words
that " the pains of hell were loosed " may be
understood as referring not to the case of all, but
only of some whom He judged worthy of that
deliverance ; so that neither is He supposed to
have descended thither in vain, without the pur-
pose of bringing benefit to any of those who
were there held in prison, nor is it a necessary
inference that what divine mercy and justice
i granted to some must be supposed to have been
granted to all.

Chap. hi. 6. As to the first man, the father of
mankind, it is agreed by almost the entire Church
' that the Lord loosed him from that prison ; a
tenet which must be believed to have been
accepted not without reason, — from whatever
source it was handed down to the Church, —
' although the authority of the canonical Scrip-
tures cannot be brought forward as speaking ex-
pressly in its support,-* though this seems to be
the opinion which is more than any other borne
! out by these words in the book of Wisdom. 5
' Some add to this [tradition] that the same favour
I was bestowed on the holy men of antiquity, —
j on Abel, Seth, Noah and his house, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and the other patriarchs and
prophets, they also being loosed from those pains
at the time when the Lord descended into hell.
7. But, for my part, I cannot see how Abra-

3 Ps. Ixxxviii. 5.

* We give the original of this important sentence : — " De illo
quidera primo homine patre generis humani, quod eum inde solverit
Ecclesia fere tota consentit : quod earn non inaniter credidisse cre-
dendum est, undecumque hoc traditum sit, etiamsi canonicarum
Scripturarum hinc expressa non proferatur auctoritas."

^ Wisd. X. 1,2.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


517


ham, into whose bosom also the pious beggar in
the parable was received, can be understood to
have been in these pains ; those who are able can
perhaps explain this. But I suppose every one
must see it to be absurd to imagine that only
two, namely, Abraham and Lazarus, were in that
bosom of wondrous repose before the Lord de-
scended into hell, and that with reference to
these two alone it was said to the rich man,
" Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed,
so that they which would pass from hence to you
cannot, neither can they pass to us that would
pass from thence." ' Moreover, if there were
more than two there, who will dare to say that
the patriarchs and prophets were not there, to
whose righteousness and piety so signal testi-
mony is borne in the word of God ? What bene-
fit was conferred in that case on them by Him
who loosed the pains of hell, in which they were
not held, I do not yet understand, especially as
I have not been able to find anywhere in Scrip-
ture the name of hell used in a good sense. And
if this use of the term is nowhere found in the
divine Scriptures, assuredly the bosom of Abra-
ham, that is, the abode of a certain secluded rest,
is not to be believed to be a part of hell. Nay,
from these words themselves of the great Master,
in which He says that Abraham said, " Between
us and you there is a great gulf fixed," it is, as I
think, sufficiently evident that the bosom of that
glorious felicity was not any integral part of hell.
For what is that great gulf but a chasm com-
pletely separating those places between which it
not only is, but is fixed ? Wherefore, if sacred
Scripture had said, without naming hell and its
pains, that Christ when He died went to that
bosom of Abraham, I wonder if any one would
have dared to say that He " descended into
hell."

8. But seeing that plain scriptural testimonies
make mention of hell and its pains, no reason
can be alleged for believing that He who is the
Saviour went thither, except that He might save
from its pains ; but whether He did save all
whom He found held in them, or some whom
He judged worthy of that favour, I still ask :
that He was, however, in hell, and that He con-
ferred this benefit on persons subjected to these
pains, I do not doubt. Wherefore, I have not
yet found what benefit He, when He descended
into hell, conferred upon those righteous ones
who were in Abraham's bosom, from whom I see
that, so far as regarded the beatific presence of
His Godhead, He never withdrew Himself;
since even on that very day on which He died.
He promised that the thief should be with Him
in paradise at the time when He was about to
descend to loose the pains of hell. Most cer-


I


' Luke xvi. 26.


tainly, therefore, He was, before that time, both
in paradise and the bosom of Abraham in His
beatific wisdom, and in hell in His condemning
power ; for since the Godhead is confined by no
limits, where is He not present? At the same
time, however, so far as regarded the created
nature, in assuming which at a certain point of
time, He, while continuing to be God, became
man — that is to say, so far as regarded His soul.
He was in hell : this is plainly declared in
these words of Scripture, which were both sent
before in prophecy and fully expounded by apos-
tolical interpretation : " Thou wilt not leave my
soul in hell." ^

9. I know that some think that at the death
of Christ a resurrection such as is promised to
us at the end of the world was granted to the
righteous, founding this on the statement in
Scripture that, in the earthquake by which at the
moment of His death the rocks were rent and
the graves were opened, many bodies of the
saints arose and were seen with Him in the
Holy City after He rose. Certainly, if these did
not fall asleep again, their bodies being a second
time laid in the grave, it would be necessary
to see in what sense Christ can be understood to
be " the first begotten from the dead," ^ if so
many preceded Him in the resurrection. And if
it be said, in answer to this, that the statement
is made by anticipation, so that the graves in-
deed are to be supposed to have been opened
by that earthquake at the time when Christ was
hanging on the cross, but that the bodies of the
saints did not rise then, but only after Christ had
risen before them, — although on this hypothesis
of anticipation in the narrative, the addition of
these words would not hinder us from still believ-
ing, on the one hand, that Christ was without
doubt " the first begotten from the dead," and on
the other, that to these saints permission was
given, when He went before them, to rise to an
eternal state of incorruption and immortality, —
there still remains a difficulty, namely, how in
that case Peter could have spoken as he did,
saying what was without doubt perfectly true,
when he affirmed that in the prophecy quoted
above the words, that " His flesh should not see
corruption," referred not to David but to Christ,
and added concerning David, "He is buried,
and his sepulchre is with us to this day," -^ — a
statement which would have had no force as an
argument unless the body of David was still un-
disturbed in the sepulchre ; for of course the
sepulchre might still have been there even had
the saint's body been raised up immediately after
his death, and had thus not seen corruption.
But it seems hard that David should not be


2 Ps. xvi. 10.

3 Rev. i. 5.

4 AcU ii. 28.


5i8


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


included in this resurrection of the saints, if
eternal life was given to them, since it is so fre-
quently, so clearly, and with such honourable
mention of his name, declared that Christ was
to be of David's seed. Moreover, these words
in the Epistle to the Hebrews concerning the
ancient believers, " God having provided some
better thing for us, that they without us should
not be made perfect," ' will be endangered, if
these believers have been already established
in that incorruptible resurrection-state which is
promised to us when we are to be made perfect
at the end of the world.

Chap. iv. — lo. You perceive, therefore, how
intricate is the question why Peter chose to
mention, as persons to whom, when shut "up in
prison, the gospel was preached, those only who
were unbelieving in the days of Noah when the
ark was a preparing — and also the difficulties
which prevent me from pronouncing any definite
opinion on the subject. An additional reason
for my hesitation is, that after the apostle had
said, " Which baptism now by a like figure saves
you (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh,
but tlie answer of a good conscience towards
God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, who
is on the right hand of God, having swallowed
up death that we might be made heirs of eternal
life ; and having gone into heaven, angels, and
authorities, and powers being made subject to
Him," he added : " Forasmuch then as Christ
hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves
likewise with the same mind : for he that hath
suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin ; that
he no longer should live the rest of his time in
the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of
God ; " after which he continues : " For the time
past of our life may suffice us to have wrought
the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in las-
civiousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, ban-
quetings, and abominable idolatries : wherein
they think it strange that ye run not with them
to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you ;
who shall give account to Him that is ready to
judge the quick and the dead." After these
words he subjoins : " For for this cause was the
gospel preached also to them that are dead, that
they might be judged according to men in the
flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit." ^

1 1 . Who can be otherwise than perplexed by
words so profound as these? He saith, "The
gospel was preached to the dead ; " and if by
the " dead " we understand persons who have
departed from the body, I suppose he must mean
those described above as " unbelieving in the
days of Noah," or certainly all those whom Christ
found in hell. W^hat, then, is meant by the
words, " That they might be judged according

■ Heb. xi. 40.
- I Pet. iv. 1,6.


to men in the flesh, but live according to God
in the spirit"? For how can they be judged in
the flesh, which if they be in hell they no longer
have, and which if they have been loosed from
the pains of hell they have not yet resumed?
For even if" hell was," as you put in your question,
" emptied," it is not to be believed that all who
were then there have risen again in the flesh, or
those who, arising, again appeared with the Lord
resumed the flesh for this j)urpose, that they
might be in it judged according to men ; but
how this could be taken as true in the case of
those who were unbelieving in the days of Noah
I do not see, for Scripture does not affirm that
they were made to live in the flesh, nor can it be
believed that the end for which they were loosed
from the pains of hell was that they who were
delivered from these might resume their flesh in
order to suffer punishment. What, then, is meant
by the words, "That they might be judged ac-
cording to men in the flesh, but live according
to God in the spirit?" Can it mean that to
those whom Christ found in hell this was granted,
that by the gospel they were quickened in the
spirit, although at the future resurrection they
must be judged in the flesh, that they may pass,
through some punishment in the flesh, into the
kingdom of God? If this be what is meant,
why were only the unbelievers of the time of
Noah (and not also all others whom Christ found
in hell when He went thither) quickened in
spirit by the preaching of the gospel, to be after-
wards judged in the flesh with a punishment of
limited duration ? But if we take this as apply-
ing to all, the question still remains why Peter
mentioned none but those who were unbelieving
in the days of Noah.

12. I find, moreover, a difficulty in the reason
alleged by those who attempt to give an ex-
planation of this matter. They say that all those
who were found in hell when Christ descended
thither had never heard the gospel, and that
that place of punishment or imprisonment was
emptied of all these, because the gospel was not
published to the whole world in their lifetime,
and they had sufficient excuse for not believing
that which had never been proclaimed to them ;
but that thenceforth, men despising the gospel
when it was in all nations fully published and
spread abroad would be inexcusable, and there-
fore after the prison was then emptied there still
remains a just judgment, in which those who are
contumacious and unbelieving shall be punished
even with eternal fire. Those who hold this
opinion do not consider that the same excuse
is available for all those who have, even after
Christ's resurrection, departed this life before the
gospel came to them. For even after the Lord
came back from hell, it was not the case that
no one was from that time forward permitted

%


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


519


to go to hell without having heard the gospel,
seeing that multitudes throughout the world died
before the proclamation of its tidings came to
them, all of whom are entitled to plead the ex-
cuse which is alleged to have been taken away
from those of whom it is said, that because they
had not before heard the gospel, the Lord when
He descended into hell proclaimed it to them.

13. This objection may perhaps be met by
saying that those also who since the Lord's res-
urrection have died or are now dying without the
gospel having been proclaimed to them, may
have heard it or may now hear it where they are,
in hell, so that there they may believe what
ought to be believed concerning the truth of
Christ, and may also have that pardon and
salvation which those to whom Christ preached
obtained ; for the fact that Christ ascended again
from hell is no reason why the report concerning
Him should have perished from recollection
there, for from this earth also He has gone as-
cending into heaven, and yet by the publication
of His gospel those who believe in Him shall be
saved ; moreover, He was exalted, and received
a name that is above every name, for this end,
that in His name every knee should bow, not
only of things in heaven and on earth, but also
of things under the earth.' But if we accept this
opinion, according to which we are warranted in
supposing that men who did not believe while
they were in life can in hell believe in Christ,
who can bear the contradictions both of reason
and faith which must follow ? In the first place,
if this were true, we should seem to have no rea-
son for mourning over those who have departed
from the body without that grace, and there
would be no ground for being solicitous and
using urgent exhortation that men would accept
the grace of God before they die, lest they should
be punished with eternal death. If, again, it be
alleged that in hell those only believe to no pur-
pose and in vain who refused to accept here on
earth the gospel preached to them, but that be-
lieving will profit those who never despised a
gospel which they never had it in their power to
hear, another still more absurd consequence is
involved, namely, that forasmuch as all men
shall certainly die, and ought to come to hell
wholly free from the guilt of having despised the
gospel, since otherwise it can be of no use to
them to believe it when they come there, the
gospel ought not to be preached on earth, — a
sentiment not less foolish than profane.

Chap. v. — 14. Wherefore let us most firmly
hold that which faith, resting on authority estab-
lished beyond all question, maintains : " that
Christ died according to the Scriptures," and
that " He was buried," and that


He rose again


' Infernorutn. Phil. ii. 9.


the third day according to the Scriptures," and
all other things which have been written con-
cerning Him in records fully demonstrated to
be true. Among these doctrines we include the
doctrine that He was in hell, and, having loosed
the pains of hell, in which it was impossible for
Him to be holden, from which also He is with
good ground believed to have loosed and deliv-
ered whom He would. He took again to Him-
self that body which He had left on the cross,
and which had been laid in the tomb. These
things, I say, let us firmly hold ; but as to the
question propounded by you from the words of
the Apostle Peter, since you now perceive the
difficulties which I find in it, and since other
difficulties may possibly be found if the subject
be more carefully studied, let us continue to
investigate it, whether by applying our own
thoughts to the subject, or by asking the opinion
of any one whom it may be becoming and pos-
sible to consult.

15. Consider, however, I pray you, whether
all that the Apostle Peter says concerning spirits
shut up in prison, who were unbelieving in the
days of Noah, may not after all have been written
without any reference to hell, but rather to those
times the typical character of which he has
transferred to the present time. For that trans-
action had been typical of future events, so that
those who do not believe the gospel in our age,
when the Church is being built up in all nations,
may be understood to be like those who did not
believe in that age while the ark was a prepar-
ing ; also, that those who have believed and are
saved by baptism may be compared to those
who at that time, being in the ark, were saved
by water ; wherefore he says, " So baptism by a
like figure saves you." Let us therefore interpret
the rest of the statements concerning them that
believed not so as to harmonise with the analogy
of the figure, and refuse to entertain the thought
that the gospel was once preached, or is even
to this hour being preached in hell in order to
make men believe and be delivered from its
pains, as if a Church had been established there
as well as on earth.

16. Those who have inferred from the words,
'' He preached to the spirits in prison," that
Peter held the opinion which perplexes you,
seem to me to have been drawn to this interpre-
tation by imagining that the term " spirits " could
not be applied to designate souls which were at
that time still in the bodies of men, and which,
being shut up in the darkness of ignorance, were,
so to speak, "in prison," — a prison such as
that from which the Psalmist sought deliverance
in the prayer, " Bring my soul out of prison, that
I may praise Thy name ;" ^ which is in another

2 Ps. cxlii. 7.


520


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


place called the " shadow of death," ' from which
deliverance was granted, not certainly in hell, but
in this world, to those of whom it is written,
" They that dwell in the land of the shadow of
death, upon them hath the light shined."^ But
to the men of Noah's time the gospel was
preached in vain, because they believed not when
God's long suffering waited for them during the
many years in which the ark was being built (for
the building of the ark was itself in a certain
sense a preaching of mercy) ; even as now men
similar to them are unbelieving, who, to use the
same figure, are shut up in the darkness of igno-
rance as in a prison, beholding in vain the
Church which is being built up throughout the
world, while judgment is impending, as the flood
was by which at that time all the unbelieving
perished ; for the Lord says : " As it was in the
days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days
of the Son of man ; they did eat, they drank,
they married wives, they were given in marriage,
until the day that Noah entered into the ark,
and the flood came and destroyed them all." ^
But because that transaction was also a type
of a future event, that flood was a type both of
baptism to believers and of destruction to un-
believers, as in that figure in which, not by a
transaction but by words, two things are pre-
dicted concerning Christ, when He is represented
in Scripture as a stone which was destined to be
both to unbelievers a stone of stumbling, and
to believers a foundation-stone.* Occasionally,
however, also in the same figure, whether it be
in the form of a typical event or of a parable,
two things are used to represent one, as believers
were represented both by the timbers of which
the ark was built and by the eight souls saved
in the ark, and as in the gospel similitude of
the sheepfold Christ is both the shepherd and the
door.5

Chap. vi. 17. And let it not be regarded as
an objection to the interpretation now given,
that the Apostle Peter says that Christ Himself
preached to men shut up in prison who were un-
believing in the days of Noah, as if we must
consider this interpretation inconsistent with the
fact that at that time Christ had not come. For
although he had not yet come in the flesh, as
He came when afterwards He " showed Him-
self upon earth, and conversed with men," ^
nevertheless he certainly came often to this
earth, from the beginning of the human race,
whether to rebuke the wicked, as Cain, and be-
fore that, Adam and his wife, when they sinned,
or to comfort the good, or to admonish both,

' Ps. cvii. 14.

* Isa. ix. 2.

* Luke xvii. 26, 27.

•♦ Ps. cxviii. 22; Isa. viii. 14, xxviii. 16; Dan il. 34, 45; Matt.
xxi. 44; Luke xx. 17; Acts iv. 11; Rom. ix. 33, etc.
i John X. i^ 2.

* Baruch iii. 37,


SO that some should to their salvation believe,
others should to their condemnation refuse to
believe, — coming then not in the flesh but in
the spirit, speaking by suitable manifestations of
Himself to such persons and in such manner as
seemed good to Him. As to this expression,
" He came in the spirit," surely He, as the Son
of God, is a Spirit in the essence of His Deity,
for that is not corporeal ; but what is at any time
done by the Son without the Holy Spirit, or
without the Father, seeing that all the works of
the Trinity are inseparable ?

18. The words of Scripture which are under
consideration seem to me of themselves to make
this sufficiently plain to those who carefully attend
to them : " For Christ hath died once for our
sins, the Just for the unjust, that He might bring
us to God ; being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened in the spirit : in which also He came
and preached unto the spirits in prison, who
sometime were unbelieving, when the long-suffer-
ing of God waited in the days of Noah, while
the ark was a preparing." The order of the
words is now, I suppose, carefully noted by you :
" Christ being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened in the spirit ; " in which spirit He
came and preached also to those spirits who had
once in the days of Noah refused to believe His
word ; since before He came in the flesh to die
for us, which He did once, He often came in the
spirit, to whom He would, by visions instructing
them as He would, coming to them assured-
ly in the same spirit in which He was quick-
ened when He was put to death in the flesh in
His passion. Now what does His being quick-
ened in the spirit mean if not this, that the
same flesh in which alone He had experienced
death rose from the dead by the quickening
spirit?

Chap, vil 19. For who will dare to say that
Jesus was put to death in His soul, i.e. in the
spirit which belonged to Him as man, since the
only death which the soul can experience is sin,
from which He was absolutely free when for us
He was put to death in the flesh ? For if the
souls of all men are derived from that one which
the breath of God gave to the first man, by
whom " sin entered into the world, and death
by sin, and so death passed upon all men," ?
either the soul of Christ is not derived from the
same source as other souls, because He had ab-
solutely no sin, either original or personal, on
account of which death could be supposed to be
merited by Him, since He paid on our behalf
that which was not on His own account due by
Him, in whom the prince of this world, who had
the power of death, found nothing ^ — and there
is nothing unreasonable in the supposition that

7 Rom. V. 12.

8 John xiv. 30.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


521


He who created a soul for the first man should
create a soul for Himself; or if the soul of
Christ be derived from Adam's soul, He, in
assuming it to Himself, cleansed it so that when
He came into this world He was born of the
Virgin perfectly free from sin either actual or
transmitted. If, however, the souls of men are
not derived from that one soul, and it is only
by the flesh that original sin is transmitted from
Adam, the Son of God created a soul for Him-
self, as He creates souls for all other men, but
He united it not to sinful flesh, but to the " like-
ness of sinful flesh." ' For He took, indeed,
from the Virgin the true substance of flesh ; not,
however, " sinful flesh," for it was neither begot-
ten nor conceived through carnal concupiscence,
but mortal, and capable of change in the suc-
cessive stages of life, as being like unto sinful
flesh in all points, sin excepted.

20. Therefore, whatever be the true theory
concerning the origin of souls, — and on this I
feel it would be rash for me to pronounce, mean-
while, any opinion beyond utterly rejecting the
theory which affirms that each soul is thrust into j
the body which it inhabits as into a prison, where
it expiates some former actions of its own of
which I know nothing, — it is certain, regarding
the soul of Christ, not only that it is, according
to the nature of all souls, immortal, but also
that it was neither put to death by sin nor pun-
ished by condemnation, the only two ways in
which death can be understood as experienced
by the soul ; and therefore it could not be said
of Christ that with reference to the soul He was
" quickened in the spirit." For He was quick-
ened in that in which He had been put to death ;
this, therefore, is spoken with reference to His
flesh, for His flesh received life again when the
soul returned to it, as it also had died when
the soul departed. He was therefore said to be
" put to death in the flesh," because He expe-
rienced death only in the flesh, but " quickened
in the spirit," because by the operation of that
Spirit in which He was wont to come and preach
to whom He would, that same flesh in which He
came to men was quickened and rose from the
grave.

21. Wherefore, passing now to the words
which we find farther on concerning unbelievers,
" Who shall give account to Him who is ready
to judge the quick and the dead," there is no
necessity for our understanding the " dead "
here to be those who have departed from the
body. For it may be that the apostle intended
by the word " dead " to denote unbelievers, as
being spiritually dead, like those of whom it
was said, " Let the dead bury their dead," ^ and
by the word " living " to denote those who be-

■ Rom. viii 3.
' Matt. viii. 22.


lieve in Him, having not heard in vain the call,
" Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light ;"3 of
whom also the Lord said : " The hour is com-
ing, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live." ■♦ On the same principle of interpreta-
tion, also, there is nothing compelling us to
understand the immediately succeeding words
of Peter — "For for this cause was the gospel
preached also to them that are dead, that they
might be judged according to men in the flesh,
but live according to God in the spirit " 5 — as
describing what has been done in hell. " For
for this cause has the gospel been preached " in
this life " to the dead," that is, to the unbeliev-
ing wicked, " that " when they believed " they
might be judged according to men in the flesh,"
— that is, by means of various afflictions and by
the death of the body itself; for which reason
the same apostle says in another place : " The
time is come that judgment must begin at the
house of God,"^ — "but live according to God
in the spirit," since in that same spirit they had
been dead while they were held prisoners in the
death of unbelief and wickedness.

2 2. If this exposition of the words of Peter
offend any one, or, without offending, at least
fail to satisfy any one, let him attempt to inter-
pret them on the supposition that they refer to
hell : and if he succeed in solving my difficulties
which I have mentioned above, so as to remove
the perplexity which they occasion, let him com-
municate his interpretation to me ; and if this
were done, the words might possibly have been
intended to be understood in both ways, but the
view which I have propounded is not thereby
shown to be false.

I wrote and sent by the deacon Asellus a letter,
which I suppose you have received, giving such
answers as I could to the questions which you
sent before, excepting the one concerning the
vision of God by the bodily senses, on which a
larger treatise must be attempted. In your last
note, to which this is a reply, you propounded
two questions concerning certain words of the
Apostle Peter, and concerning the soul of
the Lord, both of which I have discussed, — the
former more fuUy, the latter briefly. ^ I beg you
not to grudge the trouble of sending me another
copy of the letter containing the question whether
it is possible for the substance of the Deity to
be seen in a bodily form as limited to place ;
for it has, I know not how, gone amissing here,
and though long sought for, has not been
found.


3 Eph. V. 14.

< John V. 25.

5 I Pet. iv. 6.

*> I Pet iv. 17.

' See paragraphs 19 and zo.


522


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


LETTER CLXV.

(a.d. 410.')

to my truly pious lords marcellinus ^ and
anapsychia, sons worthy of being esteemed
with all the love due to their position,
jerome sends greeting in christ.

Chap. i. — i. At last I have received your joint
letter from Africa, and I do not regret the im-
portunity with which, though you were silent, I
persevered in sending letters to you, that I might
obtain a reply, and learn, not through report
from others, but from your own most welcome
statement, that you are in health. I have not
forgotten the brief query, or rather the very im-
portant theological 3 question, which you pro-
pounded in regard to the origin of the soul, —
does it descend from heaven, as the philosopher
Pythagoras and all the Platonists and Origen
think? or is it part of the essence of the Deity,
as the Stoics, Manichseus, and the Priscillianists
of Spain imagine ? or are souls kept in a divine
treasure-house wherein they were stored of old,
as some ecclesiastics, foolishly misled, believe?
or are they daily created by God and sent into
bodies, according to what is written in the gos-
pel, " My Father worketh hitherto, and I work " ?*
or are souls really produced, as Tertullian, Apol-
linaris, and the majority of the Western divines
conjecture, by propagation, so that as the body
is the offspring of body, the soul is the offspring
of soul, and exists on conditions similar to those
regulating the existence of the inferior animals." 5
I know that I have published my opinion on this
question in my brief writings against Rufifinus,
in reply to a treatise addressed by him to Anas-
tasius, of holy memory, bishop of the Roman
Church, in which, while attempting to impose
upon the simplicity of his readers by a slippery
and artful, yet withal foolish confession, he ex-
posed to contempt his own faith, or, rather, his
own perfidy. These books are, I think, in the
possession of your holy kinsman Oceanus, for
they were published long ago to meet the calum-
nies contained in numerous writings of Rufifinus.
Be this as it may, you have in Africa that holy
man and learned bishop Augustin, who will be
able to teach you on this subject viva voce, as
the saying is, and expound to you his opinion,
or, I should rather say, my own opinion stated
in his words.

Chap. ii. — 2. I have long wished to begin the

» In assigning this place to Jerome's letter to Marcellinus and
Anapsychia, the Benedictine editors have departed from the chrono-
logical sequence in order to place it in immediate juxtaposition to
Letter CLXVL, written by Augustin to Jerome some years later OD
the subject mentioned in sec. i.

2 See note on Marcellinus in Letter CXXXIII. p. 470.

3 Ecclesiastica.
* John V. 17.

5 £t iimili cum brutis animantibus conditione subsistat.


volume of Ezekiel, and fulfil a promise frequently
made to studious readers ; but at the time when
I had just begun to dictate the proposed expo-
sition, my mind was so much agitated by the
devastation of the western provinces of the em-
pire, and especially by the sack of Rome itself
by the barbarians, that, to use a common pro-
verbial phrase, I scarcely knew my own name ;
and for a long while I was silent, knowing that it
was a time for tears. Moreover when I had, in
the course of this year, prepared three books
of the CoDunentary, a sudden furious invasion of
the barbarous tribes mentioned by your Virgil
as " the widely roaming Barcsei," ^ and by sacred
Scripture in the words concerning Ishmael, " He
shall dwell in the presence of his brethren," '
swept over the whole of Egypt, Palestine, Phe-
nice, and Syria, carrying all before them with the
vehemence of a mighty torrent, so that it was
only with the greatest difficulty that we were
enabled, by the mercy of Christ, to escape their
hands. But if, as a famous orator has said,
"Laws are silent amid the clash of arms,"** how
much more may this be said of scriptural studies,
which demand a multitude of books and silence,
together with uninterrupted diligence of aman-
uenses, and especially the enjoyment of tran-
quillity and leisure by those who dictate ! I
have accordingly sent two, books to my holy
daughter Fabiola, of which, if you wish copies,
you may borrow them from her. Through lack
of time I have been unable to transcribe others ;
when you have read these, and have seen the
portico, as it were, you may easily conjecture
what the house itself is designed to be. But I
trust m the mercy of God, who has helped me
in the very difficult commencement of the fore-
said work, that He will help me also in the pre-
dictions concerning the wars of Gog and Magog,
which occupy the last division but one of the
prophecy,^ and in the concluding portion itself,
describing the building, the details, and the
proportions of that most holy and mysterious
temple. '°

Chap. hi. — 3. Our holy brother Oceanus, to
whom you desire to be mentioned, is a man of
such gifts and character, and so profoundly
learned in the law of the Lord, that he may
probably give you instruction without any re-
quest of mine, and can impart to you on all
scriptural questions the opinion which, according
to the measure of our joint abihties, we have
formed.

May Christ, our almighty God, keep you, my
truly pious lords, in safety and prosperity to a
good old age !


^ " Lateque vagantes Barcaei." — Virg. ySnei'd, iv. 43

7 Gen, xvi. 12.

8 Cicero /r<7 Milone : " Leges inter arma silent."

9 Ezek. ch. xxxviii.-xxxix.
1° Ibid. ch. xl.-xliii


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


523


LETTER CLXVI.

(a.d. 415.)

a treatise on the origin of the human soul,
addressed to jerome.'

Chap. i. — i . Unto our God, who hath called
us unto His kingdom and glory/ I have prayed,
and pray now, that what I write to you, holy
brother Jerome, asking your opinion in regard
to things of which I am ignorant, may by His
good pleasure be profitable to us both. For
although in addressing you I consult one much
older than myself, nevertheless I also am be-
coming old ; but I cannot think that it is at any
time of life too late to learn what we need to
know, because, although it is more' fitting that
old men should be teachers than learners, it is
nevertheless more fitting for them to learn than
to continue ignorant of that which they should
teach to others. I assure you that, amid the
many disadvantages which I have to submit to
in studying very difficult questions, there is none
which grieves me more than the circumstance
of separation from your Charity by a distance
so great that I can scarcely send a letter to you,
and scarcely receive one from you, even at inter-
vals, not of days nor of months, but of several
years ; whereas my desire would be, if it were
possible, to have you daily beside me, as one
with whom I could converse on any theme.
Nevertheless, although I have not been able to
do all that I wished, I am not the less bound
to do all that I can.

2. Behold, a religious young man has come
to me, by name Orosius, who is in the bond
of Catholic peace a brother, in point of age a
son, and in honour a fellow presbyter, — a man
of quick understanding, ready speech, and burn-
ing zeal, desiring to be in the Lord's house a
vessel rendering useful service in refuting those
false and pernicious doctrines, through which the

' The following passage from the Retractations of Augustin
(Book ii. ch. xlv.) is quoted by the Benedictine Fathers as a preface
to this letter and the one immediately succeeding: — "I wrote also
two books to Presbyter Jerome, the recluse of Bethlehem [sedentem
in Bethlehem]; the one on the origin of the human soul, the other
on the sentence of the Apostle James, ' Whosoever shall keep the
whole law and offend in one point, he is guilty of all' (Jas. ii. 10),
asking his opinion on both subjects. In the former letter I did not
give any answer of my own to the question which I proposed; in the
latter I did not keep back what seemed to me the best way to solve
the question, but asked whether the same solution commended itself
to his judgment. He wrote in return, expressing approbation of my
submitting the questions to him, but saying that he had not leisure to
send me a reply. So long as he lived, therefore, I refused to give
these books to the world, lest he should perhaps at any time reply to
them, in which case 1 would have rather published them along with
his answer. After his decease, however, I published them, — the
former, in order to admonish any who read it, either to forbear alto-
gether from inquiring into the manner in which a soul is given to
infants at the time of birth, or, at all events, in a matter so involved
in obscurity, to accept only such a solution of the question as does
not contradict the clearest truths which the Catholic faith confesses
in regard to original sin in infants, as undoubtedly doomed to perdi-
tion unless they be regenerated in Christ; the latter in order that
what seemed to us the true answer to the question therein discussed
might be known. The work begins with the words, ' Deum nostrum
qui nos vocavit.' "

* I Thess. ii. 12.


souls of men in Spain have suffered much more
grievous wounds than have been inflicted on
their bodies by the sword of barbarians. For
from the remote western coast of Spain he
has come with eager haste to us, having been
prompted to do this by the report that from me
he could learn whatever he wished on the sub-
jects on which he desired information. Nor has
his coming been altogether in vain. In the first
place, he has learned not to believe all that re-
port affirmed of me : in the next place, I have
taught him all that I could, and, as for the things
in which I could not teach him, I have told him
from whom he may learn them, and have ex-
horted him to go on to you. As he received
this counsel or rather injunction of mine with
pleasure, and with intention to comply with it,
I asked him to visit us on his way home to his
own country when he comes from you. On re-
ceiving his promise to this effect, I believed that
the Lord had granted me an opportunity of
writing to you regarding certain things which I
wish through you to learn. For I was seeking
some one whom I might send to you, and it was
not easy to fall in with one qualified both by
trustworthiness in performing and by alacrity in
undertaking the work, as well as by experience in
travelling. Therefore, when I became acquainted
with this young man, I could not doubt that he
was exactly such a person as I was asking from
the Lord.

Chap. ii. — 3. Allow me, therefore, to bring
before you a subject which I beseech you not to
refuse to open up and discuss with me. Many
are perplexed by questions concerning the soul,
and I confess that I myself am of this number.
I shall in this letter, in the first place, state ex-
plicitly the things regarding the soul which I
most assuredly believe, and shall, in the next
place, bring forward the things regarding which
I am still desirous of explanation.

The soul of man is in a sense proper to itself
immortal. It is not absolutely immortal, as God
is, of whom it is written that He " alone hath
immortality," 3 for Holy Scripture makes mention
of deaths to which the soul is liable — as in the
saying, " Let the dead bury their dead ; " '' but
because when alienated from the life of God it
so dies as not wholly to cease from living in its
own nature, it is found to be from a certain cause
mortal, yet so as to be not without reason called
at the same time immortal.

The soul is not a part of God. For if it were,
it would be absolutely immutable and incorrupt-
ible, in which case it could neither go downward
to be worse, nor go onward to be better ; nor
could it either begin to have anything in itself
which it had not before, or cease to have any-

3 I Tim. vi. 16.

4 Matt. viii. 22.


5^4


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


thing which it had within the sphere of its own
experience. But how different the actual facts
of the case are is a point requiring no evidence
from without, it is acknowledged by every one
who consults his own consciousness. In vain,
moreover, is it pleaded by those who affirm that
the soul is a part of God, that the corruption
and baseness which we see in the worst of men,
and the weakness and blemishes which we
see in all men, come to it not from the soul
itself, but from the body ; for what matters it
whence the infirmity originates in that which, if
it were indeed immutable, could not, from any
quarter whatever, be made infirm? For that
which IS truly immutable and incorruptible is not
liable to mutation or corruption by any influence
whatever from without, else the invulnerability
which the fable ascribed to the flesh of Achilles
would be nothing pecuhar to him, but the prop-
erty of every man, so long as no accident befell
him. That which is liable to be changed in
any manner, by any cause, or in any part what-
ever, is therefore not by nature immutable ; but
it were impiety to think of God as otherwise
than truly and supremely immutable : therefore
the soul is not a part of God.

4. That the soul is immaterial is a fact of
which I avow myself to be fully persuaded, al-
though men of slow understanding are hard to
be convinced that it is so. To secure myself,
however, from either unnecessarily causing to
others or unreasonably bringing upon myself a
controversy about an expression, let me say that,
since the thing itself is beyond question, it is
needless to contend about mere terms. If mat-
ter be used as a term denoting everything which
in any form has a separate existence, whether it
be called an essence, or a substance, or by
another name, the soul is material. Again, if
you choose to apply the epithet immaterial only
to that nature which is supremely immutable and
is everywhere present in its entirety, the soul is
material, for it is not at all endowed with such
qualities. But if matter be used to designate
notliing but that which, whether at rest or in
motion, has some length, breadth, and height,
so that with a greater part of itself it occupies
a greater part of space, and with a smaller part a
smaller space, and is in every part of it less than
the whole, then the soul is not material. For it
pervades the whole body which it animates, not
by a local distribution of parts, but by a certain
vital influence, being at the same moment pres-
ent in its entirety in all parts of the body, and
not less in smaller parts and greater in larger
parts, but here with more energy and there with
less energy, it is in its entirety present both in
the whole body and in every part of it. For
even that which the mind perceives in only a
part of the body is nevertheless not otherwise


perceived than by the v.?hole mind ; for when
any part of the living flesh is touched by a fine-
pointed instrument, although the place affected
is not only not the whole body, but scarcely dis-
cernible in its surface, the contact does not
escape the entire mind, and yet the contact is
felt not over the whole body, but only at the one
point where it takes place. How comes it, then,
that what takes place in only a part of the body
is immediately known to the whole mind, unless
the whole mind is present at that part, and at
the same time not deserting all the other parts
of the body in order to be present in its entirety
at this one ? For all the other parts of the body
in which no such contact takes place are still
living by the soul being present with them. And
if a similar contact takes place in the other parts,
and the contact occur in both parts simultane-
ously, it would in both cases alike be known at
the same moment, to the whole mind. Now this
presence of the mind in all parts of the body at
the same moment, so that in every part of the
body the whole mind is at the same moment
present, would be impossible if it were dis-
tributed over these parts in the same way as we
see matter distributed in space, occupying less
space with a smaller portion of itself, and greater
space with a greater portion. If, therefore, mind
is to be called material, it is not material in the
same sense as earth, water, air, and ether are
material. For all things composed of these ele-
ments are larger m larger places, or smaller in
smaller places, and none of them is in its en-
tirety present at any part of itself, but the dimen-
sions of the material substances are according to
the dimensions of the space occupied. Whence
it is perceived that the soul, whether it be termed
material or immaterial, has a certain nature of
its own, created from a substance superior to the
elements of this world, — a substance which can-
not be truly conceived of by any representa-
tion of the material images perceived by the
bodily senses, but which is apprehended by the
understanding and discovered to our conscious-
ness by its living energy. These things I am
stating, not with the view of teaching you what
you already know, but in order that I may de-
clare explicitly what I hold as indisputably cer-
tain concerning the soul, lest any one should
think, when I come to state the questions to
which I desire answers, that I hold none of the
doctrines which we have learned from science or
from revelation concerning the soul.

5. I am, moreover, fully persuaded that the
soul has fallen into sin, not through the fault of
God, nor through any necessity either in the
divine nature or in its own, but by its own free
will ; and that it can be delivered from the body
of this death neither by the strength of its own
will, as if that were in itself sufficient to achieve


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


525


this, nor by the death of the body itself, but
only by the grace of God through our Lord
Jesus Christ ; ' and that there is not one soul
in the human family to whose salvation the
one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus, is not absolutely necessary. Every
soul, moreover, which may at any age whatsoever
depart from this life without the grace of the
Mediator and the sacrament of this grace, de-
parts to future punishment, and shall receive
again its own body at the last judgment as a
partner in punishment. But if the soul after its
natural generation, which was derived from
Adam, be regenerated in Christ, it belongs to
His fellowship,^ and shall not only have rest
after the death of the body, but also receive
again its own body as a partner in glory. These
are truths concerning the soul which I hold most
firmly.

Chap. III. — 6. Permit me now, therefore, to
bring before you the question which I desire to
have solved, and do not reject me ; so may He
not reject you who condescended to be rejected
for our sakes !

1 ask where can the soul, even of an infant
snatched away by death, have contracted the
guilt which, unless the grace of Christ has come
to the rescue by that sacrament of baptism which
is administered even to infants, involves it in
condemnation? I know you are not one of
those who have begun of late to utter certain
new and absurd opinions, alleging that there is
no guilt derived from Adam which is removed
by baptism in the case of infants. If I knew
that you held this view, or, rather, if I did not
know that you reject it, I would certainly neither
address this question to you, nor think that it
ought to be put to you at all. Since, however,
we hold on this subject the opinion consonant
with the immoveable Catholic faith, which you
have yourself expressed when, refuting the absurd
sayings of Jovinian, you have quoted this sen-
tence from the book of Job : " In thy sight no
one is clean, not even the infant, whose time of
life on earth is a single day," ^ adding, " for we
are held guilty in the similitude of Adam's trans-
gression," ■♦ — an opinion which your book on
Jonah's prophecy declares in a notable and lucid
manner, where you affirm that the little children
of Nineveh were justly compelled to fast along
with the people, because merely of their original
sin,5 — it is not unsuitable that I should address
to you the question — where has the soul con-
tracted the guilt from which, even at that age,
it must be delivered by the sacrament of Chris-
tian grace?

' Rom. vii. 24, 25.

2 We xe^A pertinere, not pertinens.

3 Job xiv. 4, 5, according to LXX.

< Jerome against yovinian, Book ii.
5 Jerome on Jonah., ch. iii.


7. Some years ago, when I wrote certain
books concerning Free Will, which have gone
forth into the hands of many, and are now in the
possession of very many readers, after referring
to these four opinions as to the manner of the
soul's incarnation, — ( i ) that all other souls are
derived from the one which was given to the
first man; (2) that for each individual a new
soul is made ; (3) that souls already in existence
somewhere are sent by divine act into the bodies ;
or (4) glide into them of their own accord, — I
thought that it was necessary to treat them in
such a way that, whichever of them might be
true, the decision should not hinder the object
which I had in view when contending with all
my might against those who attempt to lay upon
God the blame of a nature endowed with its own
principle of evil, namely, the Manichseans ; ^ for
at that time I had not heard of the Priscillianists,
who utter blasphemies not very dissimilar to
these. As to the fifth opinion, namely, that the
soul is a part of God, — an opinion which, in
order to omit none, you have mentioned along
with the rest in your letter to Marcellinus (a man
of pious memory and verj' dear to us in the grace
of Christ), who had consulted you on this ques-
tion,7 — I did not add it to the others for two
reasons, — first, because, in examining this opin-
ion, we discuss not the incarnation of the soul,
but its nature ; secondly, because this is the view
held by those against whom I was arguing, and
the main design of my argument was to prove
that the blameless and inviolable nature of the
Creator has nothing to do with the faults and
blemishes of the creature, while they, on their
part, maintained that the substance of the good
God itself is, in so far as it is led captive, cor-
rupted and oppressed and brought under a neces-
sity of sinning by the substance of evil, to which
they ascribe a proper dominion and principali-
ties. Leaving, therefore, out of the question this
heretical error, I desire to know which of the
other four opinions we ought to choose. For
whichever of them may justly claim our prefer-
ence, far be it from us to assail this article of
faith, about which we have no uncertainty, that
every soul, even the soul of an infant, requires
to be delivered from the binding guilt of sin, and
that there is no deliverance except through Jesus
Christ and Him crucified.

Chap, iv — 8. To avoid prolixity, therefore, let
me refer to the opinion which you, I believe,
entertain, viz. that God even now makes each
soul for each individual at the dme of birth. To
meet the objection to this view which might be
taken from the fact that God finished the whole
work of creation on the sixth day and rested on
the seventh day, you quote the testimony of the

*> De Libera Arbitrio, iii. 21.
^ Letter CLXV.


526


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


words in the gospel, " My Father worketh hither-
to, and I work." ' This you have written in your
letter to Marcellinus, in which letter, moreover,
you have most kindly condescended to mention
my name, saying that he had me here in Africa,
who could more easily explain to him the opinion
held by you.^ But had I been able to do this,
lie would not have applied for instruction to you,
who were so remote from him, though perhaps
he did not write from Africa to you. For I know
not when he wrote it ; I only know that he knew
well my hesitation to embrace any definite view
on this subject, for which reason he preferred to
write to you without consulting me. Yet, even
if he had consulted me, I would rather have
encouraged him to write to you, and would have
expressed my gratitude for the benefit which
might have been conferred on us all, had you not
preferred to send a brief note, instead of a full
reply, doing this, I suppose, to save yourself from
unnecessary expenditure of effort in a place
where I, whom you supposed to be thoroughly
acquainted with the subject of his inquiries, was
at hand. Behold, I am willing that the opinion
which you hold should be also mine ; but I as-
sure you that as yet I have not embraced it.

9. You have sent to me scholars, to whom
you wish me to impart what I have not yet
learned myself. Teach me, therefore, what I
am to teach them ; for many urge me vehe-
mently to be a teacher on this subject, and to
them I confess that of this, as well as of many
other things, I am ignorant, and perhaps, though
they maintain a respectful demeanour in my
presence, they say among themselves : " Art
thou a master in Israel, and knowest not these
things? "3 — a rebuke which the Lord gave to
one who belonged to the class of men who de-
lighted in being called Rabbi ; which was also
the reason of his coming by night to the true
Teacher, because perchance he, who had been
accustomed to teach, blushed to take the learn-
er's place. But, for my own part, it gives me
much more pleasure to hear instruction from
another, than to be myself listened to as a
teacher. For I remember what He said to those
whom, above all men, He had chosen : " But be
not ye called Rabbi, for one is your master, even
Christ." * Nor was it any other teacher who
taught Moses by Jethro,5 Cornelius by Peter the
earlier apostle,^ and Peter himself by Paul the
later apostle ; ? for by whomsoever truth is
spoken, it is spoken by the gift of Him who is
the Truth. What if the reason of our still being


' John V. 17.

2 See Letter GLXV., p. 522.

3 John iii. 10. j


Matt, xxiu.rs.
Ex. xviii. iH-25.
Acts X. 25-(48.
Gal. ii. ii-jzi.


ignorant of these things, and of our having failed
to discover them, even after praying, reading,
thinking, and reasoning, be this : that full proof
may be made not only of the love with which
we give instruction to the ignorant, but also of
the humility with which we receive instruction
from the learned?

ID. Teach me, therefore, I beseech you, what
I may teach to others ; teach me what I ought
to hold as my own opinion ; and tell me this :
if souls are from day to day made for each in-
dividual separately at birth, where, in the case
of infant children, is sin committed by these
souls, so that they require the remission of sin
in the sacrament of Christ, because of sinning in
Adam from whom the sinful flesh has been de-
rived ? or if they do not sin, how is it compatible
with the justice of the Creator, that, because of
their being united to mortal members derived
from another, they are so brought under the
bond of the sin of that other, that unless they be
rescued by the Church, perdition overtakes them,
although it is not in their own power to secure
that they be rescued by the grace of baptism ?
Where, therefore, is the justice of the condemna-
tion of so many thousands of souls, which in the
deaths of infant children leave this world without
the benefit of the Christian sacrament, if being
newly created they have, not through any pre-
ceding sin of their own, but by the will of the
Creator, become severally united to the indi-
vidual bodies to animate which they were created
and bestowed by Him, who certainly knew that
every one of them was destined, not through
any fault of its own, to leave the body without
receiving the baptism of Christ ? Seeing, there-
fore, that we may not say concerning God either
that He compels them to become sinners, or that
He punishes innocent souls — and seeing that,
on the other hand, it is not lawful for us to deny
that nothing else than perdition is the doom of
the souls, even of little children, which have de-
parted from the body without the sacrament of
Christ, tell me, I implore you, where anything
can be found to support the opinion that souls
are not all derived from that one soul of the
first man, but are each created separately for
each individual, as Adam's soul was made for
him.

Chap. v. — ii. As for some other objections
which are advanced against this opinion, I think
that I could easily dispose of them. For ex-
ample, some think that they urge a conclusive
argument against this opinion when they ask,
how God finished all His works on the sixth
day and rested on the seventh day,^ if He is
still creating new souls. If we meet them with
the quotation from the gospel (given by you in

* Gen. ii. 2.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


527


the letter to Marcellinus already mentioned),
"My Father worketh hitherto," they answer that
He " worketh " in maintaining those natures
which He has created, not in creating new na-
tures ; otherwise, this statement would contra-
dict the words of Scripture in Genesis, where it
is most plainly declared that God finished all
His works. Moreover, the words of Scripture,
that He rested, are unquestionably to be under-
stood of His resting from creating new creatures,
not from governing those which He had created ;
for at that time He made things which previously
did not exist, and from making these He rested
because He had finished all the creatures which
before they existed He saw necessary to be cre-
ated, so that thenceforward He did not create
and make things which previously did not exist,
but made and fashioned out of things already
existing whatever He did make. Thus the state-
ments, " He rested from His works," and, " He
worketh hitherto," are both true, for the gospel
could not contradict Genesis.

12. When, however, these things are brought
forward by persons who advance them as con-
clusive against the opinion that God now creates
new souls as He created the soul of the first
man, and who hold either that He forms them
from that one soul which existed before He
rested from creation, or that He now sends them
forth into bodies from some reservoir or store-
house of souls which He then created, it is easy
to turn aside their argument by answering, that
even in the six days God formed many things
out of those natures which He had already
created, — as, for example, the birds and fishes
were formed from the waters, and the trees, the
grass, and the animals from the earth, — and yet
it is undeniable that He was then making things
Avhich did not exist before. For there existed
previously no bird, no fish, no tree, no animal,
and it is clearly understood that He rested from
creating those things which previously were not,
and were then created, that is to say. He ceased
in this sense, that, after that, nothing was made
by Him which did not already exist. But if, re-
jecting the opinions of all who believe either that
God sends forth into men souls existing already
in some incomprehensible reservoir, or that He
makes souls emanate like drops of dew from
Himself as particles of His own substance, or
that He brings them forth from that one soul of
the first man, or that He binds them in the fet-
ters of the bodily members because of sins com-
mitted in a prior state of existence, — if, I say,
rejecting these, we affirm that for each individ-
ual He creates separately a new soul when he
is bom, we do not herein affirm that He makes
anything which Pie had not already made. For
He had already made man after His own image
on the sixth day ; and this work of His is un-


questionably to be understood with reference to
the rational soul of man. The same work He
still does, not in creating what did not exist, but
in multiplying what already existed. Wherefore
it is true, on the one hand, that He rested from
creating things which previously did not exist,
and equally true, on the other hand, that He
continues still to work, not only in governing
what He has made, but also in making (not any-
thing which did not previously exist, but) a larger
number of those creatures which He had already
made. Wherefore, either by such an explana-
tion, or by any other which may seem better, we
escape from the objection advanced by those
who would make the fact that God rested from
His works a conclusive argument against our be-
lieving that new souls are still being daily created,
not from the first soul, but in the same manner
as it was made.

13. Again, as for another objection, stated in
the question, " Wherefore does He create souls
for those whom He knows to be destined to an
early death?" we may reply, that by the death
of the children the sins of the parents are either
reproved or chastised. We may, moreover, with
all propriety, leave these things to the disposal
of the Lord of all, for w-e know that he appoints
to the succession of events in time, and therefore
to the births and deaths of living creatures as in-
cluded in these, a course which is consummate
in beauty and perfect in the arrangement of all
its parts ; whereas we are not capable of perceiv-
ing those things by the perception of which, if
it were attainable, we should be soothed with an
ineffable, tranquil joy. For not in vain has the
prophet, taught by divine inspiration, declared
concerning God, " He bringeth forth m meas-
ured harmonies the course of time." ' For
which reason music, the science or capacity of
correct harmony, has been given also by the
kindness of God to mortals having reasonable
souls, with a view to keep them in mind of this
great truth. For if a man, when composing a
song which is to suit a particular melody, knows
how to distribute the length of time allowed to
each word so as to make the song flow and pass
on in most beautiful adaptation to the ever-chan-
ging notes of the melody, how much more shall
God, whose wisdom is to be esteemed as infin-
itely transcending human arts, make infallible
provision that not one of the spaces of time
alloted to natures that are bom and die — spaces
which are like the words and syllables of the
successive epochs of the course of time — shall
have, in what we may call the sublime psalm of
the vicissitudes of this world, a duration either
more brief or more protracted than the fore-


' Isa. xL 26; translated by Augustin, "Qui profert numerose
ssculam."


528


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


known and predetermined harmony requires !
For when I may speak thus with reference even
to the leaves of every tree, and the number of
the hairs upon our heads, how much more may
I say it regarding the birth and death of men,
seeing that every man's hfe on earth continues
for a time, which is neither longer nor shorter
than God knows to be in harmony with the plan
according to which He rules the universe.

14. As to the assertion that everything which
has begun to exist in time is incapable of im-
mortality, because all things which are bom die,
and all things which have grown decay through
age, and the opinion which they affirm to follow
necessarily from this, viz. that the soul of man
must owe its immortality to its having been cre-
ated before time began, this does not disturb my
faith ; for, passing over other examples, which
conclusively dispose of this assertion, I need
only reter to the body of Christ, which now
" dieth no more ; death shall have no more do-
minion over it." '

15. Moreover, as to your remark in your book
against Ruffinus, that some bring forward as
against this opinion [that souls are created for
each individual separately at birth] the objection
that it seems unworthy of God that He should
give souls to the offspring of adulterers, and who
accordingly attempt to build on this a theory
that souls may possibly be incarcerated, as it
were, in such bodies, to suffer for the deeds of a
life spent in some prior state of being, ^ — this
objection does not disturb me, as many things
by which it may be answered occur to me when
I consider it. The answer which you yourself
have given, saying, that in the case of stolen
wheat, there is no fault in the grain, but only in
him who stole it, and that the earth is not under
obligation to refuse to cherish the seed because
the sower may have cast it in with a hand de-
filed by dishonesty, is a most felicitous illustra-
tion. But even before I had read it, I felt that
to me the objection drawn from the offspring of
adulterers caused no serious difficulty when I
took a general view of the fact that God brings
many good things to light, even out of our evils
and our sins. Now, the creation of any living
creature compels every one who considers it
with piety and wisdom to give to the Creator
praise which words cannot express ; and if this
praise is called forth by the creation of any liv-
ing creature whatsoever, how much more is it
called forth by the creation of a man ! If,
therefore, the cause of any act of creative power
be sought for, no shorter or better reply can be
given than that every creature of God is good.
And [so far from such an act being unworthy of


^ Rom. vi. 9.

2 Hieron. Adv. Ruffin. lib. iii.


God] what is more worthy of Him than that He,
being good, should make those good things which
no one else than God alone can make ?

Chap. vi. — 16. These things, and others which
I can advance, I am accustomed to state, as well
as I can, against those who attempt to overthrow
by such objections the opinion that souls are
made for each individual, as the first man's soul
was made for him.

But when we come to the penal sufferings of
infants, I am embarrassed, believe me, by great
difficulties, and am wholly at a loss to find an
answer by which they are solved ; and I speak
here not only of those punishments in the life
to come, which are involved in that perdition to
which they must be drawn down if they depart
from the body without the sacrament of Chris-
tian grace, but also of the sufferings which are to
our sorrow endured by them before our eyes in
this present life, and which are so various, that
time rather than examples would fail me if I
were to attempt to enumerate them. They are
liable to wasting disease, to racking pain, to
the agonies of thirst and hunger, to feebleness
of limbs, to privation of bodily senses, and to
vexing assaults of unclean spirits. Surely it is
incumbent on us to show how it is compatible
with justice that infants suffer all these things
without any evil of their own as the procuring
cause. For it would be impious to say, either
that these things take place without God's knowl-
edge, or that He cannot resist those who cause
them, or that He unrighteously does these things,
or permits them to be done. We are warranted
in saying that irrational animals are given by God
to serve creatures possessing a higher nature,
even though they be wicked, as we see most
plainly in the gospel that the swine of the Gad-
arenes were given to the legion of devils at their
request ; but could we ever be warranted in say-
ing this of men? Certainly not. Man is, in-
deed, an animal, but an animal endowed with
reason, though mortal. In his members dwells
a reasonable soul, which in these severe afflic-
tions is enduring a penalty. Now God is good,
God is just, God is omnipotent — none but a
madman would doubt that he is so ; let the
great sufferings, therefore, which infant children
experience be accounted for by some reason
compatible with justice. When older people
suffer such trials, we are accustomed, certainly,
to say, either that their worth is being proved,
as in Job's case, or that their wickedness is being
punished, as in Herod's ; and from some exam-
ples, which it has pleased God to make perfectly
clear, men are enabled to conjecture the nature
of others which are more obscure ; but this is
in regard to persons of mature age. Tell me,
therefore, what we must answer in regard to
infant children ; is it true that, although they


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


529


suffer so great punishments, there are no sins in
them deserving to be punished? for, of course,
there is not in them at that age any righteous-
ness requiring to be put to the proof.

1 7. What shall I say, moreover, as to the
[difficulty which besets the theory of the crea-
tion of each soul separately at the birth of the
individual in connection with the] diversity of
talent in different souls, and especially the abso-
lute privation of reason in some? This is, in-
deed, not apparent in the first stages of infancy,
but being developed continuously from the be-
ginning of life, it becomes manifest in children,
of whom some are so slow and defective in
memory that they cannot learn even the letters
of the alphabet, and some (commonly called
idiots) so imbecile that they differ very little
from the beasts of the field. Perhaps I am told,
in answer to this, that the bodies are the cause
of these imperfections. But surely the opinion
which we wish to see vindicated from objection
does not require us to affirm that the soul chose
for itself the body which so impairs it, and,
being deceived in the choice, committed a blun-
der ; or that the soul, when it was compelled,
as a necessary consequence of being born, to
enter into some body, was hindered from finding
another by crowds of souls occupying the other
bodies before it came, so that, like a man who
takes whatever seat may remain vacant for him
in a theatre, the soul was guided in taking pos-
session of the imperfect body not by its choice,
but by its circumstances. We, of course, cannot
say and ought not to believe such things. Tell
us, therefore, what we ought to believe and to
say in order to vindicate from this difficulty the
theory that for each individual body a new soul
is specially created.

Chap. VII. — 18. In my books on Free Will,
already referred to, I have said something, not
in regard to the variety of capacities in different
souls, but, at least, in regard to the pains which
infant children suffer in this life. The nature of
the opinion which I there expressed, and the
reason why it is insufficient for the purposes of
our present inquiry, I will now submit to you,
and will put into this letter a copy of the passage
in the third book to which I refer. It is as fol-
lows : — "In connection with the bodily suffer-
ings experienced by the little children who, by
reason of their tender age, have no sins — if the
souls which animate them did not exist before
they were bom into the human family — a more
grievous and, as it were, compassionate com-
plaint is very commonly made in the remark,
' What evil have they done that they should suf-
fer these things ? ' as if there could be a meri-
torious innocence in any one before the time at
which it is possible for him to do anything
wrong ! Moreover, if God accomplishes, in any


measure, the correction of the parents when
they are chastised by the sufferings or by the
death of the children that are dear to them, is
there any reason why these things should not
take place, seeing that, after they are passed,
they will be, to those who experienced them, as
if they had never been, while the persons on
whose account they were inflicted will either
become better, being moved by the rod of tem-
poral afflictions to choose a better mode of life,
or be left without excuse under the punishment
awarded at the coming judgment, if, notwith-
standing the sorrows of this life, they have re-
fused to turn their desires towards eternal life?
Morever, who knows what may be given to the
little children by means of whose sufferings the
parents have their obdurate hearts subdued, or
their faith exercised, or their compassion proved ?
Who knows what good recompense God may,
in the secret of his judgments, reserve for these
little ones? For although they have done no
righteous action, nevertheless, being free from
any transgression of their own, they have suffered
these trials. It is certainly not without reason
that the Church exalts to the honourable rank
of martyrs those children who were slain when
Herod sought our Lord Jesus Christ to put Him
to death." '

19. These things I wrote at that time when I
was endeavouring to defend the opinion which
is now under discussion. For, as I mentioned
shortly before, I was labouring to prove that
whichever of these four opinions regarding the
soul's incarnation may be found true, the sub-
stance of the Creator is absolutely free from
blame, and is completely removed from all share
in our sins. And, therefore, whichever of these
opinions might come to be established or de-
molished by the truth, this had no bearing on
the object aimed at in the work which I was then
attempting, seeing that whichever opinion might
win the victory over all the rest, after they had
been examined in a more thorough discussion,,
this would take place without causing me any
disquietude, because my object then was to prove
that, even admitting all these opinions, the doc-
trine maintained by me remained unshaken. But
now my object is, by the force of sound reason-
ing, to select, if possible, one opinion out of the
four ; and, therefore, when I carefully consider
the. words now quoted from that book, I do not
see that the arguments there used in defending
the opinion which we are now discussing are
valid and conclusive.

20. For what may be called the chief prop of
my defence is in the sentence, " Moreover, who
knows what may be given to the little children,
by means of whose sufferings the parents have

' De Libera A rbitrio, lib. lii. ch. 23, n. 67.


530


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


their obdurate hearts subdued, or their faith ex-
ercised, or their compassion proved? Who
knows what good recompense God may, in the
secret of His judgments, reserve for these Uttle
ones?" I see that this is not an unwarranted
conjecture in the case of infants who, in any way,
suffer (though they know it not) for the sake
of Christ and in the cause of true religion, and of
infants wlio have already been made partakers
of the sacrament of Christ ; because, apart from
union to the one Mediator, they cannot be
delivered from condemnation, and so put in a
position in which it is even possible that a rec-
ompense could be made to them for the evils
which, in diverse afflictions, they have endured
in this world. But since the question cannot be
fully solved, unless the answer include also the
case of those who, without having received the
sacrament of Christian fellowship, die in infancy
after enduring the most painful sufferings, what
recompense can be conceived of in their case,
seeing that, besides all that they suffer in this life,
perdidon awaits them in the life to come ? As
to the baptism of infants, I have, in the same
book, given an answer, not, indeed, fully, but so
far as seemed necessary for the work which then
occupied me, proving that it profits children,
even though they do not know what it is, and
have, as yet, no faith of their own ; but on the
subject of the perdition of those infants who
depart from this life without baptism, I did not
think it necessary to say anything then, because
the question under discussion was different from
that with which we are now engaged.

21. If, however, we pass over and make no
account of those sufferings which are of brief
continuance, and which, when endured, are not
to be repeated, we certainly cannot, in like man-
ner, make no account of the fact that " by one
man death came, and by one man came also the
resurrection of the dead ; for as in Adam all die,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive." ' For,
according to this apostolical, divine, and perspic-
uous declaration, it is sufficiently plain that no
one goes to death otherwise than through Adam,
and that no -one goes to life eternal otherwise
than through Christ. For this is the force of all
in the two parts of the sentence ; as all men, by
their first, that is, their natrual birth, belong to
Adam, even so all men, whoever they be, who
come to Christ come to the second, that is, the
spiritual birth. For this reason, therefore, the
word all is used in both clauses, because as all
who die do not die otherwise than in Adam, so
all who shall be made alive shall not be made
alive otherwise than in Christ. Wherefore who-
soever tells «s that any man can be made alive
in the resurrection of the dead otherwise than

• I Cor. XV. 21, 22.


in Christ, he is to be detested as a pestilent en-
emy to the common faith. Likewise, whosoever
says that those children who depart out of this
life without partaking of that sacrament shall be
made alive in Christ, certainly contradicts the
apostolic declaration, and condemns the univer-
sal Church, in which it is the practice to lose
no time and run in haste to administer baptism
to infant children, because it is believed, as an
indubitable truth, that otherwise they cannot be
made alive in Christ. Now he that is not made
alive in Christ must necessarily remain under the
condemnation, of which the apostle says, that
" by the offence of one judgment came upon all
men to condemnation." ^ That infants are born
under the guilt of this offence is believed by the
whole Church. It is also a doctrine which you
have most faithfully set forth, both in your trea-
tise against Jovinian and your exposition of Jonah,
as I mentioned above, and, if I am not mistaken,
in other parts of your works which I have not
read or have at present forgotten. I therefore
ask, what is the ground of this condemnation of
unbaptized infants? For if new souls are made
for men, individually, at their birth, I do not see,
on the one hand, that they could have any sin
while yet in infancy, nor do I believe, on the
other hand, that God condemns any soul which
He sees to have no sin.

Chap. viii. — 22. Are we perchance to say, in
answer to this, that in the infant the body alone
is the cause of sin ; but that for each body a
new soul is made, and that if this soul live ac-
cording to the precepts of God, by the help of
the grace of Christ, the reward of being made
incorruptible may be secured for the body itself,
when subdued and kept under the yoke ; and
that inasmuch as the soul of an infant cannot
yet do this, unless it receive the sacrament of
Christ, that which could not yet be obtained for
the body by the holiness of the soul is obtained
for it by the grace of this sacrament ; but if the
soul of an infant depart without the sacrament,
it shall itself dwell in life eternal, from which it
could not be separated, as it had no sin, while,
however, the body which it occupied shall not
rise again in Christ, because the sacrament had
not been received before its death ?

23. This opinion I have never heard or read
anywhere, I have, however, certainly heard and
believed the statement which led me to speak
thus, namely, "The hour is coming, in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear His voice,
and shall come forth ; they that have done good,
unto the resurrection of life," — the resurrection,
namely, of which it is said that " by one man
came the resurrection of the dead," and in which
"all shall be made alive in Christ," — "and they

2 Rom. V. 18.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


531


that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation." ' Now, what is to be understood
regarding infants which, before thdy could do
good or evil, have quitted the body without
baptism ? Nothing is said here concerning them.
But if the bodies of these infants shall not rise
again, because they have never done either good
or evil, the bodies of the infants that have died
after receiving the grace of baptism shall also
have no resurrection, because they also were not
in this life able to do good or evil. If, however,
these are to rise among the saints, i.e. among
those who have done good, among whom shall
the others rise again but among those who have
done evil — unless we are to believe that some
human souls shall not receive, either in the res-
urrection of life, or in the resurrection of dam-
nation, the bodies which they lost in death?
This opinion, however, is condemned, even
before it is formally refuted, by its absolute nov-
elty ; and besides this, who could bear to think
that those who run with their infant children to
have them baptized, are prompted to do so by a
regard for their bodies, not for their souls? The
blessed Cyprian, indeed, said, in order to correct
those who thought that an infant should not be
baptized before the eighth day, that it was not
the body but the soul which behoved to be saved
from perdition — in which statement he was not
inventing any new doctrine, but preserving the
firmlv established faith of the Church ; and he,
along with some of his colleagues in the episco-
pal office, held that a child may be properly
baptized immediately after its birth. ^

24. Let every man, however, believe anything
which commends itself to his own judgment,
even though it run counter to some opinion of
Cyprian, who may not have seen in the matter
what should have been seen. But let no man
believe anything which runs counter to the per-
fectly unambiguous apostolical declaration, that
by the offence of one all are brought into con-
demnation, and that from this condemnation
nothing sets men free but the grace of God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom alone
life is given to all who are made alive. And let
no man believe anything which runs counter to
the firmly grounded practice of the Church, in
which, if the sole reason for hastening the ad-
ministration of baptism were to save the children,
the dead as well as the living would be brought
to be baptized.

25. These things being so, it is necessary still
to investigate and to make known the reason
why, if souls are created new for every individual
at his birth, those who die in infancy without the
sacrament of Christ are doomed to perdition ;


' John V. 29.

2 Cyprian's Letters (LIX., Ad Fidum).


for that they are doomed to this if they so de-
part from the body is testified both by Holy
Scripture and by the holy Church. Wherefore,
as to that opinion of yours concerning the crea-
tion of new souls, if it does not contradict this
firmly grounded article of faith, let it be mine
also ; but if it does, let it be no longer yours.

26. Let it not be said to me that we ought to
receive as supporting this opinion the words of
Scripture in Zechariah, " He formeth the spirit
of man within him," ^ and in the book of Psalms,
" He formeth their hearts severally." ^ We must
seek for the strongest and most indis])utable
proof, that we may not be compelled to believe
that God is a judge who condemns any soul
which has no fault. For to create signifies
either as much or, probably, more than to form
\_fi!igere~\ ; nevertheless it is written, " Create in
me a clean heart, O God," 5 and yet it cannot
be supposed that a soul here expresses a desire
to be made before it has begun to exist. There-
fore, as it is a soul already existing which is cre-
ated by being renewed in righteousness, so it
is a soul already existing which is formed by
the moulding power of doctrine. Nor is your
opinion, which I would willingly make my own,
supported by that sentence in Ecclesiastes,
" Then shall the dust return to the earth as it
was : and the spirit shall return to (iod who
gave it."^ Nay, it rather favours those who
think that all souls are derived from one ; for
they say that, as the dust returns to the earth as
it was, and yet the body of which this is said re-
turns not to the man from whom it was derived,
but to the earth from which the first man was
made, the spirit in like manner, though derived
from the spirit of the first man, does not return
to him but to the Lord, by whom it was given to
our first parent. Since, however, the testimony
of this passage in their favour is not so decisive
as to make it appear altogether opposed to the
opinion which I shall gladly see vindicated, I
thought proper to submit these remarks on it to
your judgment, to prevent you from endeavour-
ing to deliver me from my perplexities by quoting
passages such as these. For although no man's
wishes can make that true which is not true,
nevertheless, were this possible, I would wish
that this opinion should be true, as I do wish that,
if it is true, it should be most clearly and un-
answerably vindicated by you.

Chap. ix. — 27. The same difficulty attends
those also who hold that souls already existing
elsewhere, and prepared from the beginning of
the works of God, are sent by Him into bodies.
For to these persons also the same question may


3 Zech. xii. i.

< Ps. xxxiii. 15 (LXX.).

5 Ps. li. 10.

* Eccles. xii. 7.


532


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


be put : If these souls, being without any fault,
go obediently to the bodies to which they are
sent, why are they subjected to punishment in
the case of infants, if they come without being
baptized to the end of this life ? The same diffi-
culty unquestionably attaches to both opinions.
Those who affirm that each soul is, according to
the deserts of its actions in an earlier state of
being, united to the body alloted to it in this
life, imagine that they escape more easily from
this difficulty. For they think that to " die in
Adam " means to suffer punishment in that flesh
which is derived from Adam, from which condi-
tion of guilt the grace of Christ, they say, de-
livers the young as well as the old. So far,
indeed, they teach what is right, and true, and
excellent, when they say that the grace of Christ
delivers the young as well as the old from the
guilt of sins. But that souls sin in another earlier
life, and that for their sins in that state of being
they are cast down into bodies as prisons, I do
not believe : I reject and protest against such
an opinion. I do this, in the first place, because
they affirm that this is accomplished by means
of some incomprehensible revolutions, so that
after I know not how many cycles the soul must
return again to the same burden of corruptible
flesh and to the endurance of punishment, —
than which opinion I do not know that anything
more horrible could be conceived. In the next
place, who is the righteous man gone from the
earth about whom we should not (if what they
say is true) feel afraid lest, sinning in Abraham's
bosom, he should be cast down into the flames
which tormented the rich man in the parable ? '
For why may the soul not sin after leaving the
body, if it can sin before entering it ? Finally,
to have sinned in Adam (in regard to which the
apostle says that in him all have sinned) is one
thing, but it is a wholly different thing to have
sinned, I know not where, outside of Adam, and
then because of this to be thrust into Adam —
that is, into the body, which is derived from
Adam, as into a prison-house. As to the other
opinion mentioned above, that all souls are de-
rived from one, I will not begin to discuss it
unless I am under necessity to do so ; and my
desire is, that if the opinion which we are now
discussing is true, it may be so vindicated by
you that there shall be no longer any necessity
for examining the other.

28. Although, however, I desire and ask, and
with fervent prayers wish and hope, that by you
the Lord may remove my ignorance on this sub-
ject, if, after all, I am found unworthy to obtain
this, I will beg the grace of ]jatience from the
Lord our God, in whom we have such faith, that
even if there be some things which He does not

' Luke xvi. 22, 23.


open to us when we knock, we know it would be
wrong to murmur in the least against Him. I
remember \fhat He said to the apostles them-
selves : " I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now." ^ Among
these things, so far at least as I am concerned,
let me still reckon this, and let me guard against
being angry that I am deemed unworthy to pos-
sess this knowledge, lest by such anger I be all
the more clearly proved to be unworthy. I am
equally ignorant of many other things, yea, of
more than I could name or even number ; and
of this I would be more patiently ignorant, were
it not that I fear lest some one of these opinions,
involving the contradiction of truth which we
most assuredly believe, should insinuate itself
into the minds of the unwary. Meanwhile,
though I do not yet know which of these opin-
ions is to be preferred, this one thing I profess
as my deliberate conviction, that the opinion
which is true does not conflict with that most
firm and well grounded article in the faith of
the Church of Christ, that infant children, even
when they are newly born, can be delivered
from perdition in no other way than through the
grace of Christ's name, which He has given in
His sacraments.


LETTER CLXVIL

(a.d. 415.)

from augustin to jerome on james ii. lo.

Chap. i. — i. My brother Jerome, esteemed
worthy to be honoured in Christ by me, when I
wrote to you propounding this question concern-
ing the human soul, — if a new soul be now
created for each individual at birth, whence do
souls contract the bond of guilt which we as-
suredly believe to be removed by the sacrament
of the grace of Christ, when administered even
to new-born children? — as the letter on that
subject grew to the size of a considerable vol-
ume, I was unwilling to impose the burden of
any other question at that time ; but there is a
subject which has a much stronger claim on
my attention, as it presses more seriously on my
mind. I therefore ask you, and in God's name
beseech you, to do something which will, I be-
lieve, be of great service to many, namely, to
explain to me (or to direct me to any work in
which you or any other commentator has already
expounded) the sense in which we are to under-
stand these words in the Epistle of James,
" Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet
offend in one point, he is guilty of all." ^ This
subject is of such importance that I very greatly


* John xvi. 12.
S Jas. ii. 10.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


533


regret that I did not write to you in regard to it
long ago.

2. For whereas in the question which I thought
it neccessary to submit to you concerning the
soul, our inquiries were engaged with the investi-
gation of a life wholly past and sunk out of sight
in oblivion, in this question we study this present
life, and how it must be spent if we would attain
to eternal life. As an apt illustration of this
remark let me quote an entertaining anecdote.
A man had fallen into a well where the quantity
of water was sufficient to break his fall and save
him from death, but not deep enough to cover
his mouth and deprive him of speech. Another
man approached, and on seeing him cries out
in surprise : " How did you fall in here?" He
answers : " I beseech you to plan how you can
get me out of this, rather than ask how I fell in."
So, since we admit and hold as an article of the
Catholic faith, that the soul of even a little infant
requires to be delivered out of the guilt of sin,
as out of a pit, by the grace of Christ, it is suffi-
cient for the soul of such a one that we know the
way in which it is saved, even though we should
never know the way in which it came into that
wretched condition. But I thought it our duty
to inquire into this subject, lest we should in-
cautiously hold any one of those opinions con-
cerning the manner of the soul's becoming united
with the body which might contradict the doc-
trine that the souls of little children require to
be delivered, by denying that they are subject
to the bond of guilt. This, then, being very
firmly held by us, that the soul of every infant
needs to be freed from the guilt of sin, and can
be freed in no other way except by the grace of
God through Jesus Christ our Lord, if we can
ascertain the cause and origin of the evil itself,
we are better prepared and equipped for resist-
ing adversaries whose empty talk I call not rea-
soning but quibbling ; if, however, we cannot
ascertain the cause, the fact that the origin of
this misery is hid from us is no reason for our
being slothful in the work which compassion de-
mands from us. In our conflict, however, with
those who appear to themselves to know what
they do not know, we have an additional strength
and safety in not being ignorant of our ignorance
on this subject. For there are some things
which it is evil not to know ; there are other
things which cannot be known, or are not nec-
essary to be known, or have no bearing on the
life which we seek to obtain ; but the question
which I now submit to you from the writings of
the Apostle James is intimately connected with
the course of conduct in which we live, and in
which, with a view to life eternal, we endeavour
to please God.

3. How, then, I beseech you, are we to under-
stand the words : " Whosoever shall keep the


whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all " ? Does this affirm that the person
who shall have committed theft, nay, who even
shall have said to the rich man, " Sit thou here,"
and to the poor man, " Stand thou there," is
guilty of homicide, and adultery, and sacrilege?
And if he is not so, how can it be said that a
person who has offended in one point has be-
come guilty of all? Or are the things which
the apostle said concerning the rich man and the
poor man not to be reckoned among those things
in one of which if any man offend he becomes
guilty of all ? But we must remember whence
that sentence is taken, and what goes before it,
and in what connection it occurs. " My breth-
ren," he says, " have not the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory, with respect of
persons. For if there come into your assembly
a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and
there come in also a poor man in vile raiment ;
and ye have respect to him that weareth the gay
clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a
good place ; and say to the poor. Stand thou
there, or sit here under my footstool ; are ye not
then partial in yourselves, and are become judges
of evil thoughts? Hearken, my beloved breth-
ren. Hath not God chosen the poor of this world,
rich in faith, and heirs of the kindgom which He
hath promised to them that love Him ? But ye
have despised the poor," ■ — inasmuch as you
have said to the poor man, " Stand thou there,"
when you would have said to a man with a gold
ring, *' Sit thou here in a good place." And then
there follows a passage explaining and enlarging
upon that same conclusion : " Do not rich men
oppress you by their power, and draw you be-
fore the judgment-seats? Do not they blas-
pheme that worthy name by the which ye are
called? If ye fulfil the royal law according to
the Scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself, ye do well : but if ye have respect to
persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of
the law as transgressors." ^ See how the apostle
calls those transgressors of the law who say to
the rich man, " Sit here," and to the poor, "Stand
there." See how, lest they should think it a
trifling sin to transgress the law in this one thing,
he goes on to add : " Whosoever shall keep the
whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. For He that said, Do not commit
adultery, said also. Do not kill. Now if thou do
not kill, yet, if thou commit adultery, thou art
become a transgressor of the law," according to
that which he had said : " Ye are convinced of
the law as transgressors." Since these things
are so, it seems to follow, unless it can be shown
that we are to understand it in some other way,


' Jas. ii. 1-6.
2 Jas. li. 6-9.


534


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


that he who says to the rich man, '' Sit here,"
and to the poor, " Stand there," not treating the
one with the same respect as the other, is to be
judged guilty as an idolater, and a blasphemer,
and an adulterer, and a murderer — in short, —
not to enumerate all, which would be tedious, —
as guilty of all crimes, since, offending in one, he
is guilty of all."

Chap. ii. — 4. But has he who has one virtue all
virtues? and has he no virtues who lacks one?
If this be true, the sentence of the apostle is
thereby confirmed. But what I desire is to have
the sentence explained, not confirmed, since of
Itself it stands more sure m our esteem than all
the authority of philosophers could make it.
And even if what has just been said concerning
virtues and vices were true, it would not follow
that therefore all sins are equal. For as to
the inseparable co-existence of the virtues, this
is a doctrine in regard to which, if I remember
rightly, what, indeed, I have almost forgotten
(though perhaps I am mistaken), all philoso-
phers who affirm that virtues are essential to
the right conduct of life are agreed. The doc-
trine of the equality of sins, however, the Stoics
alone dared to maintain in opposition to the
unanimous sentiments of mankind : an absurd
tenet, which in writing against Jovinianus (a
Stoic in this opinion, but an Epicurean in fol-
lowing after antl defending pleasure) you have
most clearly refuted from the Holy Scriptures.'
In that most delightful and noble dissertation
you have made it abundantly plain that it has
not been the doctrine of our authors, or rather
of the Truth Himself, who has spoken through
them, that all sins are equal. I shall now do my
utmost in endeavouring, with the help of God,
to show how it can be that, although the doc-
trine of philosophers concerning virtues is true,
we are nevertheless not compelled to admit the
Stoics' doctrine that all sins are equal. If I
succeed, I will look for your approbation, and
m whatever respect I come short, I beg you to
supply my deficiencies.

5. Those who maintain that he who has one
virtue has all, and that he who lacks one lacks
all, reason correctly from the fact that prudence
cannot be cowardly, nor unjust, nor intemperate ;
for if it were any of these it would no longer
be prudence. Moreover, if it be prudence only
when it is brave, and just, and temperate, assu-
redly wherever it exists it must have the other
virtues along with it. In like manner, also,
courage cannot be imprudent, or intemperate,
or unjust ; temperance must of necessity be pru-
dent, brave, and just ; and justice does not exist
unless it be prudent, brave, and temperate.
Thus, wherever any one of these virtues truly

* Jerome, Contra J at'inianuni , lib. ii.


exists, the others likewise exist ; and where some
are absent, that which may appear in some
measure to resemble virtue is not really present.

6. There are, as you know, some vices
opposed to virtues by a paljjable contrast, as
imprudence is the opposite of prudence. But
there are some vices opposed to virtues simply
because they are vices which, nevertheless, by a
deceitful appearance resemble virtues ; as, for
example, in the relation, not of imprudence, but
of craftiness to the said virtue of prudence. I
speak here of that craftiness^ which is wont to
be understood and spoken of in connection with
the evilly disposed, not in the sense in which
the word is usually employed in our Scriptures,
where it is often used in a good sense, as, " Be
crafty as serpents," 3 and again, to give crafti-
ness to the simple." '• It is true that among
heathen writers one of the most accomplished
of Latin authors, speaking of Catiline, has said :
" Nor was there lacking on his part craftiness to
guard against danger," 5 using " craftiness" (as-
tutia) in a good sense ; but the use of the word
in this sense is among them very rare, among us
very common. So also in regard to the virtues
classed under temperance. Extravagance is
most manifestly opposite to the virtue of frugal-
ity ; but that which the common people are
wont to call niggardliness is indeed a vice, yet
one which, not in its nature, but by a very de-
ceitful similarity of appearance, usurps the name
of frugality. In the same manner injustice is by
a palpable contrast opposed to justice ; but the
desire of avenging oneself is wont often to be a
counterfeit of justice, but it is a vice. There is an
obvious contrariety between courage and cow-
ardice ; but hardihood, though differing from
courage m nature, deceives us by its resemblance
to that virtue. Firmness is a part of virtue ;
fickleness is a vice far removed from and un-
doubtedly opposed to it ; but obstinacy lays
claim to the name of firmness, yet is wholly dif-
ferent, because firmness is a virtue, and obsti-
nacy is a vice.

7. To avoid the necessity of again going over
the same ground, let us take one case as an
example, from which all others may be under-
stood. Catiline, as those who have written con-
cerning him had means of knowing, was capable
of enduring cold, thirst, hunger, and patient in
fastings, cold, and watchings beyond what any
one could believe, and thus he appeared, both
to himself and to his followers, a man endowed
with great courage.^ But this courage was not
prudent, for he chose the evil instead of the


2 A sill tin.

3 Matt. X. 16.
* Prov. i. 4.

5 Sallusl, De Bella Catilinario.
t> Ibid.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


535


good ; was not temperate, for his life was dis-
graced by the lowest dissipation ; was not just,


rived,' but even of a woman who is faithful to
her husband, and who is so from a regard to the


for he conspired against his country ; and there- commandments and promises of God, and, first

fore It was not courage, but hardihood usurping

the name of courage to deceive fools ; for if it ;

had been courage, it would not have been a vice

but a virtue, and if it had been a virtue, it would j

never have been abandoned by the other virtues, '

its inseparable companions. !

8. On this account, when it is asked also con- i
cerning vices, whether where one exists all in like ;
manner exist, or where one does not exist none
exist, it would be a difficult matter to show this,
because two vices are wont to be opposed to one
virtue, one that is evidently opposed, and an-
other that bears an apparent likeness. Hence
the hardihood of Catiline is the more easily
seen not to have been courage, since it had not
along with it other virtues ; but it may be diffi-
cult to convince men that his hardihood was
cowardice, since he was in the habit of enduring
and patiently submitting to the severest hard-
ships to a degree almost incredible. But per-
haps, on examining the matter more closely, this
hardihood itself is seen to be cowardice, be-
cause he shrunk from the toil of those liberal
studies by which true courage is acquired.
Nevertheless, as there are rash men who are not
guilt)' of cowardice, and there are cowardly men
who are not guilty of rashness, and since in both
there is vice, for the truly brave man neither
ventures rashly nor fears without reason, we are
forced to admit that vices are more numerous
than virtues.

9. Accordingly, it happens sometimes that
one vice is supplanted by another, as the love
of money by the love of praise. Occasionally,
one vice quits the field that more may take its
place, as in the case of the drunkard, who, after
becoming temperate m the use of drink, may
come under the power of niggardliness and am-
bition. It is possible, therefore, that vices may
give place to vices, not to virtues, as their suc-
cessors, and thus they are more numerous.
When one virtue, however, has entered, there
will infallibly be (since it brings all the other
virtues along with it) a retreat of all vices what-
soever that were in the man ; for all vices were
not in him, but at one time so many, at another
a greater or smaller number might occupy their
place.

Chap. hi. — 10. We must inquire more care-
fully whether these things are so ; for the state-
ment that " he who has one virtue has all, and
that all virtues are awanting to him who lacks
one," is not given by inspiration, but is the view
held by many men, ingenious, indeed, and studi-
ous, but still men. But I must avow that, in the
case — I shall not say of one of those from
whose name the word virtue is said to be de-


of all, is faithful to Him, I do not know how I
could say of her that she is unchaste, or that
chastity is no virtue or a trifling one. I should
feel the same in regard to a husband who is
faithful to his wife ; and yet there are many
such, none of whom I could affirm to be with-
out any sins, and doubtless the sin which is in
them, whatever it be, proceeds from some vice.
\Vhence it follows that though conjugal fidelity
in religious men and women is undoubtedly a
virtue, for it is neither a nonentity nor a vice,
yet it does not bring along with it all virtues, for
if all virtues were there, there would be no vice,
and if there were no vice, there woukl be no sin ;
but where is the man who is altogether without
sin? Where, therefore, is the man who is with-
out any vice, that is, fuel or root, as it were, of
sin, when he who reclined on the breast of the
Lord says, " If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us "?^
It is not necessary for us to urge this at greater
length in writing to you, but I make the state-
ment for the sake of others who perhaps shall
read this. For you, indeed, in that same splendid
work against Jovinianus, have carefully proved
this from the Holy Scriptures ; in which work
also you have quoted the words, " in many
things we all offend," ^ from this very epistle in
which occur the words whose meaning we are
now investigating. For though it is an apostle
of Christ who is speaking, he does not say, " ye
offend," but, " we offend ; " and although in the
passage under consideration he says, " Whoso-
ever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all," ■♦ in the words just
quoted he affirms that we offend not in one
thing but in many, and not that some offend
but that we a// offend.

1 1 . Far be it, however, from any believer to
think that so many thousands of the servants of
Christ, who, lest they should deceive themselves,
and the truth should not be in them, sincerely
confess themselves to have sin, are altogether
without virtue ! For wisdom is a great virtue,
and wisdom herself has said to man, " Behold
the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom." s Far be
it from us, then, to say that so many and so great
believmg and pious men have not the fear of
the Lord, which the Greeks call evaifSua, or
more literally and fully, Oeoaef^eta. And what is
the fear of the Lord but His worship? and
whence is He truly worshipped except from
love? Love, then, out of a pure heart, and a


' Virujfi a guo denoininata dicitur ;

2 I John i. 8.

3 Jas. 111. 2.

4 Jas. ii 10.
i Job XX


'irii4S.


( xxviii. 28, Sept. ver.


536


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


good conscience, and faith unfeigned, is the
great anci true virtue, because it is " the end of
the commandment." ' Deservedly is love said
to be " strong as death," ^ because, like death,
it is vancjuished by none ; or because the meas-
ure of love in this life is even unto death, as the
Lord says, " Greater love hath no man than this,
that a man lay down his life for his friends ; " ^
or, rather, because, as death forcibly separates
the soul from the senses of the body, so love
separates it from fleshly lusts. Knowledge,
when it is of the right kind, is the handmaid
to love, for without love " knowledge puffeth
up," * but where love, by edifying, has filled the
heart, there knowledge will find nothing empty
which it can puff up. Moreover, Job has shown
what is that useful knowledge by defining it
where, after saying, " The fear of the Lord, that
is wisdom," he adds, " and to depart from evil,
that is understanding." 5 Why do we not then
say that the man who has this virtue has all vir-
tues, since "love is the fulfilling of the law?"""
Is it not true that, the more love exists in a man
the more he is endowed with virtue, and the less
love he has the less virtue is in him, for love is
itself virtue ; and the less virtue there is in a
man so much the more vice will there be in him?
Therefore, where love is full and perfect, no vice
will remain.

12. The Stoics, therefore, appear to me to be
mistaken in refusing to admit that a man who is
advancing in wisdom has any wisdom at all, and
in affirming that he alone has it who has become
altogether perfect in wisdom. They do not,
indeed, deny that he has made progress, but
they say that he is in no degree entitled to be
called wise, unless, by emerging, so to speak,
from the depths, he suddenly springs forth into
the free air of wisdom. For, as it matters not
when a man is drowning whether the depth of
water above him be many stadia or only the
breadth of a hand or finger, so they say in regard
to the progress of those who are advancing
towards wisdom, that they are like men rising
from the bottom of a whirlpool towards the air,
but that unless they by their progress, so escape
as to emerge wholly from folly as from an over-
whelming flood, they have not virtue and are not
wise ; but that, when they have so escaped, they
immediately have wisdom in perfection, and not
a vestige of folly whence any sin could be origi-
nated remains.

12. This simile, in which folly is compared to
water and wisdom to air, so that the mind
emerging, as it were, from the stifling influence


' I Tim. I. 5.

* Song of Sol. viii. 6.

* John XV. 13.

* I Cor. viii. i.
5 Job xxviii. 28.

* Kom. xiii. 10.


of folly breathes suddenly the free air of wisdom,
does not appear to me to harmonize sufficiently
with the authoritative statement of our Scrip-
tures ; a better simile, so far, at least, as illustra-
tion of spiritual things can be borrowed from
material things, is that which compares vice or
folly to darkness, and virtue or wisdom to light.
The way to wisdom is therefore not like that of
a man rising from the water into the air, in
which, in the moment of rising above the surface
of the water, he suddenly breathes freely, but,
like that of a man proceeding from darkness
into light, on whom more light gradually shines
as he advances. So long, therefore, as this is not
fully accomplished, we speak of the man as of
one going from the dark recesses of a vast cavern
towards its entrance, who is more and more
influenced by the proximity of the light as he
comes nearer to the entrance of the cavern ; so
that whatever light he has proceeds from the
light to which he is advancing, and whatever
darkness still remains in him proceeds from the
darkness out of which he is emerging. There-
fore it is true that in the sight of God " shall no
man living be justified," ' and yet that " the just
shall live by his faith." ^ On the one hand, " the
saints are clothed with righteousness," ^ one
more, another less ; on the other hand, no one
lives here wholly without sin — one sins more,
another less, and the best is the man who sins
least.

Chap. iv. — 14. But why have I, as if forget-
ting to whom I address myself, assumed the tone
of a teacher in stating the question regarding
which I wish to be instructed by you ? Never-
theless, as I had resolved to submit to your
examination my opinion regarding the equality
of sins (a subject involving a question closely
bearing on the matter on which I was writing),
let me now at last bring my statement to a
conclusion. Even though it were true that he
who has one virtue has all virtues, and that he who
lacks one virtue has none, this would not involve
the consequence that all sins are equal ; for
although it is true that where there is no virtue
there is nothing right, it by no means follows
that among bad actions one cannot be worse
than another, or that divergence from that which
is right does not admit of degrees. I think,
however, that it is more agreeable to truth and
consistent with the Holy Scriptures to say, that
what is true of the members of the body is true
of the different dispositions of the soul (which,
though not seen occupying different places, are
by their distinctive workings perceived as plainly
as the members of the body), namely, that as
in the same body one member is more fully


7 Ps. cxliii. 2.

8 Hab. li. 4.

9 Job xxix. 14.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


537


shone upon by the h'ght, another is less shone
upon, and a third is aUogether without Hght, and
remains in the dark under some impervious cov-
ering, something similar takes place in regard to
the various dispositions of the soul. If this be
so, then according to the manner in which every
man is shone upon by the light of holy love, he
may be said to have one virtue and to lack an-
other virtue, or to have one virtue in larger and
another in smaller measure. For in reference
to that love which is the fear of God, we may
correctly say both that it is greater in one man
than in another, and that there is some of it in
one man, and none of it in another ; we may
also correctly say as to an individual that he has
greater chastity than patience, and that he has
either virtue in a higher degree than he had yes-
terday, if he is making progress, or that he still
lacks self-control, but possesses, at the same time,
a large measure of compassion.

15. To sum up generally and briefly the view
which, so far as relates to holy living, I entertain
concerning virtue, — virtue is the love with which
that which ought to be loved is loved. This is
in some greater, in others less, and there are
men in whom it does not exist at all ; but in the
absolute fulness which admits of no increase, it
exists in no man while livmg on this earth ; so
long, however, as it admits of being increased
there can be no doubt that, in so far as it is less
than it ought to be, the shortcoming proceeds
from vice. Because of this vice there is " not
a just man upon earth that doeth good and
sinneth not ; " ' because of this vice, " in God's
sight shall no man living be justified."^ On
account of this vice, " if we say that we have
no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not
in us." ^ On account of this also, whatever
progress we may have made, we must say, " For-
give us our debts," •* although all debts in word,
deed, and thought were washed away in baptism.
He, then, who sees aright, sees whence, and
when, and where he must hope for that perfection
to which nothing can be added. Moreover, if
there had been no commandments, there would
have been no means whereby a man might cer-
tainly examine himself and see from what things
he ought to turn aside, whither he should aspire,
and in what things he should find occasion for
thanksgiving or for prayer. Great, therefore, is
the benefit of commandments, if to free will so
much liberty be granted that the grace of God
may be more abundantly honoured.

Chap. v. — 16. If these things be so, how
shall a man who shall keep the whole law, and
yet offend in one point, be guilty of all ? May


' Eccles. V. 7.

* Ps. cxliil 2.
3 1 John i. 8.

* Matt, vi- 12.


it not be, that since the fulfilling of the law is
that love wherewith we love God and our neigh-
bour, on which commandments of love " hang
all the law and t^he f)rophets," s he is justly held
to be guilty of all who violates that on which all
hang? Now, no one sins without violating this
love ; "for this, thou shalt not commit adultery;
thou shalt do no murder ; thou shalt not steal ;
thou shalt not covet ; and if there be any other
commandment, it is briefly comprehended in
this saying. Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself. Love worketh no ill to his neighbour :
therefore love is the fulfilling of the lavv."^ No
one, however, loves his neighbour who does not
out of his love to God do all in his power to
bring his neighbour also, whom he loves as him-
self, to love God, whom if he does not love, he
neither loves himself nor his neighbour. Hence
it is true that if a man shall keep the whole law,
and yet offend in one point, he becomes guilty
of all, because he does what is contrary to the
love on which hangs the whole law. A man,
therefore, becomes guilty of all by doing what is
contrary to that on which all hang.

1 7. Why, then, may not all sins be said to be
equal? May not the reason be, that the trans-
gression of the law of love is greater in him who
commits a more grievous sin, and is less in him
who commits a less grievous sin? And in the
mere fact of his committing any sin whatever,
he becomes guilty of all ; but in committing a
more grievous sin, or in sinning in more respects
than one, he becomes more guilty ; committing
a less grievous sin, or sinning in fewer respects,
he becomes less guilty, — his guilt being thus so
much the greater the more he has sinned, the
less the less he has sinned. Nevertheless, even
though it be only in one point that he offend, he
is guilty of all, because he violates that love on
which all hang. If these things be true, an
explanation is by this means found, clearing up
that saying of the man of apostolic grace, " In
many things we offend all." ^ For we all offend,
but one more grievously, another more slightly,
according as each may have committed a more
grievous or a less grievous sin ; every one being
great in the practice of sin in proportion as he
is deficient in loving God and his neighbour,
and, on the other hand, decreasing in the prac-
tice of sin in proportion as he increases in the
love of Ciod and of his neighbour. The more,
therefore, that a man is deficient in love, the
more is he full of sin. And perfection in love
is reached when nothing of sinful infirmity re-
mains in us.

18. Nor, indeed, in my opinion, are we to
esteem it a trifling sin " to have the faith of our


S Matt. xxii. 40.
* Rom. xiii. 9, 10.
7 Jag. ill. 2.


538


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons," if
we take the difference between sitting and stand-
ing, of which mention is made in the context,
to refer to ecclesiastical honours ; for who can
bear to see a rich man chosen to a place of
honour in the Church, while a poor man, of
sujierior (jualifications and of greater holiness,
is despised? If, however, the apostle speaks
there of our daily assemblies, who does not
offend in the matter? At the same time, only
those really offend here who cherish in their
hearts the opinion that a man's worth is to be
estimated according to his wealth ; for this seems
to be the meaning of the expression, " Are ye
not then partial in yourselves, and are become
judges of evil thoughts? "

19. The law of liberty, therefore, the law of
love, is that of which he says : " If ye fulfil the
royal law according to the Scripture, Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself, ye do well : but
if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin,
and are convinced of the law as transgressors.'
And then (after the difficult sentence, " \Vhoso-
ever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all," concerning which
I have with sufficient fulness stated my opinion),
making mention of the same law of liberty, he
says : " So speak ye, and so do, as they that
shall be judged by the law of liberty." And as
he knew by experience what he had said a little
before, "in many things we offend all," he sug-
gests a sovereign remedy, to be applied, as it
were day by day, to those less serious but real
wounds which the soul suffers day by day, for he
says : " He shall have judgment without mercy
that hath showed no mercy," ^ For with the
same purpose the Lord says : " Forgive, and ye
shall be forgiven : give, and it shall be given unto
you." 3 After which the apostle says: "But
mercy rejoiceth over judgment : " it is not said
that mercy prevails over judgment, for it is not
an adversary of judgment, but it " rejoiceth "
over judgment, because a greater number are
gathered in by mercy ; but they are those who
have shown mercy, for, " Blessed are the merci-
ful, for God shall have mercy on them." *

20. It is, therefore, by all means just that they
be forgiven, because they have forgiven others,
and that what they need be given to them, be-
cause they have given to others. For God uses
mercy when He judgeth, and uses judgment
when He showeth mercy. Hence the Psalmist
says : " I will sing of mercy and of judgment
unto Thee, O Lord." s For if any man, think-
ing himself too righteous to require mercy, pre-
sumes, as if he had no reason for anxiety, to

' Jas. ii. 8, 9.
^ Jas. ii. 13.
3 Luke vi. 37, 38.
* Matt. V. 7.
S Ps. ci. I.


wait for judgment without mercy, he provokes
that most righteous indignation through fear of
which the Psalmist said : " Enter not into judg-
ment with Thy servant."^ For this reason the
Lord says to a disobedient people : " Wherefore
will ye contend with me in judgment?'' For
when the righteous King shall sit upon His
throne, who shall boast that he has a pure heart,
or who shall boast that he is clean from sin?
What hope is there then unless mercy snail " re-
joice over" judgment? But this it will do only
in the case of those who have showed mercy,
saying with sincerity, " Forgive us our debts, as
we forgive our debtors," and who have given
without murmuring, for " the Lord loveth a
cheerful giver." ^ To conclude, St. James is led
to speak thus concerning works of mercy in this
passage, in order that he may console those
whom the statements immediately foregoing
might have greatly alarmed, his purpose being to
admonish us how those daily sins from which
our life is never free here below may also be ex-
piated by daily remedies ; lest any man, becom-
ing guilty of all when he offends in even one
pomt, be brought, by offending in many points
(since " in many things we all offend "), to
appear before the bar of the Supreme Judge
under the enormous amount of guilt which has
accumulated by degrees, and find at that tribu-
nal no mercy, because he showed no mercy to
others, instead of rather meriting the forgiveness
of his own sins, and the enjoyment of the gifts
promised in Scripture, by his extending forgive-
ness and bounty to others.

21. I have written at great length, which may
perhaps have been tedious to you, as you, al-
though approving of the statements now made,
do not expect to be addressed as if you were
but learning truths which you have been accus-
tomed to teach to others. If, however, there
be anything in these statements — not in the
style of language in which they are expounded,
for I am not much concerned as to mere
phrases, but in the substance of the statements
— which your erudite judgment condemns, I
beseech you to point this out to me in your
reply, and do not hesitate to correct my error.
For I pity the man who, in view of the unwea-
ried labour and sacred character of your studies,
does not on account of them both render to you
the honour which you deserve, and give thanks
unto our Lord God by whose grace you are
what you are. Wherefore, since I ought to be
more willing to learn from any teacher the things
of which to my disadvantage I am ignorant, than
prompt to teach any others what I know, with how
much greater reason do I claim the payment of


* Ps. cxliii. 2,

? Jer.il. 28, LXX.

8 2 Cor. ix. 7.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


539


this debt of love from you, by whose learning
ecclesiastical literature in the Latin tongue has
been, in the Lord's name, and by His help, ad-
vanced to an extent which had been previously
unattainable. Especially, however, I ask atten-
tion to the sentence : " Whosoever shall keep
the whole law, and offend in one point, is guilty
of all." If you know any better way, my be-
loved brother, in which it can be explained, I
beseech you by the Lord to favour us by com-
municating to us your exposition.

LETTER CLXIX.
(a.d. 415.)

bishop augustin to bishop evodius.

Chap. i. — i. If acquaintance with the treatises
which specially occupy me, and from which I am
unwilling to be turned aside to anything else, is
so highly valued by your Holiness, let some one
be sent to copy them for you. P'or I have now
finished several of those which had been com-
menced by me this year before Easter, near the
beginning of Lent. For, to the three books on
the City of God, in opposition to its enemies,
the worshippers of demons, I have added two
others, and in these five books I think enough
has been said to answer those who maintain that
the [heathen] gods must be worshipped in order
to secure prosperity in this present life, and who
are hostile to the Christian name from an idea
that that prosperity is hindered by us. In the
sequel I must, as I promised in the first book,'
answer those who think that the worship of their
gods is the only way to obtain that life after
death with a view to obtain which we are Chris-
tians. I have dictated also, in volumes of con-
siderable size, expositions of three Psalms, the
68th, the 7 2d, and the 78th. Commentaries on
the other Psalms — not yet dictated, nor even
entered on — are eagerly expected and de-
manded from me. From these studies I am
unwilling to be called away and hindered by any
questions thrusting themselves upon me from
another quarter ; yea, so unwilling, that I do not
wish to turn at present even to the books on the
Trinity, which I have long had on hand and have
not yet completed, because they require a great
amount of labour, and I believe that they are of
a nature to be understood only by few ; on which
account they claim my attention less urgently
than writings which may, I hope, be useful to
very many.

2. For the words, " He that is ignorant shall
be ignored," ^ were not used by the apostle in
reference to this subject, as your letter affirms ;
as if this punishment were to be inflicted on the


' De Chiitttte Dei, lib. I. ch. xxxvi.
' I Cor. xiv. 38.


man who is not able to discern by the exercise
of his intellect the ineffable unity of the Trinity,
in the same way as the unity of memory, under-
standing, and will in the soul of man is discerned.
The apostle said these words with a wholly dif-
ferent design. Consult the passage and you will
see that he was speaking of those things which
might be for the edification of the many in faith
and holiness, not of those which might with dif-
ficulty be comprehended by the few, and by them
only in the small degree in which the compre-
hension of so great a subject is attainable in this
life. The positions laid down by him were, —
that prophesying was to be preferred to speak-
ing with tongues ; that these gifts should not be
exercised in a disorderly manner, as if the spirit
of prophecy compelled them to speak even
against their will ; that women should keep
silence in the Church ; and that all things should
be done decently and in order. While treating
of these things he says : " If any man think him-
self to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him know
the things which I write to you, for they are the
commands of the Lord. If any man be igno-
rant, he shall be ignored ; " intending by these
words to restrain and call to order persons who
were specially ready to cause disorder in the
Church, because they imagined themselves to
excel in spiritual gifts, although they were
disturbing everything by their presumptious
conduct. " If any man think himself to be a
prophet, or spiritual, let him know," he says,
" the things which I write to you, for they are
the commands of the Lord." If any man thinks
himself to be, and in reality is not, a prophet, for
he who is a prophet undoubtedly knows and does
not need admonition and exhortation, because
" he judgeth all things, and is himself judged of
no man." ^ Those persons, therefore, caused
confusion and trouble in the Church who thought
themselves to be in the Church what they were
not. He teaches these to know the command-
ments of the Lord, for he is not a " God of con-
fusion, but of peace." •♦ But " if any one is
ignorant, he shall be ignored," that is to say, he
shall be rejected ; for God is not ignorant — so
far as mere knowledge is concerned — in regard
to the persons to whom He shall one day say,
" I know you not," s but their rejection is sig-
nified by this expression.

3. Moreover, since the Lord says, " Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God,"^
and that sight is promised to us as the highest
reward at the last, we have no reason to fear lest,
if we are now unable to see clearly those things
which we believe concerning the nature of God,


3 I Cor. ii. 15.
•« I Cor. xiv. 33.

5 Luke xili. 27.

6 Matt. V. 8.


540


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


this defective apprehension should bring us
under the sentence, " He that is ignorant shall
be ignored." P'or when " in the wisdom of God
the workl by wisdom knew not God, it pleased
God by the foolishness of preaching to save those
who believed." This foolishness of preaching
and " foolishness of God which is wiser than
man " ' draws many to salvation, in such a way
that not only those who are as yet incapable
of perceiving with clear intelligence the nature of
(iod which in faith they hold, but even those
who have not yet so learned the nature of their
own soul as to distinguish between its incor-
poreal essence and the body as a whole with the
same certainty with which they perceive that
they live, understand, and will, are not on this
account shut out from that salvation which that
foolishness of preaching bestows on believers.

4. For if Christ died for those only who with
clear intelligence can discern these things, our
labour in the Church is almost spent in vain.
But if, as is the fact, crowds of common people,
possessing no great strength of intellect, run to
the Physician m the exercise of faith, with the re-
sult of be'ing healed by Christ and Him crucified,
that 'Where sin has abounded, grace may much
more abound,"^ it comes in wondrous ways to
pass, through the depths of the riches of the
wisdom and knowledge of God and His un-
searchable judgments, that, on the one hand,
some who do discern between the material and
the spiritual in their own nature, while pluming
themselves on this attainment, and despising that
foolishness of preaching by which those who
believe are saved, wander far from the only path
which leads to eternal life ; and, on the other
hand, because not one perishes for whom Christ
died,^ many glorying in the cross of Christ, and
not withdrawing from that same path, attain,
notwithstanding their ignorance of those things
which some with most profound subtlety investi-
gate, unto that eternity, truth, and love, — that
is, unto that enduring, clear, and full felicity, —
in which to those who abide, and see, and love,
all things are plain.

Chap. ii. — 5. Therefore let us with stedfast
piety believe in one God, the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Spirit ; let us at the same
time believe that the Son is not [the person]
who is the Father, and the Father is not [the
person] who is the Son, and neither the Father
nor the Son is [the person] who is the Spirit of
both the Father and the Son. Let it not be
supposed that in this Trinity there is any separa-
tion in respect of time or place, but that these
Three are equal and co-eternal, and absolutely
of one nature : and that the creatures have been


» I Cor. i. 21, 25.
* Rom. V. 20.
3 Johu xvii. 13.


made, not some by the Father, and some by the
Son, and some by the Holy Spirit, but that each
and all that have been or are now being created
subsist in the Trinity as their Creator ; and that
no one is saved by the Father without the Son
and the Holy Spirit, or by the Son without the
Father and the Holy Spirit, or by the Holy Spirit
without the Father and the Son, — but by the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the only
one, true, and truly immortal (that is, absolutely
unchangeable) God. At the same time, we be-
lieve that many things are stated in Scripture
separately concerning each of the Three, in
order to teach us that, though they are an in-
separable Trinity, yet they are a Trinity. For,
just as when their names are pronounced in
human language they cannot be named simul-
taneously, although their existence in inseparable
union is at every moment simultaneous, even so
in some places of Scripture also, they are by
certain created things presented to us distinc-
tively and in mutual relation to each other : for
example, [at the baptism of Christ] the Father
is heard in the voice which said, " Thou art my
Son ; " the Son is seen in the human nature
which, in being born of the Virgin, He assumed ;
the Holy Spirit is seen in the bodily form of a
dove,'' — these things presenting the Three to
our apprehension separately, indeed, but in no
wise separated.

6. To present this in a form which the intel-
lect may apprehend, we borrow an illustration
from the Memory, the Understanding, and the
Will. For although we can speak of each of
these faculties severally in its own order, and at
a separate time, we neither exercise nor even
mention any one of them without the other two.
It must not, however, be supposed, from our
using this comparison between these three facul-
ties and the Trinity, that the things compared
agree in every particular, for where, in any pro-
cess of reasoning, can we find an illustration in
which the correspondence between the things
compared is so exact that it admits of applica-
tion in every point to that which it is intended
to illustrate? In the first place, therefore, the
similarity is found to be imperfect in this respect,
that whereas memory, understanding, and will
are not the soul, but only exist in the soul, the
Trinity does not exist in God, but is God. In
the Trinity, therefore, there is manifested a sin-
gleness \_simpiicitas'] commanding our astonish-
ment, because in this Trinity it is not one thing
to exist, and another thing to understand, or do
anything else which is attributed to the nature
of God ; but in the soul it is one thing that
It exists, and another thing that it understands,
for even when it is not using the understand-

4 Luke iii. 22.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


541


ing


it still exists. In the second place, who
would dare to say that the Father does not un-
derstand by Himself but by the Son, as memory
does not understand by itself but by the under-
standing, or, to speak more correctly, the soul in
which these faculties are understands by no other
faculty than by the understanding, as it remem-
bers only by memory, and exercises volition onl»y
by the will? The point, therefore, to which the
illustration is intended to apply is this, — that,
whatever be the manner in which we understand,
in regard to these three faculties in the soul, that
when the several names by which they are sev-
erally represented are uttered, the utterance of
each separate name is nevertheless accomplished
only m the combined operation of all the three,
since it is by an act of memory and of under-
standing and of will that it is spoken, — it is in
the same manner that we understand, in regard
to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, that
no created thing which may at any time be em-
ployed to present only one of the Three to our
minds is produced otherwise than by the simul-
taneous, because essentially inseparable, opera-
tion of the Trinity ; and that, consequently,
neither the voice of the Father, nor the body and
soul of the Son, nor the dove of the Holy Spirit,
was produced in any other way than by the
combined operation of the Trinity.

7. Moreover, that sound of a voice was cer-
tainly not made indissolubly one with the person
of the Father, for so soon as it was uttered it
ceased to be. Neither was that form of a dove
made indissolubly one with the person of the
Holy Spirit, for it* also, like the bright cloud
which covered the Saviour and His three disciples
on the mount,' or rather like the tongues of flame
which once represented the same Holy Spirit,
ceased to exist as soon as it had served its pur-
pose as a symbol. But it was otherwise with the
body and soul in which the Son of God was
manifested : seeing that the deliverance of men
was the object for which all these things were
done, the human nature in which He appeared
was, in a way marvellous and unique, assumed
into real union with the person of the Word of
God, that is, of the only Son of God, — the
Word remaining unchangeably in His own na-
ture, wherein it is not conceivable that there
should be composite elements in union with
which any mere semblance of a human soul could
subsist. We read, indeed, that " the Spirit of
wisdom is manifold ; " ^ but it is as properly
termed simple. Manifold it is, indeed, because


there are many


things


which it


possesses


but


simple, because it is not a different thing from
what it possesses, as the Son is said to have life


' Matt. xvii. 5.
* Wisd. vii. 22.


in Himself, and yet He is Himself that life. The
human nature came to the Word ; the Word did
not come, with susceptibility of change, into the
human nature ; ^ and therefore, in His union to
the human nature which He has assumed. He is
still properly called the Son of God ; for which
reason the same person is the Son of God im-
mutable and co-eternal with the Father, and the
Son of God who was laid in the grave, — the
former being true of Him only as the Word, the
latter true of Him only as a man.

8. Wherefore it behoves us, in reading any
statements made concerning the Son of God,
to observe in reference to which of these two
natures they are spoken. For by His assump-
tion of the soul and body of a man, no increase
was made in the number of Persons : the Trinity
remained as before. For just as in every man,
with the exception of that one whom alone He
assumed into personal nnion, the soul and body
constitute one person, so in Christ the Word and
His human soul and body constitute one person.
And as the name philosopher, for example, is
given to a man certainly with reference only to
his soul, and yet it is nothing absurd, but only a
most suitable and ordinary use of language, for
us to say the philosopher was killed, the philoso-
pher died, the philosopher was buried, although
all these events befell him in his body, not in
that part of him in which he was a philosopher ;
in like manner the name of God, or Son of God,
or Lord of Glory, or any other such name, is
given to Christ as the Word, and it is, neverthe-
less, correct to say that God was crucified, seeing
that there is no question that He suffered this
death in his human nature, not in that in which
He is the Lord of Glory.^

9. As for the sound of the voice, however, and
the bodily form of a dove, and the cloven tongues
which sat upon each of them, these, like the
terrible wonders wrought at Sinai, s and like the
pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night,^ were
produced only as symbols, and vanished when
this purpose had been served. The thing which
we must especially guard against in connection
with them is, lest any one should believe that the
nature of God — whether of the Father, or of
the Son, or of the Holy Spirit — is susceptible
of change or transformation. And we must not
be disturbed by the fact that the sign sometimes
receives the name of the thing signified, as when
the Holy Spirit is said to have descended in a
bodily form as a dove and abode upon Him ; for
in like manner the smitten rock is called Christ,^
because it was a symbol of Christ.


3 Homo autem Verbo accessit, non Verbum in hominem conver-
tibiliter accessit.
* I Cor. ii. 8.

5 Ex. xix. 18.

6 Ex. xiii. 21.

7 I Cor. X. 4.


542


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


Chap. hi. — lo. I wonder, however, that, al
though you believe it possible for the sound of the :
voice which said, "Thou art my Son," to have
been produced through a divine act, without the
intermediate agency of a soul, by something the
nature of which was corporeal, you nevertheless
do not believe that a bodily form and movements
exacdy resembling those of any real living crea-
ture whatsoever could be produced in the same
way. namely, through a divine act, without the
intermediate agency of a spirit imparting life.
For if inanimate matter obeys God without the
instrumentality of an animating spirit, so as to
emit sounds such as are wont to be emited by
animated bodies, in order to bring to the human
ear words articulately spoken, why should it not
obey Him, so as to present to the human eye
the figure and motions of a bird, by the same
power of the Creator without the instrumentality
of any animating spirit? The objects of both
sight and hearing — the sound which strikes the
ear and the appearance which meets the eye,
the articulations of the voice and the outlines of
the members, every audible and visible motion
— are both alike produced from matter contigu-
ous to us ; is it, then, granted to the sense of
hearing, and not to the sense of sight, to tell us
regarding the body which is perceived by this
bodily sense, both that it is a true body, and that
it is nothing beyond what the bodily sense per-
ceives it to be ? For in every living creature the
soul is, of course, not perceived by any bodily
sense. We do not, therefore, need to inquire
how the bodily form of the dove appeared to
the eye, just as we do not need to inquire how the
voice of a bodily form capable of speech was
made to fall upon the ear. For if it was possible
to dispense with the intermediate agency of a
soul in the case in which a voice, not something
like a voice, is said to have been produced, how
much more easily was it possible in the case in
which it is said that the Spirit descended " like
a dove," a phrase which signifies that a mere
bodily form was exhibited to the eye, and does
not affirm that a real living creature was seen !
In like manner, it is said that on the day of
Pentecost, " suddenly there came a sound from
heaven as of a mighty rushing wind, and there
appeared to them cloven tongues like as of fire," '
in which something like wind and like fire, i.e.
resembling these common and familiar natural
phenomena, is said to have been perceived, but
it does not seem to be indicated that these
common and familiar natural phenomena were
actually produced.

II. If, however, more subtle reasoning or
more thorough investigation of the matter re-
sult in demonstrating that that which is natu-

■ Acts ii. 2, 3.


rally destitute of motion both in time and in
space \J.e. matter] cannot be moved otherwise
than through the intermediate agency of that
which is capable of motion only in time, not in
space \J.e. spirit], it will follow from this that all
those things must have been done by the instru-
mentality of a living creature, as things are done
by angels, on which subject a more elaborate
discussion would be tedious, and is not neces-
sary. To this it must be added, that there are
visions which appear to the spirit as plainly as
to the senses of the body, not only in sleep or
delirium, but also to persons of sound mind in
their waking hours, — visions which are due not
to the deceitfulness of devils mocking men, but
to some spiritual revelation accomplished by
means of immaterial forms resembling bodies,
and which cannot by any means be distinguished
from real objects, unless they are by divine assist-
ance more fully revealed and discriminated by
the mind's intelligence, which is done sometimes
(but with difficulty) at the time, but for the
most part after they have disappeared. This
being the case in regard to these visions which,
whether their nature be really material, or ma-
terial only in appearance but really spiritual,
seem to manifest themselves to our spirit as if
they were perceived by the bodily senses, we
ought not, when these things are recorded in
sacred Scripture, to conclude hastily to which
of these two classes they are to be referred, or
whether, if they belong to the former, they are
produced by the intermediate agency of a spirit ;
while, at the same time, as to the invisible and
immutable nature of the Creator, that is, of the
supreme and ineffable Trinity, we either simply,
without any doubt, believe, or, in addition to
this, with some degree of intellectual apprehen-
sion, understand that it is wholly removed and
separated both from the senses of fleshly mor-
tals, and from all susceptibility of being changed
either for the worse or for the better, or to any-
thing whatever of a variable nature.

Chap. iv. — 12. These things I send you in
reference to two of your questions, — the one
concerning the Trinity, and the other concern-
ing the dove in which the Holy Spirit, not in
His own nature, but in a symbolical form, was
manifested, as also the Son of God, not in His
eternal Sonship (of which the Father said : " Be-
fore the morning star I have begotten Thee " ^),
but in that human nature which He assumed
from the Virgin's womb, was crucified by the
Jews : observe that to you who are at leisure I
have been able, notwithstanding immense pres-
sure of business, to write so much. I have not,
however, deemed it necessary to discuss every-
thing which you have brought forward in your

2 Ps. ex. 3, LXX.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


543


letter; but on these two questions which you
wished me to solve, I think I have written as
much as is exacted by Christian charity, though
I may not have satisfied your vehement desire.

13. Besides the two books added to the first
three in the City of God, and the exposition of
three psalms, as above mentioned,' I have also
written a treatise to the holy presbyter Jerome
concerning the origin of the soul,2 asking him,
in regard to the opinion which, in writing to
Marcellinus of pious memory, he avowed as his
own, that a new soul is made for each individual
at birth, how this can be maintained without
overthrowing that most surely established article
of the Church's faith, according to which we
firmly believe that all die in Adam,^ and are
brought down under condemnation unless they
be delivered by the grace of Christ, which, by
means of His sacrament, works even in infants.
I have, moreover, written to the same person to
inquire his opinion as to the sense in which
the words of James, " Whosoever shall keep the
whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all," are to be understood.-* In this
letter I have also stated my own opinion : in
the other, concerning the origin of the soul, I
have only asked what was his opinion, submit-
ting the matter to his judgment, and at the same
time discussing it to some extent. I wrote these
to Jerome because I did not wish to lose an op-
portunity of correspondence afforded by a cer-
tain very pious and studious young presbyter,
Orosius, who, prompted only by burning zeal in
regard to the Holy Scriptures, came to us from
the remotest part of Spain, namely, from the
shore of the ocean, and whom I persuaded to
go on from us to Jerome. In answer to certain
questions of the same Orosius, as to things
which troubled him in reference to the heresy
of the Priscillianists, and some opinions of Ori-
gen which the Church has not accepted, I have
written a treatise of moderate size with as much
brevity and clearness as was in my power. I
have also written a considerable book against
the heresy of Pelagius,5 being constrained to do
this by some brethren whom he had persuaded to
adopt his fatal error, denying the grace of
Christ. If you wish to have all these, send
some one to copy them all for you. Allow me,
however, to be free from distraction in studying
and dictating to my clerks those things which,
being urgently required by many, claim in my
opinion precedence over your questions, which
are of interest to very few.


LETTER CLXXII.
(a.d. 416.)


1 Par. I, p. 539.

2 Letter CLXVI.
' I Cor. XV. 22.

■« Letter CLXVII.

5 The work on Nature and Grace, addressed to Timasius and
Jacobus — translated in the fourth volume of this series, Antipela-
gian Writings, i. 233.


TO AUGUSTIN, MY TRULY PIOUS LORD AND FATHER,
WORTHY OF MY UTMO.ST AFFECTION AND VENE-
RATION, JEROME SENDS GREETING IN CHRIST,

I. That honourable man, my brother, and
your Excellency's son, the presbyter Orosius, I
have, both on his own account and in obedience
to your request, made welcome. But a most
tr)'ing time has come upon us,^ in which I have
found it better for me to hold my peace than to
speak, so that our studies have ceased, lest what
Appius calls " the eloquence of dogs " should
be provoked into exercise.^ For this reason I
have not been able at the present time to give
to those two books dedicated to my name —
books of profound erudition, and brilliant with
every charm of splendid eloquence — the answer
which I would otherwise have given ; not that I
think anything said in them demands correction,
but because I am mindful of the words of the
blessed apostle in regard to the variety of men's
judgments, " Let every man be fully persuaded
in his own mind." ^ Certainly, whatever can be
said on the topics there discussed, and what-
ever can be drawn by commanding genius from
the fountain of sacred Scripture regarding them,
has been in these letters stated in your positions,
and illustrated by your arguments. But I beg
your Reverence to allow me for a little to praise
your genius. For in any discussion between us,
the object aimed at by both of us is advance-
ment in learning. But our rivals, and especially
heretics, if they see different opinions maintained
by us, will assail us with the calumny that our
differences are due to mutual jealousy. For my
part, however, I am resolved to love you, to look
up to you, to reverence and admire you, and to
defend your opinions as my own. I have also
in a dialogue, which I recently published, made
allusion to your Blessedness in suitable terms.
Be it ours, therefore, rather to rid the Church
of that most pernicious heresy which always
feigns repentance, in order that it may have
liberty to teach in our churches, and may not be
expelled and extinguished, as it would be if it
disclosed its real character in the light of day.
2. Your pious and venerable daughters, Eusto-


6 The allusion is probably to the acquittal of Pela<;ius in 415 by
the Council of Diospolis (or Lydda, a place between Joppa and Jeru-
salem). Augustin viewed this Council's decisions more favourably
than Jerome, who denounces it without measure as a pitiful assembly,
which allowed itself to be imposed upon by the evasions and feigned
recantation of Pelagius; to this he makes reference in the conclud-
ing sentence of this paragraph.

' We adopt here the reading found in Letter CCII. bis, sec. 3,
where this sentence is quoted by Augustin in writing to Optatus, and
we have " ne (instead of ct) juxta Appium canina facundia exercere-
tur." On the phrase " canina facundia," see Lactantius, book vi.
ch. 18.

8 Rom. xiv. 5. Translated by Jerome: " Unusquisque in sue
sensu abundet."


544


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


chium and Paula, continue to walk worthy ofj
their own birth and of your counsels, and they j
send special salutations to your Blessedness : in '
which they are joined by the whole brotherhood ;
of those who with us labour to serve the Lord
our Saviour. As for the holy presbyter Firmus,
we sent him last year to go on business of Eusto- 1
chium and Paula, first to Ravenna, and after- [
wards to Africa and Sicily, and we suppose that
he is now detained somewhere in Africa. I be- j
seech you to present my respectful salutations to
the saints who are associated with you. I have
also sent to your care a letter from me to the ;
holy presbyter Firmus ; if it reaches you, I beg
you to take the trouble of forwarding it to him.
May Christ the Lord keep you in safety, and
mindful of me, my truly pious lord and most
blessed father.

{As a postscript.) We suffer in this province
from a grievous scarcity of clerks acquainted
with the Latin language ; this is the reason why
we are not able to comply with your instructions,
especially in regard to that version of the Sep-
tuagint which is furnished with distinctive aster-
isks and obelisks ; ' for we have lost, through
some one's dishonesty, the most of the results
of our earlier labour.


LETTER CLXXIIL

(a.d. 416.)

to donatus, a presbyter of the donatist
party, augustin, a bishop of the catholic
church, sends greeting.

1. If you could see the sorrow of my heart
and my concern for your salvation, you would
perhaps take pity on your own soul, doing that
which is pleasing to God, by giving heed to the
word which is not ours but His ; and would no
longer give to His Scripture only a place in your
memory, while shutting it out from your heart.
You are angry because you are being drawn to
salvation, although you have drawn so many of
our fellow Christians to destruction. For what
did we order beyond this, that you should be
arrested, brought before the authorities, and
guarded, in order to prevent you from perishing?
As to your having sustained bodily injury, you
have yourself to blame for this, as you would not
use the horse which was immediately brought to
you, and then dashed yourself violently to the
ground ; for, as you well know, your companion,
who was brought along with you, arrived unin-
jured, not having done any harm to himself as
you did.

2. You think, however, that even what we


* Jerome probably alludes here to Auguslin's request in Letter
LXXl., sec. 3, 4; Letters, pp. 32b, 327.


have done to you should not have been done,
because, in your opinion, no man should be
compelled to that which is good. Mark, there-
fore, the words of the apostle : " If a man desire
the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work,"
and yet, in order to make the office of a bishop
be accepted by many men, they are seized against
their will,^ subjected to importunate persuasion,
shut up and detained in custody, and made to
suffer so many things which they dislike, until a
willingness to undertake the good work is found
in them. How much more, then, is it fitting that
you should be drawn forcibly away from a per-
nicious error, in which you are enemies to your
own souls, and brought to acquaint yourselves
with the truth, or to choose it when known, not
only in order to your holding in a safe and ad-
vantageous way the honour belonging to your
office, but also in order to preserve you from
perishing miserably ! You say that God has
given us free will, and that therefore no man
should be compelled even to good. Why, then,
are those whom I have above referred to com-
pelled to that which is good ? Take heed, there-
fore, to something which you do not wish to
consider. The aim towards which a good will
compassionately devotes its efforts is to secure
that a bad will be rightly directed. For who
does not know that a man is not condemned on
any other ground than because his bad will de-
served it, and that no man is saved who has not
a good will? Nevertheless, it does not follow
from this that those who are loved should be
cruelly left to yield themselves with impunity to
their bad will ; but in so far as power is given,
they ought to be both prevented from evil and
compelled to good.

3. For if a bad will ought to be always left to
its own freedom, why were the disobedient and
murmuring Israelites restrained from evil by such
severe chastisements, and compelled to come
into the land of promise? If a bad will ought
always to be left to its own freedom, why was
Paul not left to the free use of that most perverted
will with which he persecuted the Church? Why
was he thrown to the ground that he might be
blinded, and struck blind that he might be^
changed, and changed that he might be sent as
an apostle, and sent that he might suffer for the
truth's sake such wrongs as he had inflicted on
others when he was in error? If a bad will
ought always to be left to its own freedom, why
is a father instructed in Holy Scripture not only
to correct an obstinate son by words of rebuke,
but also to beat his sides, in order that, being
compelled and subdued, he may be guided to
good conduct? 5 For which reason Solomon

2 An example is furnished in the case of Castorius, Letter
LXIX.; Letters, p. 336.

3 Eccles, XXX. 12.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


545


also says : " Thou shalt beat him with the rod,
and shalt deliver his soul from hell." ' If a bad
will ought always to be left to its own freedom,
why are negligent pastors reproved ? and why is
it said to them, " Ye have not brought back the
wandering sheep, ye have not sought the perish-
ing " ?- You also are sheep belonging to Christ,
you bear the Lord's mark in the sacrament which
you have received, but you are wandering and
perishing. Let us not, therefore, incur your
displeasure because we bring back the wandering
and seek the perishing ; for it is better for us
to obey the will of the Lord, who charges us to
compel you to return to His fold, than to yield
consent to the will of the wandering sheep, so
as to leave you to perish. Say not, therefore,
what I hear that you are constantly saying, " I
wish thus to wander ; I wish thus to perish ; "
for it is better that we should so far as is in our
power absolutely refuse to allow you to wander
and perish.

4. When you threw yourself the other day
into a well, in order to bring death upon your-
self, you did so no doubt with your free will.
But how cruel the servants of God would have
been if they had left you to the fruits of this bad
will, and had not delivered you from that death !
Who would not have justly blamed them ? Who
would not have justly denounced them as inhu-
man? And yet you, with your own free will,
threw yourself into the water that you might be
drowned. They took you against your will out
of the water, that you might not be drowned.
You acted according to your own will, but with
a view to your destruction ; they dealt with you
against your will, but in order to your preserva-
tion. If, therefore, mere bodily safety behoves
to be so guarded that it is the duty of those who
love their neighbour to preserve him even against
his own will from harm, hov/ much more is this

j duty binding in regard to that spiritual health
in the loss of which the consequence to be
dreaded is eternal death ! At the same time
let me remark, that in that death which you
wished to bring upon yourself you would have
died not for time only but for eternity, because
even though force had been used to compel you
— not to accept salvation, not to enter into the
peace of the Church, the unity of Christ's body,
the holy indivisible charity, but — to suffer some
evil things, it would not have been lawful for you
to take away your own life.

5. Consider the divine Scriptures, and examine
them to the utmost of your ability, and see
iwhether this was ever done by any one of the
just and faithful, though subjected to the most
[grievous evils by persons who were endeavouring


• Prov. xxiii. 14.

* £zek. xxxiv. 4.


to drive them, not to eternal life, to which you
are being compelled by us, but to eternal death.
I have heard that you say that the Apostle Paul
intimated the lawfulness of suicide, when he said,
"Though I give my body to be burned," ^ sup-
posing that because he was there enumerating
all the good things which are of no avail without
charity, such as the tongues of men and of angels,
and all mysteries, and all knowledge, and all
prophecy, and the distribution of one's goods to
the poor, he intended to include among these
good things the act of bringing death upon one-
self. But observe carefully and learn in what
sense Scripture says that any man may give his
body to be burned. Certainly not that any man
may throw himself into the fire when he is
harassed by a pursuing enemy, but that, when
he is compelled to choose between doing wrong
and suffering wrong, he should refuse to do
wrong rather than to suffer wrong, and so give
his body into the power of the executioner, as
those three men did who were being compelled
to worship the golden image, while he who was
compelling them threatened them with the burn-
ing fiery furnace if they did not obey. They
refused to worship the image : they did not cast
themselves into the fire, and yet of them it is
written that they "yielded their bodies, that they
might not serve nor worship any god except their
own God." ^ This is the sense in which the
apostle said, " If I give my body to be burned."
6. Mark also what follows : — "If I have not
charity, it profiteth me nothing." To that char-
ity you are called ; by that charity you are pre-
vented from perishing : and yet you think,
forsooth, that to throw yourself headlong to de-
struction, by your own act, will profit you in
some measure, although, even if you suffered
death at the hands of another, while you remain
an enemy to charity it would profit you nothing.
Nay, more, being in a state of exclusion from
the Church, and severed from the body of unity
and the bond of charity, you would be punished
with eternal misery even though you were burned
alive for Christ's name ; for this is the apostle's
declaration, "Though I give my body to be
burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me

mind back, therefore, to
sober thought ; consider
carefully whether it is to error and to impiety
that you are being called, and, if you still think
so, submit patiently to any hardship for the
truth's sake. If, however, the fact rather be that
you are living in error and in impiety, and that
in the Church to which you are called truth and
piety are found, because there is Christian unity
and the love {charitas) of the Holy Spirit, why


3 I Cor. xiii. 3.

4 Dan. iii. 28.


nothing." Bring your
rational reflection and


546


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


do you labour any longer to be an enemy to
yourself?

7. For this end the mercy of the Lord ap-
pointed that both we and your bishops met at
Carthage in a conference which had repeated
meetings, and was largely attended, and reasoned
together in the most orderly manner in regard
to the grounds of our separation from each other.
The proceedings of that conference were written
down ; our signatures are attached to the record :
read it, or allow others to read it to you, and
then choose which party you prefer. I have
heard that you have said that you could to some
extent discuss the statements in that record with
us if we would omit these words of your bishops :
" No case forecloses the investigation of another
case, and no person compromises the position
of another person." You wish us to leave out
these words, in which, although they knew it not,
the truth itself spoke by them. You will say,
indeed, that here they made a mistake, and fell
through want of consideration into a false opin-
ion. But we affirm that here they said wliat
was true, and we prove this very easily by a ref-
erence to yourself. For if in regard to these
bishops of your own, chosen by the whole party
of Donatus on the understanding that they should
act as representatives, and that all the rest should
regard whatever they did as acceptable and sat-
isfactory, you nevertheless refuse to allow them
to compromise your position by what you think
to have been a rash and mistaken utterance on
their part, in this refusal you confirm the truth
of their saying : " No case forecloses the investi-
gation of another case, and no person comprom-
ises the position of another person." And at
the same time you ought to acknowledge, that
if you refuse to allow the conjoint authority of so
many of your bishops represented in these seven
to compromise Donatus, presbyter in Mutugenna,
it is incomparably less reasonable that one per-
son, Csecilianus, even had some evil been found
in him, should compromise the position of the
whole unity of Christ, the Church, which is not
shut up within the one village of Mutugenna,
but spread abroad throughout the entire world.

8. But, behold, we do what you have desired ;
we treat with you as if your bishops had not said :
" No case forecloses the investigation of another
case, and no person compromises the position
of another person." Discover, if you can, what
they ought, rather than this, to have said in reply,
when there was alleged against them the case
and the person of Primianus,' who, notwithstand-
ing his joining the rest of the bishops in passing

' Primianus, Donatist bishop in Carthage, was in 393 deposed
by a factious clique of bishops, who appointed Maximianus in his
place. The other Donatist bishops, however, assembled in the follow-
ing year at B igai in Numidia, and, reversing the decision o< their co-
bishops deposed them in turn, and passed a sentence to which, as
stated in the text, they did not inexorably adhere. The matter is re-
ferred to in Letter XLIIl. p. 276.


sentence of condemnation on those who had
passed sentence of condemnation upon him,
nevertheless received back into their former
honours those whom he had condemned and de-
nounced, and chose to acknowledge and accept
rather than despise and repudiate the baptism ad-
ministered by these men while they were " dead "
(for of them it was said in the notable decree
[of the Council of Bagai], that " the shores were
full of dead men "), and by so doing swept away
the argument which you are accustomed to rest
on a perverse interpretation of the words : " Qui
baptizatur a mortuo quid ei prodest lavacrum
ejus ? " ^ If, therefore, your bishops had not said :
" No case forecloses the investigation of another
case, and no person compromises the position
of another person," they would have been com-
pelled to plead guilty in the case of Primianus ;
but, in saying this, they declared the Catholic
Church to be, as we mentioned, not guilty in the
case of Caecilianus.

9. However, read all the rest and examine it
well. Mark whether they have succeeded in
proving any charge of evil brought against Cae-
cilianus himself, through whose person they
attempted to compromise the position of the
Church. Mark whether they have not rather
brought forward much that was in his favour, and
confirmed the evidence that his case was a good
one, by a number of extracts which, to the pre-
judice of their own case, they produced and
read. Read these or let them be read to you.
Consider the whole matter, ponder it carefully,
and choose which you should follow : whether
you should, in the peace of Christ, in the unity
of the Catholic Church, in the love of the breth-
ren, be partaker of our joy, or, in the cause of
wicked discord, the Donatist faction and impious
schism, continue to suffer the annoyance caused
to you by the measures which out of love to you
we are compelled to take.

10. I hear that you have remarked and often
quote the fact recorded in the gospels, that the
seventy disciples went back from the Lord, and
that they had been left to their own choice in
this wicked and impious desertion, and that tp
the twelve who alone remained the Lord said,
" Will ye also go away?"^ But you have neg-
lected to remark, that at that time the Church
was only beginning to burst into life from the
recently planted seed, and that there was not yet
fulfilled in her the prophecy : " All kings shall fall
down before Him ; yea, all nations shall serve


2 Ecclus. xxxiv. 25, translated, accurately enough, in our English
version: " He that washeth himself after touching a dead body, if he
touch it again, what availeth his washing? " The Donatist, in quot-
ing the passage to support their practice of re-baptizing Catholics,
omitted the clause, " et iterum tangit mortuum," and translated the
sentence thus: " He that is baptized by one who is dead, what availeth
his baptism?" It would be difficult to quote from the annals of con-
troversy a more flagrant example of ignorant ingenuity in the wrest-
ing of words to serve a purpose. _,

3 John vi. 67. K


lOi


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


547


Him ; " ' and it is in proportion to the more en-
larged accomplishment of this prophecy that the
Church wields greater power, so that she may
not only invite, but even compel men to embrace
what is good. This our Lord intended then to
illustrate, for although He had great power, He
chose rather to manifest His humility. This
also He taught, with sufficient plainness, in the
parable of the Feast, in which the master of the
house, after He had sent a message to the invited
guests, and they had refused to come, said to his
servants : " Go out quickly into the streets and
lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor,
and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.
And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou
hast commanded, and vet there is room. And
the Lord said unto the servant, Go out into the
highways and hedges, and compel them to come
in, that my house may be filled." ^ Mark, now,
how it was said in regard to those who came
first, "bring them in ; " it was not said, "compel
them to come in," — by which was signified the
incipient condition of the Church, when it was
only growing towards the position in which it
would have strength to compel men to come in.
Accordingly, because it was right that when the
Church had been strengthened, both in power
and in extent, men should be compelled to
come in to the feast of everlasting salvation, it
was afterwards added in the parable, " The
servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast com-
manded, and yet there is room. And the Lord
said unto the servants. Go out into the highways
and hedges, and compel them to come in."
Wherefore, if you were walking peaceably, absent
from this feast of everlasting salvation and of the
holy unity of the Church, we should find you, as
it were, in the " highways ; " but since, by mul-
tiplied injuries and cruelties, which you perpe-
trate on our people, you are, as it were, full of
thorns and roughness, we find you as it were in
the " hedges," and we compel you to come in.
The sheep which is compelled is driven whither
it would not wish to go, but after it has entered,
it feeds of its own accord in the pastures to
which it was brought, ^^^lerefore restrain your
perverse and rebellious spirit, that in the true
Church of Christ you may find the feast of sal-
vation.

LETTER CLXXX.

(a.d. 416.)

to oceanus, his deservedly beloved lord
and brother, honoured among the mem-
bers of christ, augustin sends greeting.

I. I received two letters from you at the same
time, in one of which you mention a third, and

' Ps. Ixxii. II.
* Luke xiv. 21-23.


State that you had sent it before the others.
This letter I do not remember having received,
or, rather, I think I may say the testimony of
my memory is, that I did not receive it ; but in
regard to those which I have received, I return
you many thanks for your kindness to me. To
these I would have returned an immediate an-
swer, had I not been hurried away by a constant
succession of other matters urgently demanding
attention. Having now found a moment's leisure
from these, I have chosen rather to send some
reply, however imperfect, than continue towards
a friend so true and kind a protracted silence,
and become more annoying to you by saying
nothing than by saying too much.

2. I already knew the opinion of the holy
Jerome as to the origin of souls, and had read
the words wliich in your letter you have quoted
from his book. The difficulty which perplexes
some in regard to this question, " How God can

I justly bestow souls on the offspring of persons
: guilty of adultery?" does not embarrass me,
seeing that not even their o\vn sins, much less
i the sins of their parents, can prove prejudicial
I to persons of virtuous hves, converted to God,
and living in faith and piety. The really diffi-
1 cult question is, if it be true that a new soul
I created out of nothing is imparted to each child
I at its birth, how can it be that the innumerable
I souls of those little ones, in regard to whom
j God knew with certainty that before attaining
! the age of reason, and before being able to
know or understand what is right or wrong, they
1 were to leave the body without being baptized,
are justly given over to eternal death by Him
with whom " there is no unrighteousness ! " ^ It
is unnecessary to say more on this subject, since
you know what I intend, or rather what I do not
at present intend to say. I think what I have
said is enough for a wise man. If, however, you
have either read, or heard from the lips of Je-
rome, or received from the Lord when meditat-
ing on this difficult question, anything by which
it can be solved, impart it to me, I beseech you,
that I may acknowledge myself under yet greater
obligation to you.

3. As to the question whether lying is in any
case justifiable and expedient, it has appeared to
you that it ought to be solved by the example
of our Lord's saying, concerning the day and
hour of the end of the world, " Neither doth the
Son know it." ^ When I read this, I was charmed
with it as an effort of your ingenuity ; but I am
by no means of opinion that a figurative mode
of expression can be rightly termed a falsehood.
For it is no falsehood to call a day joyous be-
cause it renders men joyous, or a lupine harsh
because by its bitter flavour it imparts harshness

3 Rom. ix. 14.
■♦ Mark xiii. 32.


548


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


to the countenance of him who tastes it, or to
say that God knows something when He makes
man know it (an instance quoted by yourself in
these words of God to Abraham, " Now I know
that thou fearest God").' These are by no
means false statements, as you yourself readily
see. Accordingly, when the blessed Hilary ex-
plained this obscure statement of the Lord, by
means of this obscure kind of figurative lan-
guage, saying that we ought to understand Christ
to affirm in these words that He knew not that
day with no other meaning than that He, by
concealing it, caused others not to know it, he
did not by this explanation of the statement
apologize for it as an excusable falsehood, but
he showed that it was not a falsehood, as is
proved by comparing it not only with these com-
mon figures of speech, but also with the meta-
phor, a mode of expression very familiar to all
in daily conversation. For who will charge
the man who says that harvest fields wave and
children bloom with speaking falsely, because
he sees not in these things the waves and the
flowers to which these words are literally ap-
plied?

4. Moreover, a man of your talent and learn-
ing easily perceives how difterent from these
metaphorical expressions is the statement of the
apostle, " When I saw that they walked not up-
rightly, according to the truth of the gospel, I
said unto Peter before them all. If thou, being a
Jew, livest after the manner of the Gentiles, and
not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gen-
tiles to live as do the Jews? " ^ Here there is no
obscurity of figurative language ; these are literal
words of a plain statement. Surely, in address-
ing persons " of whom he travailed in birth till
Christ should be formed in them," ^ and to
whom, in solemnly calling God to confirm his
words, he said : " The things which I write unto
you, behold, before God, I lie not," t the great
teacher of the Gentiles affirmed in the words
above quoted either what was true or what was
false ; if he said what was false, which God for-
bid, you see the consequences which would fol-
low ; and Paul's own assertion of his veracity,
together with the example of wondrous humility
in the Apostle Peter, may warn you to recoil
from such thoughts. 5

5. But why say more? This question the
venerable Father Jerome and I have discussed
fully in letters^ which we exchanged, and in


* Gen. xxii. 12.

2 Gal. ii. 14.

3 Gal. iv. 19.

* Gal. i. 20.

5 We have left the word amho in " ambo ista exhorrescas " un-
translated. Critics are agreed that a few words of the original are
probably wanting here, only one alternative of the dilemma being
stated by St. Augustin in the text.

6 In Letters XXVIII., XL., LXXV., and LXXXII., translated
in Letters, pp. 251, 272, 333, 349.


his latest work, published under the name of
Cri tod u ills, against Pelagius,^ he has maintained
the same opinion concerning that transaction
and the words of the apostle which, in accord-
ance with the views of the blessed Cyprian,** I
myself have held. In regard to the question as
to the origin of souls, I think there is reasonable
ground for inquiry, not as to the giving of souls
to the offspring of adulterous parents, but as to
the condemnation (which God forbid) of those
who are innocent. If you have learned any-
thing from a man of such character and emi-
nence as Jerome which might form a satisfactor}''
answer to those in perplexity on this subject, I
pray you not to refuse to communicate it to me.
In your correspondence, you have approved
yourself so learned and so affable that it is a
privilege to hold intercourse with you by letter.
I ask you not to delay to send a certain book
by the same man of God, which the presbyter
Orosius brought and gave to you to copy, in
which the resurrection of the body is treated of
by him in a manner said to merit distinguished
praise. We have not asked it earlier, because
we knew that you had both to copy and to re-
vise it ; but for both of these we think we have
now given you ample time.

Live to God, and be mindful of us.

[For translation of Letter CLXXXV. to Count
Boniface, containing an exhaustive history of the
Donatist schism, see Anti-Donatist Writings.


LETTER CLXXXVIII.

(a.d. 416.)

to the lady juliana, worthy to be honoured
in christ with the service due to her rank,
our daughter deservedly distinguished,
alypius and augustin send greeting in the

LORD.

Chap. i. — i . Lady, worthy to be honoured in
Christ with the service due to your rank, and
daughter deservedly distinguished, it was very
pleasant and agreeable to us that your letter
reached us when together at Hippo, so that we
might send this joint reply to you, to express our
joy in hearing of your welfare, and with sincere
reciprocation of your love to let you know of
our welfare, in which we are sure that you take
an affectionate interest. We are well aware that
you are not ignorant how great Christian affec-
tion we consider due to you, and how much,
both before God and among men, we are in-
terested in you. For though we knew you, at
first by letter, afterwards by personal intercourse,
to be pious and Catholic, that is, true members


7 Adversus Pelagtum, book i.

8 Letters of Cyprian, LXXI.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


549


of the body of Christ, nevertheless, our humble
ministry also was of use to you, for when you
had received the word of God from us, " you
received it," as says the apostle, " not as the
word of men, but as it is in truth the word of
God." ' Through the grace and mercy of the
Saviour, so great was the fruit arising from this
ministery of ours in your family, that when prepa-
rations for her marriage ^ were already com-
pleted, the holy Demetrias preferred the spiritual
embrace of that Husband who is fairer than the
sons of men, and in espousing themselves to
whom virgins retain their virginity, and gain
more abundant spiritual fruitfulness. We should
not, however, yet have known how this exhorta-
tion of ours had been received by the faithful
and noble maiden, as we departed shortly before
she took on her the vow of chastity, had we not
learned from the joyful announcement and reli-
able testimony of your letter, that this great gift
of God, planted and watered indeed by means
of His servants, but owing its increase to Him-
self, had been granted to us as labourers in His
vineyard.

2. Since these things are so, no one may
charge us with presuming, if, on the ground of
this closer spiritual relation, we manifest our so-
licitude for your welfare by warning you to avoid
opinions opposed to the grace of God. For |
though the apostle commands us in preaching
the word to be " instant in season and out of
season," ^ yet we do not reckon you among the
number of those to whom a word or a letter from
us exhorting you carefully to avoid what is incon-
sistent with sound doctrine would seem " out of
season." Hence it was that you received our
admonition in so kindly a manner, that, in the
letter to which we are now replying, you say, " I
thank you heartily for the pious advice which
your Reverence gave me, not to lend an ear to
those men who, by their mischievous writings,
often corrupt our holy faith."

3. In this letter you go on to say, " But your
Reverence knows that I and my household are
entirely separated from persons of this descrip-
tion ; and all our family follow so strictly the
Catholic faith as never at any time to have wan-
dered from it, or fallen into any heresy, — I speak
not of the heresy of sects who have erred in a
measure hardly admiting of expiation, but of
those whose errors seem to be trivial." This
statement renders it more and more necessary
for us, in writing to you, not to pass over in
silence the conduct of those who are attempting
to corrupt even those who are sound in the faith.
We consider your house to be no insignificant

' I Thess. ii. 13.

^ In a letter of Jerome (the eighth) addressed to Demetrias, we
have a very graphic narrative of the mnnner in which Demetrias formed
and carried into effect the vow for which she is here commended.

3 2 Tim. iii. 2.


Church of Christ, nor indeed is the error of those
men trivial who think that we have of ourselves
whatever righteousness, temperance, piety, chas-
tity is in us, on the ground that God has so
formed us, that beyond the revelation which He
has given He imparts to us no further aid for
performing by our own choice those things which
by study we have ascertained to be our duty ;
declaring nature and knowledge to be the grace
of God, and the only aid for living righteously
and justly. For the possession, indeed, of a will
inclined to what is good, whence proceed the life
of uprightness and that love which so far excels
all other gifts that God Himself is said to be
love, and by which alone is fulfilled in us as far
as we fulfil them, the divine law and council, — ^
for the possession, I say, of such a will, they hold
that we are not indebted to the aid of God, but
affirm that we ourselves of our own will are
sufficient for these things. Let it not appear to
you a trifling error that men should wish to pro-
fess themselves Christians, and yet be unwilling
to hear the apostle of Christ, who, having said,
" The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts,"
lest any one should think that he had this love
through his own free will, immediately subjoined,
" by the Holy Spirit who is given unto us." *
Understand, then, how greatly and how fatally
that man errs who does not acknowledge that
this is the " great gift of the Saviour," s who,
when He ascended on high, " led captivity cap-
tive, and gave gifts unto men." ^

Chap. ii. — 4. How, then, could we so far con-
ceal our true feelings as not to warn you, in
whom we feel so deep an interest, to beware
of such doctrines, after we had read a certain
book addressed to the holy Demetrias ? Whether
this book has reached you,^ and who is its au-
thor, we are desirous to hear in your answer to
this. In this book, were it lawful for such a one
to read it, a virgin of Christ would read that her
holiness and all her spiritual riches are to spring
from no other source than herself, and thus, be-
fore she attains to the perfection of blessedness,
she would learn, — which may God forbid ! —
to be ungrateful to God. For the words ad-
dressed to her in the said book are these : —
" You have here, then, those things on account
of which you are deservedly, nay more, more
especially to be preferred before others ; for your
earthly rank and wealth are understood to be
derived from your relatives, not from yourself,
but your spiritual riches no one can have con-
ferred on you but yourself; for these, then, you
are justly to be praised, for these you are de-


■* Rom. V. 5.

5 Eph. iv. 7.

6 Ps. Ixviii. 18.

7 In the end of this letter, Augustin distinctly ascribes to Pela-
gius the authorship of the letter to Demetrias, as also in his work on
T/ie Grace of Christ, ch. xxii.


550


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


• servedly to be preferred to others, for they can
exist only from yourself, and in yourself." '

5. You see, doubtless, how dangerous is the
doctrine in these words, against which you must
be on your guard. For the affirmation, indeed,
that these spiritual riches can exist only in your-
self, is very well and truly said : that evidently
is food ; but the affirmation that they cannot
exist except from you is unmixed poison. Far
be it from any virgin of Christ willingly to listen
to statements like these. Every virgin of Christ
understands the innate poverty of the human
heart, and therefore declines to have it adorned
otherwise than by the gifts of her Spouse. Let
her rather listen to the apostle when he says :
" I have espoused you to one husband, that I
may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.
But I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is
in Christ."^ And therefore in regard to these
spiritual riches let her listen, not to him who
says : " No one can confer them on you ex-
cept yourself, and they cannot exist except from
you and in you ; " but to him who says : " We
have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of us." 3

6. In regard to that sacred virginal chastity,
also, which does not belong to her from her-
self, but is the gift of God, bestowed, however,
on her who is believing and willing, let her hear
the same truthful and pious teacher, who when
he treats of this subject says : " I would that all
men were even as I myself : but every man hath
his proper gift of God, one after this manner,
and another after that.""* Let her hear also Him
who is the only Spouse, not only of herself, but
of the whole Church, thus speaking of this chas-
tity and purity : " All cannot receive this saying,
save they to whom it is given ; " 5 that she may
understand that for her possession of this so
great and excellent gift, she ought rather to ren-
der thanks to our God and Lord, than to listen
to the words O'f any one who says that she pos-
sessed it from herself, — words which we may
not designate as those of a flatterer seeking to
please, lest we seem to judge rashly concerning
the hidden thoughts of men, but which are as-
suredly those of a misguided eulogist. For " every
good gift and every perfect gift," as the Apostle
James says, " is from above, and cometh down
from the Father of Lights ; " ^ from this source,
therefore, cometh this holy virginity, in which
you who approve of it, and rejoice in it, have


1 Epistle to Deinetrias, ch. xi.

2 2 Cor. xi. 2, 3.

3 2 Cor. iv. 7
^ I Cor. iv. 7.

s Matt. xix. II.
^ Jas. 1. 17.


daughter.


who.


commg


been excelled by your

after you in birth, has gone before you in con
duct ; descended from you in lineage, has risen
above you in honour ; following you in age, has
gone beyond you in holiness ; in whom also that
begins to be yours which could not be in your
own person. For she did not contract an earthly
marriage, that she might be, not for herself only,
but also for you, spiritually enriched, in a higher
degree than yourself, since you, even with this
addition, are inferior to her, because you con-
tracted the marriage of which she is the offspring.
These things are gifts of God, and are yours,
indeed, but are not from yourselves ; for you
have this treasure in earthly bodies, which are
still frail as the vessels of the potter, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of you. And be not surprised because we
say that these things are yours, and not from
you, for we speak of " daily bread " as ours, but
yet add, 7 " give it to us," lest it should be
thought that it was from ourselves.

7. Wherefore obey the precept of Scripture,
" Pray without ceasing. In everything give
thanks ; " ^ for you pray in order that you may
have constantly and increasingly these gifts, you
render thanks because you have them not of
yourself. For who separates you from that mass
of death and perdition derived from Adam ? Is
it not He " who came to seek and to save that
which was lost? "9 Was, then, a man, indeed,
on hearing the apostle's question, " Who maketh
thee to differ?" to reply, "My own good will,
my faith, my righteousness," and to disregard
what immediately follows ? " What hast thou
that thou didst not receive? Now, if thou didst
receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst
not received it ? " '° We are unwilling, then, yea,
utterly unwilling, that a consecrated virgin, when
she hears or reads these words : " Your spiritual
riches no one can have conferred on you ; for
these you are justly to be praised, for these you
are deservedly to be preferred to others, for they
can exist only from yourself, and in yourself,"
should thus boast of her riches as if she had
not received them. Let her say, indeed, " In
me are Thy vows, O God, I will render praises
unto Thee;"" but since they are /;/ her, not
ffom her, let her remember also to say, " Lord,
by Thy will Thou hast furnished strength to my
beauty," '^ because, though it be from her, inas-
much as it is the acting of her own will, without
which we cannot do what is good, yet we are not
to say, as he said, that it is " only from her."
For our own will, unless it be aided by the grace


7 Luke xi. 3.

^ I Thess. V. 17, 18.

9 Luke xix. 10.
'° 1 Cor. iv. 7.
" Ps. Ivi. 12.
" Ps. XXX. 7, LXX.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


551


of God, cannot alone be even in name good will,
for, says the apostle, " it is God who worketh in
us, both to will, and to do according to good
will," ' — not, as these persons think, merely by
revealing knowledge, that we may know what we
ought to do, but also by inspiring Christian love,
that we may also by choice perform the things
which by study we have learned.

8. For doubtless the value of the gift of con-
tinence was known to him who said, " I perceived
that no man can be continent unless God be-
stowed the gift." He not only knew then how
great a benefit it was, and how eagerly it ought
to be coveted, but also that, unless God gave it,
it could not exist ; for wisdom had taught him
this, for he says, " This also was a point of wis-
dom, to know whose gift it was ; " and the knowl-
edge did not suffice him, but he says, " I went
to the Lord and made my supplication to Him." ^
God then aids us in this matter, not only by
making us know what is to be done, but also by
making us do through love what we already know
through learning. No one, therefore, can possess,
not only knowledge, but also continence, unless
God give it to him. Whence it was that when
he had knowledge he prayed that he might have
continence, that it might be in him, because he
knew that it was not from him ; or if on account
of the freedom of his will it was in a certain
sense from himself, yet it was not from himself
alone, because no one can be continent unless
God bestow on him the gift. But he whose
opinions I am censuring, in speaking of spiritual
riches, among which is doubtless that bright and
beautiful gift of continence, does not say that
they may exist in you, and from yourself, but says
that they can exist only from you, and in you, in
such a way that, as a virgin of Christ has these
things nowhere else than in herself, so it can be
believed possible for her to have them from no
other source than from herself, and in this way
(which may a merciful God avert from her
heart !) she shall so boast as if she had not re-
ceived them !

Chap. hi. — 9. We indeed hold such an opin-
ion concerning the training of this holy virgin,
and the Christian humility in which she was
nourished and brought up. as to be assured that
when she read these words, if she did read
them, she would break out into lamentations,
and humbly smite her breast, and perhaps burst
into tears, and pray in faith to the Lord to
whose service she was dedicated and by whom
she was sanctified, pleading with Him that these
were not her own words, but another's, and ask-
ing that her faith might not be such as to believe
that she had anything whereof to glory in her-


I Phil. ii. i^.
^ Wisd. viii. 21.


self and not in the Lord. For her glory is in
herself, not in the words of another, as the apos-
tle says : " Let every man prove his own work,
and then shall he have glory (rejoicing) in him-
self alone, and not in another." ^ But God for-
bid that her glory should be in herself, and not
in Him to whom the Psalmist says, " Thou art
my glory, and the lifter up of mine head." ^ For
her glory is then profitably in herself, when God,
who is in her, is Himself her glory, from whom
she has every good, by which she is good, and
shall have all things by which she shall be made
better, in as far as she may become better in this
life, and by which she shall be made perfect
when rendered so by divine grace, not by human
praise. " For her soul shall be praised in the
Lord," 5 "who satisfieth her desire with good
things," ^ because He Himself has inspired this
desire, that His virgin should not boast of any
good, as if she had not received it.

10. Liform us, then, in reply to this letter,
whether we have judged truly in supposing these
to be your daughter's sentiments. For we know
well that you and all your family are, and have
been, worshippers of the indivisible Trinity. But
human error insinuates itself in other forms than
in erroneous opinions concerning the indivisible
Trinity. There are other subjects also, in re-
gard to which men fall into very dangerous er-
rors. As, for example, that of which we have
spoken in this letter at greater length, perhaps,
than might have sufficed to a person of your
stedfast and pure wisdom. And yet we know
not to whom, except to God, and therefore to
the Trinity, wrong is done by the man who de-
nies that the good that comes from God is from
God ; which evil may God avert from you, as
we believe He does ! May God altogether for-
bid that the book out of which we have thought

' it our duty to extract some words, that they
might be more easily understood, should pro-
duce any such impression, we do not say on your
mind, or on that of the holy virgin your daugh-
ter, but on the mind of the least deserving of
your male or female servants.

11, But if you study more carefully even
those words in which the writer appears to speak
in favour of grace or the aid of God, you will
find them so ambiguous that they may have
reference either to nature or to knowledge, or to
forgiveness of sins. For even in regard to that
which they are forced to acknowledge, that we
ought to pray that we may not enter into tempta-
tion, they may consider that the words mean
that we are so far helped to it that, by our pray-
ing and knocking, the knowledge of the truth


3 Gal. yi. 4.
■4 Ps. iii. 3.
5 Ps. x.xxiv. 2,
* Ps. ciii. 5.


552


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


is so revealed to us that we may learn what it is
our duty to do, not so far as that our will re-
ceives strength, whereby we may do that which
we learn to be our duty ; and as to their saying
that it is by the grace or help of God that the
Lord Christ has been set before us as an ex-
ample of holy living, they interpret this so as
to teach the same doctrine, affirming, namely,
that we learn by His example how we ought to
live, but denying that we are so aided as to do
through love what we know by learning.

12. Find in this book, if you can, anything in
which, excepting nature and the freedom of the
will (which pertains to the same nature), and
the remission of sin and the revealing of doc-
trine, any such aid of God is acknowledged as
that which he acknowledges who said : " When
I perceived that no man can be continent unless
God bestow the gift, and that this also is a point
of wisdom to know whose gift it is, I went to the
Lord, and made my supplication to Him." '
For he did not desire to receive, in answer to
his prayer, the nature in which he was made ;
nor was he solicitous to obtain the natural free-
dom of the will with which he was made ; nor
did he crave the remission of sms, seeing that
he prayed rather for continence, that he might
not sin ; nor did he desire to know what he
ought to do, seeing that he already confessed
that he knew whose gift this continence was ;
but he wished to receive from the Spirit of wis-
dom such strength of will, such ardour of love,
as should suffice for fully practising the great
virtue of continence. If, therefore, you succeed
in finding any such statement in that book, we
will heartily thank you if, in your answer, you
deign to inform us of it.

13. It is impossible for us to tell how greatly
we desire to find in the writings of these men,
whose works are read by very many for their
pungency and eloquence, the open confession of
that grace which the apostle vehemently com-
mends, who says that " God has given to every
man the measure of faith," ^ " without which it is
impossible to please God," ^ " by which the just
live," 4 " which worketh by love," s before which
and without which no works of any man are in
any respect to be reckoned good, since " what-
soever is not of faith is sin." *" He affirms that
God distributes to every man, ? and that we re-
ceive divine assistance to live piously and justly,
not only by the revelation of that knowledge
which without charity "puffeth up,"^ but by our
being inspired with that " love which is the ful-


' Wisd. viii. 21.

2 Rom. xii. 3.

3 Heb. xi. 6.

* Rom. i. 17.
S Gal. V. 6.

^ Rom. xiv. 23.
7 Rom. xii. 3.

* I Cor viii. i.


filling of the law," 9 and which so edifies our
heart that knowledge does not puff it up. But
hitherto I have failed to find any such statements
in the writings of these men.

14. But especially we should wish that these
sentiments should be found in that book from
which we have quoted the words in which the
author, praising a virgin of Christ as if no one
except herself could confer on her spiritual
riches, and as if these could not exist except
from herself, does not wish her to glory in the
Lord, but to glory as if she had not received
them. In this book, though it contain neither
his name nor your own honoured name, he never-
theless mentions that a request had been made
to him by the mother of the virgin to write to
her. In a certain epistle of his, however, to
which he openly attaches his name, and does
not conceal the name of the sacred virgin, the
same Pelagius says that he had written to her,
and endeavours to prove, by appealing to the
said work, that he most openly confessed the
grace of God, which he is alleged to have passed
over in silence, or denied. But we beg you to
condescend to inform us, in your reply, whether
that be the very book in which he has inserted
these words about spiritual riches, and whether
it has reached your Holiness.

LETTER CLXXXIX.

(A.D. 418.)

TO BONIFACE,'" MY NOBLE LORD AND JUSTLY DIS-
TINGUISHED AND HONOURABLE SON, AUGUSTIN
SENDS GREETING IN THE LORD.

I. I had already written a reply to your Char-
ity, but while I was waiting for an opportunity of
forwarding the letter, my beloved son Faustus
arrived here on his way to your Excellency.
After he had received the letter which 1 had in-
tended to be carried by him to your Benevolence,
he stated to me that you were very desirous that
I should write you something which might build

9 Rom. xiii. lo.

'° Count Boniface, to whom St. Augustin also addressed Letters
CLXXXV. and CCXX., was governor of the province of Africa
under Placidia, who for twenty-five years ruled the empire in the
name of her son Valentinian. By his perfidious rival Aetius, Boni-
face was persuaded to disobey the order of Placidia, when, under the
instigation of Aetius himself, she recalled him from the government
of Africa. The necessity of powerful allies in order to maintain his
position led him to invite the Vandals to pass from Spain into Africa.
They came, under Genseric, and the fertile provinces of Northern
Africa fell an easy prey to their invading armies. When the treachery
of Aetius was discovered, Placidia received Boniface again into favour,
and he devoted all his military talents to the task of expelling the bar-
barians whom his own invitation had made masters of North Africa.
But it was now too late to wrest this Roman province from the Van-
dals; defeated in a great battle, Boniface was compelled in 430 to
retire into Hippo Regius, where he succeeded in resisting the besie-
ging army for fourteen months. It was during this siege, and after it
had continued three months, that Augustin died. Reinforced by
troops from Constantinople, Boniface fought one more desperate but
unsuccessful battle, after which he left Hippo in the hands of Genseric,
and returned by order of Placidia to Italy For fuller particulars of
his history, see Gibbon's History of the Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire, ch. xxxiii.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


553


you up unto the eternal salvation of which you
have hope in Christ Jesus our Lord. And, al-
though I was busily occupied at the time, he
insisted, with an earnestness corresponding to
the love which, as you know, he bears to you,
that I should do this without delay. To meet
his convenience, therefore, as he was in haste to
depart, I thought it better to write, though ne-
cessarily without much time for reflection, rather
than put off the gratification of your pious de-
sire, my noble lord and justly distinguished and
honourable son.

2. All is contained in these brief sentences :
" Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength : and
love thy neighbour as thyself;" ' for these are
the words in which the Lord, when on earth,
gave an epitome of religion, saying in the gos-
pel, " On these two commandments hang all
the law and the prophets." Daily advance,
then, in this love, both by praying and by well-
doing, that through the help of Him, who en-
joined it on you, and whose gift it is, it may be
nourished and increased, until, being perfected,
it render you perfect. " For this is the love
which," as the apostle says, " is shed abroad in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given
unto us." ^ This is " the fulfilling of the law ; " ^
this is the same love by which faith works, of
which he says again, " Neither circumcision
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision ; but faith,
which worketh by love." ■♦

3. In this love, then, all our holy fathers,
patriarchs, prophets, and apostles pleased God.
In this all true martyrs contended against the
devil even to the shedding of blood, and be-
cause in them it neither waxed cold nor failed,
they became conquerors. In this all true believ-
ers daily make progress, seeking to acquire not
an earthly kingdom, but the kingdom of heaven ;
not a temporal, but an eternal inheritance ; not
gold and silver, but the incorruptible riches of
the angels ; not the good things of this life, which
are enjoyed with trembling, and which no one
can take with him when he dies, but the vision
of God, whose grace and power of imparting
felicity transcend all beauty of form in bodies
not only on earth but also in heaven, transcend
all spiritual loveliness in men, however just and
holy, transcend all the glory of the angels and
powers of the world above, transcend not only
all that language can express, but all that thought
can imagine concerning Him. And let us not
despair of the fulfilment of such a great promise
because it is exceeding great, but rather believe
that we shall receive it because He who has


' Matt. xxii. 37-40.

* R(im. V. 5.

3 Rem. xiii. 10.

* Ga.'. V. 6.


promised it is exceeding great, as the blessed
Apostle John says : " Now are we the sons of
God ; and it doth not yet appear what we shall be :
but we know that, when He shall appear, we shall
be like Him ; for we shall see Him as He is." s

4. Do not think that it is impossible for any
one to please God while engaged in active mili-
tary service. Among such persons was the holy
David, to whom God gave so great a testimony ;
among them also were many righteous men of that
time ; among them was also that centurion who
said to the Lord : " I am not worthy that Thou
shouldest come under my roof, but speak the
word only, and my servant shall be healed : for
I am a man under authority, having soldiers
under me : and I say to this man, Go, and he
goeth ; and to another. Come, and he cometh ;
and to my servant. Do this, and he doeth it ; "
and concerning whom the Lord said : " Verily,
I say unto you, I have not found so great faith,
no, not in Israel." ^ Among them was that
Cornelius to whom an angel said : " Cornelius,
thine alms are accepted, and thy prayers are
heard," 7 when he directed him to send to the
blessed Apostle Peter, and to hear from him
what he ought to do, to which apostle he sent a
devout soldier, requesting him to come to him.
Among them were also the soldiers who, when
they had come to be baptized by John, — the
sacred forerunner of the Lord, and the friend
of the Bridegroom, of whom the Lord says :
" Among them that are born of women there
hath not arisen a greater than John the Bap-
tist," ** — and had inquired of him what they
should do, received the answer, " Do violence to
no man, neither accuse any falsely ; and be con-
tent with your wages." 9 Certainly he did not
prohibit them to serve as soldiers when he com-
manded them to be content with their pay for
the service.

5. They occupy indeed a higher place before
God who, abandoning all these secular employ-
ments, serve Him with the strictest chastity ; but
" every one," as the apostle says, " hath his
proper gift of God, one after this manner, and
another after that." '° Some, then, in praying
for you, fight against your invisible enemies ;
you, in fighting for them, contend against the
barbarians, their visible enemies. Would that
one faith existed in all, for then there would be
less weary struggling, and the devil with his an-
gels would be more easily conquered ; but since
it is necessary in this life that the citizens of the
kingdom of heaven should be subjected to temp-
tations among erring and impious men, that they


S John iii. 2.

* Matt. viii. 8-10.

7 Acts X. 4.

8 Matt. xi. II.

9 Luke iii. 14.
'° I Cor. vii. 7.


554


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


may be exercised, and " tried as gold in the fur-
nace," ' we ought not before the appointed time
to desire to live with those alone who are holy and
righteous, so that, by patience, we may deserve
to receive this blessedness in its proper time.

6. Think, then, of this first of all, when you
are arming for the battle, that even your bodily
strength is a gift of God ; for, considering this,
you will not employ the gift of God against
God. For, when faith is pledged, it is to be
kept even with the enemy against whom the
war is waged, how much more with the friend
for whom the battle is fought ! Peace should
be the object of your desire ; war should be
waged only as a necessity, and waged only that
God may by it deliver men from the necessity
and preserve them in peace. For peace is not
sought in order to the kindling of war, but war
is waged in order that peace may be obtained.
Therefore, even in waging war, cherish the spirit
of a peacemaker, that, by conquering those
whom you attack, you may lead them back to
the advantages of peace ; for our Lord says :
'•' Blessed are the peacemakers ; for they shall
be called the children of God." ^ If, however,
peace among men be so sweet as procuring tem-
poral safety, how much sweeter is that peace
with God which procures for men the eternal
felicity of the angels ! Let necessity, therefore,
and not your will, slay the enemy who fights
against you. As violence is used towards him
who rebels and resists, so mercy is due to the
vanquished or the captive, especially in the case
in which future troubhng of the peace is not to
be feared.

7. Let the manner of your life be adorned by
chastity, sobriety, and moderation ; for it is ex-
ceedingly disgraceful that lust should subdue
him whom man finds invincible, and that wine
should overpower him whom the sword assails
in vain. As to worldly riches, if you do not
possess them, let them not be sought after on
earth by doing evil ; and if you possess them,
let them by good works be laid up in heaven.
The manly and Christian spirit ought neither to
be elated by the accession, nor crushed by the
loss of this world's treasures. Let us rather
think of what the Lord says : " Where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also ; " ^ and
certainly, when we hear the exhortation to lift
up our hearts, it is our duty to give unfeignedly
the response which you know that we are accus-
tomed to give.+

' Wisd. iii. 6.

2 Matt. V. 9.

3 Matt. vi. 21.

4 The allusion is evidently to the ancient formulary in public wor-
ship, first mentioned by Cyprian in his treatise on the Lord's Prayer.
To the presbyter's exhortation, " Sursum corda! " the people re-
sponded, " Habemus ad Dominum." For an account of this formu-
lary and a most beautiful exposition of it, qvioted from Cyril of
Jerusalem, see Riddle's Christiaii Antiquities, book IV. ch. i.
sec. 2.


8. In these things, indeed, I know that you
are very careful, and the good report which I
hear of you fills me with great delight, and moves
me to congratulate you on account of it in the
Lord. This letter, therefore, may serve rather
as a mirror in which you may see what you are,
than as a directory from which to learn what you
ought to be : nevertheless, whatever you may
discover, either from this letter or from the Holy
Scriptures, to be still wanting to you in regard
to a holy life, persevere in urgently seeking it
both by effort and by prayer ; and for the things
which you have, give thanks to God as the
Fountain of goodness, whence you have re-
ceived them ; in every good action let the glory
be given to God, and humility be exercised by
you, for, as it is written, " Every good gift and
every perfect gift is from above, and cometh
down from the Father of lights." 5 But how-
ever much you may advance in the love of God
and of your neighbour, and in true piety, do not
imagine, as long as you are in this life, that you
are without sin, for concerning this we read in
Holy Scripture : " Is not the life of man upon
earth a life of temptation ? " ^ Wherefore, since
always, as long as you are in this body, it is ne-
cessary for you to say in prayer, as the Lord
taught us : " Forgive us our debts, as we forgive
our debtors," 7 remember quickly to forgive, if
any one shall do you wrong and shall ask par-
don from you, that you may be able to pray sin-
cerely, and may prevail in seeking pardon for
your own sins.

These things, my beloved friend, I have written
to you in haste, as the anxiety of the bearer to
depart urged me not to detain him ; but I thank
God that I have in some measure complied with
your pious wish. May the mercy of God ever
protect you, my noble lord and justly distin-
guished son.

LETTER CXCI.

(a.d. 418.)

to my venerable lord and pious brother and
co-presbyter sixtus,* worthy of being re-
ceived in the love of christ, augustin sends
greeting in the lord.

I. Since the arrival of the letter which, in my
absence, your Grace forwarded by our holy broth-
er the presbyter Firmus, and which I read on my
return to Hippo, but not until after the bearer
had departed, the present is my first opportunity

5 Jas. i. 17.

6 Job. vii. I, LXX.
^ Matt. vi. 12.

8 Sixtus, afterwards Sixtus III., Bishop of Rome, the immediate
successor of Cselestine, to whom the next letter is addressed. His
name is the forty-third in the list of Popes, and he was in office from
432 to 440 A.D. The 194th letter of Augustin was addressed to the
same Sixtus, and is a very elaborate dissertation on Pelagiarism. It
is omitted from this selection as being rather a theologica 1 treatise
than a letter.


i


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


555


of sending to you any reply, and it is with great
pleasure that I entrust it to our very dearly
beloved son, the acolyte Albinus. Your letter,
addressed to Alypius and myself jointly, came at
a time when we were not together, and this is the
reason why you will now receive a letter from
each of us, instead of one from both, in reply.
For the bearer of this letter has just gone, mean-
while, from me to visit my venerable brother and
co-bishop Alypius, who will write a reply for
himself to your Holiness, and he has carried with
him your letter, which I had already perused.
As to the great joy with which that letter filled
my heart, why should a man attempt to say what
it is impossible to express? Indeed, I do not
think that you yourself have any adequate idea
of the amount of good done by your sending
that letter to us ; but take our word for it, for as
you bear witness to your feelings, so do we bear
witness to ours, declaring how profoundly we
have been moved by the perfectly transparent
soundness of the views declared in that letter.
For if, when you sent a very short letter on the
same subject to the most blessed aged Aurelius,
by the acolyte Leo, we transcribed it with joyful
alacrity, and read it with enthusiastic interest to
all who were within our reach, as an exposition
of your sentiments, both in regard to that most
fatal dogma [of Pelagius], and in regard to the
grace of God freely given by Him to small and
great, to which that dogma is diametrically op-
posed ; how great, think you, is the joy with which
we have read this more extended statement in {
your writing, how great the zeal with which we
take care that it be read by all to whom we have
been able already or may yet be able to make it
known ! For what could be read or heard with \
greater satisfaction than so clear a defence of the
grace of God against its enemies, from the mouth
of one who was before this proudly claimed by
these enemies as a mighty supporter of their
cause ? ' Or is there anything for which we ought
to give more abundant thanksgivings to God, than
that His grace is so ably defended by those to
whom it is given, against those to whom it is not
given, or by whom, when given, it is not accepted,
because in the secret and just judgment of God
the disposition to accept it is not given to them ?
2. Wherefore, my venerable lord, and holy
brother worthy of being received in the love of
Christ, although you render a most excellent
service when you thus write on this subject to
brethren before whom the adversaries are wont
to boast themselves of your being their friend,
nevertheless, there remains upon you the yet
greater duty of seeing not only that those be
punished with wholesome severity who dare to

' SJxtus had been not without reason reckoned as a sympathiser
with Pelagius, until their views were finally condemned in this year
418 by Zosimus.


prate more openly their declaration of that error,
most dangerously hostile to the Christian name,
but also that with pastoral vigilance, on behalf
of the weaker and simpler sheep of the Lord,
most strenuous precautions be used against those
who more covertly, indeed, and timidly, but per-
severingly, and in whispers, as it were, teach this
error, "creeping into houses," as the apostle says,
and doing with practised impiety all those other
things which are mentioned immediately after-
wards in that passage.- Nor ought those to be
overlooked who under the restraint of fear hide
their sentiments under the most profound silence,
yet have not ceased to cherish the same perverse
opinions as before. For some of their party
might be known to you before that pestilence
was denounced by the most explicit condemna-
tion of the apostolic see, whom you perceive
to have now become suddenly silent ; nor can it
be ascertained whether they have been really
cured of it, otherwise than through their not
only forbearing from the utterance of these false
dogmas, but also defending the truths which are
opposed to their former errors with the same
zeal as they used to show on the other side.
These are, however, to be more gently dealt
with ; for what need is there for causing further
terror to those whom their silence itself proves
to be sufficiently terrified already ? At the same
time, though they should not be frightened, they
should be taught ; and in my opinion they may
more easily, while their fear of severity assists the
teacher of the truth, be so taught that by the Lord's
help, after they have learned to understand and
love His grace, they may speak out as antago-
nists of the error which meanwhile they dare not
confess.

LETTER CXCn.

(a.d. 418.)

to my venerable lord and highly esteemed
and holy brother, c/elestine,3 augustin sends
greeting in the lord.

I . I was at a considerable distance from home
when the letter of your Holiness addressed to
me at Hippo arrived by the hands of the clerk
Projectus. When I had returned home, and,
having read your letter, felt myself to be owing
you a reply, I was still waiting for some means
of communicating with you, when, lo ! a most
desirable opportunity presented itself in the de-
parture of our very dear brother the acolyte
Albinus, who leaves us immediately. Rejoicing,
therefore, in your health, which is most earnestly
desired by me, I return to your Holiness the
salutation which I was owing. But I always owe

2 2 Tim. iii. 6.

3 Cselestine, who was at the date of this letter a deacon in Rome,
was raised in 423 to succeed Boniface as Bishop of Rome: he stands
forty-second in lie list of the Popes. Letter CCIX. is addressed to
him.


556


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


you love, the only debt which, even when it has
been paid, holds him who has paid it a debtor
still. For it is given when it is paid, but it is
owing even after it has been given, for there is no
time at which it ceases to be due. Nor when it
is given is it lost, but it is rather multiplied by
giving it ; for in possessing it, not in parting with
it, it is given. And since it cannot be given
unless it is possessed, so neither can it be pos-
sessed unless it is given ; nay, at the very time
when it is given by a man it increases in that
man, and, according to the number of persons to
whom it is given, the amount of it which is gained
becomes greater. Moreover, how can that be
denied to friends which is due even to enemies?
To enemies, however, this debt is paid with
caution, whereas to friends it is repaid with con-
fidence. Nevertheless, it uses every effort to
secure that it receives back what it gives, even
in the case of those to whom it renders good for
evil. For we wish to have as a friend the man
whom, as an enemy, we truly love, for we do not
sincerely love him unless we wish him to be
good, which he cannot be until he be delivered
from the sin of cherished enmities.

2. Love, therefore, is not paid away in the
same manner as money ; for, whereas money is
diminished, love is increased by paying it away.
They differ also in this, — that we give evidence
of greater goodwill to the man to whom we may
have given money if we do not seek to have it
returned ; but no one can be a true donor of
love unless he lovingly insist on its repayment.
For money, when it is received, accrues to him
to whom it is given, but forsakes him by whom
it is given ; love, on the contrary, even when it
is not repaid, nevertheless increases with the
man who insists on its repayment by the person
whom he loves ; and not only so, but the person
by whom it is returned to him does not begin to
possess it till he pays it back again.

Wherefore, my lord and brother, I willingly
give to you, and joyfully receive from you, the love
which we owe to each other. The love which I
receive I still claim, and the love which I give I
still owe. For we ought to obey with docility the
precept of the One Master, whose disciples we
both profess to be, when He says to us by His
apostle : " Owe no man anything, but to love one
another." '

LETTER CXCV.

(a.d, 418.)

to his holy lord and most blessed father,^
augustin, jerome sends greeting.

At all times I have esteemed your Blessedness
with becoming reverence and honour, and have

' Rom. xiii. 8.
2 Papa.


loved the Lord and Saviour dwelling in you.
But now we add, if possible, something to that
which has already reached a climax, and we
heap up what was already full, so that we do not
suffer a single hour to pass without the mention
of your name, because you have, with the ardour
of unshaken faith, stood your ground against
opposing storms, and preferred, so far as this
was in your power, to be delivered from Sodom,
though you should come forth alone, rather than
linger behind with those who are doomed to
perish. Your wisdom apprehends what I mean
to say. Go on and prosper ! You are renowned
throughout the whole world ; Catholics revere
and look up to you as the restorer of the ancient
faith, and — which is a token of yet more illus-
trious glory — all heretics abhor you. They per-
secute me also with equal hatred, seeking by
imprecation to take away the life which they
cannot reach with the sword. May the mercy
of Christ the Lord preserve you in safety and
mindful of me, my venerable lord and most
blessed father.^

LETTER CCL

(A.D. 419.)

THE EMPERORS HONORIUS AUGUSTUS AND THEO-
DOSIUS AUGUSTUS TO BISHOP AURELIUS SEND
GREETING.

1. It had been indeed long ago decreed that
Pelagius and Celestius, the authors of an exe-
crable heresy, should, as pestilent corruptors of
the Cathohc truth, be expelled froijj the city of
Rome, lest they should, by their baneful influ-
ence, pervert the minds of the ignorant. In
this our clemency followed up the judgment of
your Holiness, according to which it is beyond
all question that they were unanimously con-
demned after an impartial examination of their
opinions. Their obstinate persistence in the
offence having, however, made it necessary to
issue the decree a second time, we have enacted
further by a recent edict, that if a«y one, know-
ing that they are concealing themselves in any
part of the provinces, shall delay either to drive
them out or to inform on them, he, as an accom-
plice, shall be liable to the punishment pre-
scribed.

2. To secure, however, the combined efforts
of the Christian zeal of all men for the destruc-
tion of this preposterous heresy, it will be proper,
most dearly beloved father, that the authority of

3 In two MSS. this letter has, as a postscript, the letter already
translated as CXXIII.; see page 451. The reason for that letter
being supposed to belong to the year 410 is the interpretation which
some put upon one of its obscure sentences as alluding 10 the fall oi
Rome in that year. If, however, the sentence in question referred to
the ecclesiastical difificulties disturbing Jerusalem and all the East in
connection with the Pelagian controversy, there is nothing to forbid
the conjecture which its place in the MSS. aforesaid suggests, namely,
that it was sent at the same time as this letter, with which in them it
stands connected.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


557


your Holiness be applied to the correction of
certain bishops, who either support the evil rea-
sonings of these men by their silent consent, or
abstain from assailing them with open opposi-
tion. Let your Reverence, then, by suitable
writings, cause all bishops to be admonished (as
soon as they shall know, by the order of your
Holiness, that this order is laid upon them)
that whoever shall, through impious obstinacy,
neglect to vindicate the purity of their doctrine
by subscribing the condemnation of the persons
before mentioned, shall, after being punished by
the loss of their episcopal office, be cut off by
excommunication and banished for life from
their sees. For as, by a sincere confession of
the truth, we ourselves, in obedience to the
Council of Nice, worship God as the Creator of
all things, and as the Fountain of our imperial
sovereignty, your Holiness will not suffer the
members of this odious sect, inventing, to the
injury of religion, notions new and strange, to
hide in writings privately circulated an error con-
demned by public authority. For, most beloved
and loving father, the guilt of heresy is in no
degree less grievous in those who either by dis-
simulation lend the error their secret support, or
by abstaining from denouncing it extend to it a
fatal approbation.

{In another hand.) May the Divinity pre-
serve you in safety for many years !

Given at Ravenna, on the 9th day of June, in
the Consulship of Monaxius and Plinta.

A letter, in the same terms, was also sent to
the holy Bishop Augustin.

LETTER CCn.

(a.d. 419.)

to the bishops alypius and augustin, my lords
truly holy, and deservedly loved and rev-
erenced, jerome sends greeting in christ.'

Chap. i. — i. The holy presbyter Innocentius,
who is the bearer of this letter, did not last year
take with him a letter from me to your Emi-
nences, as he had no expectation of returning
to Africa. We thank (jod, however, that it so
happened, as it afforded you an opportunity of
ov^ercoming [evil with good in requiting] our
silence by your letter. Every opportunity of
writing to you, revered fathers, is most accept-
able to me. I call God to witness that, if it
were possible, I would take the wings of a dove
and fly to be folded in your embrace. Loving
you, indeed, as I have always done, from a deep
sense of your worth, but now especially because
your co-operation and your leadership have suc-
ceeded in strangling the heresy of Celestius, a
heresy which has so poisoned the hearts of many,


' [The last letter of Jerome, who died at Bethlehem, 419.]


that, though they felt they were vanquished and
condemned, yet they did not lay aside their ven-
omous sentiments, and, as the only thing that
remained in their power, hated us by whom they
imagined that they had lost the liberty of teach-
ing heretical doctrines.

Chap. ii. — 2. As to your inquiry whether I
have written in opposition to the books of An-
nianus, this pretended deacon ^ of Celedse, who
IS amply provided for in order that he may fur-
nish frivolous accounts of the blasphemies of
others, know that I received these books, sent
in loose sheets by our holy brother, the presbyter
Eusebius, not long ago. Since then I have suf-
fered so much through the attacks of disease,
and through the falling asleep of your distin-
guished and holy daughter Eustochium, that I
almost thought of passing over these writings
with silent contempt. For he flounders from
beginning to end in the same mud, and, with the
exception of some jingling phrases which are
not original, says nothing he had not said before.
Nevertheless, I have gained much in the fact,
that in attempting to answer my letter he has
declared his opinions with less reserve, and has
published to all men his blasphemies ; for every
error which he disowned in the wretched synod
of Diospolis he in this treatise openly avows.
It is indeed no great thing to answer his super-
latively silly puerilities, but if the Lord spare me,
and I have a sufficient staff of amanuenses, I
will in a few brief lucubrations answer him, not
to refute a defunct heresy, but to silence his ig-
norance and blasphemy by arguments : and this
your Holiness could do better than I, as you
would relieve me from the necessity of praising
my own works in writing to the heretic. Our
holy daughters Albina and Melania, and our son
Pinianus, salute you cordially. I give to our
holy presbyter Innocentius this short letter to
convey to you from the holy place Bethlehem.
Your niece Paula piteously entreats you to re-
member her, and salutes you warmly. May the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve you
safe and mindful of me, my lords truly holy, and
fathers deservedly loved and reverenced.

LETTER CCIII.

(a.d. 420.)

to my noble lord and most excellent and
loving son, largus, augustin sends greet-
ing in the lord.

I received the letter of your Excellency, in
which you ask me to write to you. This assur-
edly you would not have done unless you had
esteemed acceptable and pleasant that which
you suppose me capable of writing to you. In

^ Pseudodiacotius.


558


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


other words, I assume that, having desired the
vanities of this life when you had not tried them,
now, after the trial has been made, you despise
them, because in them the pleasure is deceitful,
the labour fruitless, the anxiety perpetual, the
elevation dangerous. Men seek them at first
through imprudence, and give them up at last
with disappointment and remorse. This is true
of all the things which, in the cares of this mortal
life, are coveted with more eagerness than wis-
dom by the uneasy solicitude of the men of the
world. But it is wholly otherwise with the hope
of the pious : very different is the fruit of their
labours, very different the reward of their dan-
gers. Fear and grief, and labour and danger are
unavoidable, so long as we live in this world ;
but the great question is, for what cause, with
what expectation, with what aim a man endures
these things. When, indeed, I contemplate the
lovers of this world, I know not at what time
wisdom can most opportunely attempt their
moral improvement ; for when they have appar-
ent prosperity, they reject disdainfully her salu-
tary admonitions, and regard them as old wives'
fables ; when, again, they are in adversity, they
think rather of escaping merely from present
suffering than of obtaining the real remedy by
which they may be made whole, and may arrive
at that place where they shall be altogether
exempt from suffering. Occasionally, however,
some open their ears and hearts to the truth, —
rarely in prosperity, more frecjuently in adversity.
These are indeed the few, for such it is predicted
that they shall be. Among these I desire you
to be, because I love you truly, my noble lord
and most excellent and loving son. Let this
counsel be my answer to your letter, because
though I am unwilling that you should hence-
forth suffer such things as you have endured, yet
I would grieve still more if you were found to
have suffered these things without any change
for the better m your life.

LETTER CCVIIL

(a.d. 423.)

to the lady felicia, his daughter in the
faith, and worthy of honour among the
members of christ, augustin sends greet-
ing in the lord.

I. I do not doubt, when I consider both
your faith and the weakness or wickedness of
others, that your mind has been disturbed, for
even a holy apostle, full of compassionate love,
confesses a similiar experience, saying, " Who is
weak, and I am not weak ? who is offended, and
I burn not?'" Wherefore, as I myself share
your pain, and am solicitous for vour welfare in


' z Cor. xi. 29.


Christ, I have thought it my duty to address this
letter, partly consolatory, partly hortatory, to
your Holiness, because in the body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, in which all His members are one,
you are very closely related to us, being loved
as an honourable member in that body, and
partaking with us of life in His Holy Spirit.

2. I exhort you, therefore, not to be too much
troubled by those offences which for this very
reason were foretold as destined to come, that
when they came we might remember that they
had been foretold, and not be greatly discon-
certed by them. For the Lord Himself in His
gospel foretold them, saying, "Woe unto the
world because of offences ! for it must needs be
that offences come ; but woe unto that man by
whom the offence cometh ! " ^ These are the
men of whom the apostle said, " They seek their
own, not the things that are Jesus Christ's." ^
There are, therefore, some who hold the honour-
able office of shepherds in order that they may
provide for the flock of Christ ; others occupy
that position that they may enjoy the temporal
honours and secular advantages connected with
the office. It must needs happen that these two
kinds of pastors, some dying, others succeeding
them, should continue in the Catholic Church
even to the end of time, and the judgment of
the Lord. If, then, in the times of the apostles
there were men such that Paul, grieved by their
conduct, enumerates among his trials, " perils
among false brethren," '* and yet he did not
haughtily cast them out, but patiently bore with
them, how much more must such arise in our
times, since the Lord most plainly says concern-
ing this age which is drawing to a close, " that
because iniquity shall abound the love of many
shall wax cold." 5 The word which follows, how-
ever, ought to console and exhort us, for He
adds, " He that shall endure to the end, the
same shall be saved."

3. Moreover, as there are good shepherds and
bad shepherds, so also in flocks there are good
and bad. The good are represented by the
name of sheep, but the bad are called goats :
they feed, nevertheless, side by side in the same
pastures, until the Chief Shepherd, who is called
the One Shepherd, shall come and separate
them one from another according to His prom-
ise, " as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the
goats." On us He has laid the duty of gather-
ing the flock ; to Himself He has reserved the
work of final separation, because it pertains
properly to Him who cannot err. For those
presumptuous servants, who have lightly ven-
tured to separate before the time which the Lord
has reserved in His own hand, have, instead of

^ Matt, xviii. 7.

3 Phil. ii. 21.

■* I Cor. xi. 26.

5 Matt. xxiv. 12, 13.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


559


separating others, only been separated them-
selves from Catholic unity ; for how could those
have a clean flock who have by schism become
unclean ?

4. In order, therefore, that we may remain in
the unity of the faith, and not, stumbling at the
offences occasioned by the chaff, desert the
threshing-floor of the Lord, but rather remain
as wheat till the final winnowing," and by the
love which imparts stability to us bear with the
beaten straw, our great Shepherd in the gospel
admonishes us concerning the good shepherds,
that we should not, on account of their good
works, place our hope in them, but glorify our
heavenly Father for making them such ; and
concerning the bad shepherds (whom He de-
signed to point out under the name of Scribes
and Pharisees), He reminds us that they teach
that which is good though they do that which is
evil.'

5. Concerning the good shepherds He thus
speaks : " Ye are the light of the world. A city
that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do
men light a candle, and put it imder a bushel,
but on a candlestick ; and it giveth light unto
all that are in the house. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father who is in
heaven." ^ Concerning the bad shepherds He
admonishes the sheep in these words : " The
Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat :
all, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do ; but do not ye after their
works : for they say, and do not." ^ When
these are listened to, the sheep of Christ, even
through evil teachers, hear His voice, and do
not forsake the unity of His flock, because the
good which they hear them teach belongs not
to the shepherds but to Him, and therefore the
sheep are safely fed, since even under bad shep-
herds they are nourished in the Lord's pastures.
They do not, however, imitate the actions of
the bad shepherds, because such actions belong
not to the world but to the shepherds them-
selves. In regard, however, to those whom they
see to be good shepherds, they not only hear the
good things which they teach, but also imitate
the good actions which they perform. Of this
number was the apostle, who said : " Be ye fol-
lowers of me, even as I also am of Christ." ■*
He was a light kindled by the Eternal Light, the
Lord Jesus Christ Himself, and was placed on a
candlestick because He gloried in His cross,
concerning which he said : " God forbid that I
should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ." 5 Moreover, since he sought not his

1 Matt. iii. 12.

2 Matt. V. 14, 15, 16.

3 Matt, xxiii. 2, 3.
* I Cor. xi. I.

S Gal. vi. 14.


own things, but the things which are Jesus
Christ's, whilst he exhorts to the imitation of his
own life those whom he had " begotten through
the gospel," ^ he yet severely reproved those
who, by the names of apostles, introduced
schisms, and he chides those who said, " I am
of Paul; was Paul crucified for you? or were
ye baptized in the name of Paul?" ?

6. Hence we understand both that the good
shepherds are those who seek not their own, but
the things of Jesus Christ, and that the good
sheep, though imitating the works of the good
shepherds by whose ministry they have been
gathered together, do not place their hope in
tliem, but rather in the Lord, by whose blood
they are redeemed ; so that when they may hap-
pen to be placed under bad shepherds, preach-
ing Christ's doctrine and doing their own evil
works, they will do what they teach, but will not
do what they do, and will not, on account of these
sons of wickedness, forsake the pastures of the
one true Church. For there are both good and
bad in the Catholic Church, which, unlike the
Donatist sect, is extended and spread abroad, not
in Africa only, but through all nations ; as the
apostle expresses it, " bringing forth fruit, and in-
creasing in the whole world." ^ But those who
are separated from the Church, as long as they
are opposed to it cannot be good ; although an
apparently praiseworthy conversation seems to
prove some of them to be good, their separation
from the Church itself renders them bad, ac-
cording to the saying of the Lord : " He that is
not with me is against me ; and he that gather-
eth not with me scattereth." ^

7. Therefore, my daughter, worthy of all wel-
come and honour among the members of Christ,
I exhort you to hold faithfully that which the
Lord has committed to you, and lo\e with all
your heart Him and His Church who suffered
you not, by joining yourself with the lost, to
lose the recompense of your virginity, or perish
with them. For if you should depart out of
this world separated from the unity of the body
of Christ, it will avail you nothing to have pre-
served inviolate your virginity. But God, who
is rich in mercy, has done in regard to you that
which is written in the gospel : when the invited
guests excused themselves to the master of the
feast, he said to the servants, " Go ye, therefore,
into the highways and hedges, and as many as ye
shall find compel them to come in." '° Although,
however, you owe sincerest affection to those good
servants of His through whose instrumentality you
were compelled to come in, yet it is your duty,

6 I Cor. iv. 15.

7 I Cor. i. 12, 13.

8 Col. i 6 The words " xai av^avoixevov," here translated by
Augustin, are found in some MSS. but omitted in the Textits Recep-
tus.

9 Matt. xii. 30.

*° Matt. xxii. 9; Luke xiv. 23.


56o


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


nevertheless, to place your hope on Him who pre-
pared the banquet, by whom also you have been
persuaded to come to eternal and blessed life.
Committing to Him your heart, your vow, and
your sacred virginity, and your faith, hope, and
charity, you will not be moved by offences,
which shall abound even to the end ; but, by
the unshaken strength of piety, shall be safe
and shall triumph in the Lord, continuing in
the unity of His body even to the end. Let
me know, by your answer, with what sentiments
you regard my anxiety for you, to which I have
to the best of my ability given expression in this
letter. May the grace and mercy of God ever
protect you !

LETTER CCIX.

(a.d. 423.)

to c^lestine,' my lord most blessed, and
holy father venerated with all due af-
fection, augustin sends greeting in the

LORD.

1. First of all I congratulate you that our
Lord God has, as we have heard, established
you in the illustrious chair which you occupy
without any division among His people. In the
next place, I lay before your Holiness the state
of affairs with us, that not only by your prayers,
but with your council and aid you may help us.
For I write to you at this time under deep afflic-
tion, because, while wishing to benefit certain
members of Christ in our neighbourhood, I
brought on them a great calamity by my want
of prudence and caution.

2. Bordering on the district of Hippo, there
is a small town,^ named Fussala : formerly there
was no bishop there, but, along with the contig-
uous district, it was included in the parish of
Hippo. That part of the country had few Cath-
olics ; the error of the Donatists held under its
miserable influence all the other congregations
located in the midst of a large population, so
that in the town of Fussala itself there was not
one Catholic. In the mercy of God, all these
places were brought to attach themselves to the
unity of the Church ; with how much toil, and how
many dangers it would take long to tell, — how
the presbyters originally appointed by us to gather
these people into the fold were robbed, beaten,
maimed, deprived of their eyesight, and even
put to death ; whose sufferings, however, were
not useless and unfruitful, seeing that by them
the re-establishment of unity was achieved. But
as Fussala is forty miles distant from Hippo, and

' The successor of Boniface as Bishop of Rome. See note to
Letter CXCII. For a summary of the arguments which may be
used on both sides in regard to the genuineness of this letter, which
is found in only one MS., see Dupin's remarks upon it in his Ecclesi-
astical History J 5th century.

2 Castellum.


I saw that in governing its people, and gather-
ing together the remnant, however small, of per-
sons of both sexes, who, not threatening others,
but fleeing for their own safety, were scattered
here and there, my work would be extended
farther than it ought, and that I could not give
the attention which I clearly perceived to be
necessary, I arranged that a bishop should be
ordained and appointed there.

3. With a view to the carrying out of this, I
sought for a person who might be suitable to the
locality and people, and at the same time ac-
quainted with the Punic language ; and I had in
my mind a presbyter fitted for the oflice. Hav-
ing applied by letter to the holy senior bishop
who was then Primate of Numidia, I obtained
his consent to come from a great distance to or-
dain this presbyter. After his coming, when all
our minds were intent on an affair of so great
consequence, at the last moment, the person
whom I believed to be ready to be ordained dis-
appointed us by absolutely refusing to accept the
office. Then I myself, who, as the event showed,
ought rather to have postponed than precipitated
a matter so perilous, being unwilling that the
very venerable and holy old man, who had come
with so much fatigue to us, should return home
without accomplishing the business for which he
had journeyed so far, offered to the people, with-
out their seeking him, a young man, Antonius,
who was then with me. He had been from
childhood brought up in a monastery by us, but,
beyond officiating as a reader, he had no expe-
rience of the labours pertaining to the various
degrees of rank in the clerical office. The un-
happy people, not knowing what was to follow,
submissively trusting me, accepted him on my
suggestion. What need I say more ? The deed
was done ; he entered on his office as their
bishop.

4. What shall I do? I am unwilling to ac-
cuse before your venerable Dignity one whom I
brought into the fold, and nourished with care ;
and I am unwilling to forsake those in seeking
whose ingathering to the Church I have travailed,
amid fears and anxieties ; and how to do justice
to both I cannot discover. The matter has come
to such a painful crisis, that those who, in com-
pliance with my wishes, had, in the belief that
they were consulting their own interests, chosen
him for their bishop, are now bringing charges
against him before me. When the most serious
of these, namely, charges of gross immorality,
which were brought forward not by those whose
bishop he was, but by certain other individuals,
were found to be utterly unsupported by evi-
dence, and he seemed to us fully acquitted of
the crimes laid most ungenerously to his charge,
he was on this account regarded, both by our-
selves and by others, with such sympathy that


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


561


the things complained of by the people of Fus-
sala and the surrounding district, — such as in-
tolerable tyranny and spoliation, and extortion,
and oppression of various kinds, — by no means
seemed so grievous that for one, or for all of
them taken together, we should deem it neces-
sary to deprive him of the office of bishop ; it
seemed to us enough to insist that he should
restore what might be proved to have been taken
away unjustly.

5. In fine, we so mixed clemency with severity
in our sentence, that while reserving to him his
office of bishop, we did not leave altogether
unpunished offences which behoved neither to
be repeated again by himself, nor held forth to
the imitation of others. We therefore, in cor-
recting him, reserved to the young man the rank
of his office unimpaired, but at the same time,
as a punishment, we took away his power, ap-
pointing that he should not any longer rule over
those with whom he had dealt in such a manner,
that with just resentment they could not submit
to his authority, and might perhaps manifest their
impatient indignation by breaking forth into some
deeds of violence fraught with danger both to
themselves and to him. That this was the state
of feeling evidently appeared when the bishops
dealt with them concerning Antonius, although
at present that conspicuous man Celer, of whose
powerful interference against him he complained,
possesses no power, either in Africa or elsewhere.

6. But why should I detain you with further
particulars? I beseech you to assist us in this
laborious matter, blessed lord and holy father,
venerated for your piety, and revered with due
affection ; and command all the documents
which have been forwarded to be read aloud to
you. Observe in what manner Antonius dis-
charged his duties as bishop ; how, when de-
barred from communion until full restitution
should be made to the men of Fussala, he sub-
mitted to our sentence, and has now set apart
a sum out of which to pay what may after
inquiry be deemed just for compensation, in
order that the privilege of communion might be
restored to him ; with what crafty reasoning he
prevailed on our aged primate, a most venerable
man, to believe all his statements, and to recom-
mend him as altogether blameless to the vener-
able Pope Boniface. But why should I rehearse
all the rest, seeing that the venerable old man
aforesaid must have reported the entire matter
to your Holiness?

7. In the numerous minutes of procedure in
which our judgment regarding him is recorded,
I should have feared that we might appear to
you to have passed a sentence less severe than
we ought to have done, did I not know that you
are so prone to mercy that you will deem it
your duty to spare not us only, because we


spared him, but also the man himself. But
what we did, whether in kindness or laxity, he
attempts to turn to account, and use as a legal
objection to our sentence. He boldly protests :
" Either I ought to sit in my own episcopal
chair, or ought not to be a bishop at all," as if
he were now sitting in any seat but his own.
For, on this very account, those places were set
apart and assigned to him in which he had pre-
viously been bishop, that he might not be said
to be unlawfully translated to another see, con-
trary to the statutes of the Fathers ; ' or is it to
be maintained that one ought to be so rigid an
advocate, either for severity or for lenity, as to
insist, either that no punishment be inflicted on
those who seem not to deserve deposition from
the office of bishop, or that the sentence of de-
position be pronounced on all who seem to
deserve any punishment?

8. There are cases on record, in which the
Apostolic See, either pronouncing judgment or
confirming the judgment of others, sanctioned
decisions by which persons, for certain offences,
were neither deposed from their episcopal office
nor left altogether unpunished. I shall not
bring forward those which occurred at a period
very remote from our own time ; I shall men-
tion recent instances. Let Priscus, a bishop of
the province of Cssarea, protest boldly : " Either
the office of primate should be open to me, as
to other bishops, or I ought not to remain a
bishop." Let Victor, another bishop of the
same province, with whom, when involved in
the same sentence as Priscus, no bishop beyond
his own diocese holds communion, let him, I
say, protest with similar confidence : " Either
I ought to have communion everywhere, or I
ought not to have it in my own district." Let
I^aurentius, a third bishop of the same province,,
speak, and in the precise words of this man he
may exclaim : " Either I ought to sit in the
chair to which I have been ordained, or I ought
not to be a bishop." But who can find fault
with these judgments, except one who does not.
consider that, neither on the one hand ought all
offences to be left unpunished, nor on the other
ought all to be punished in one way.

9. Since, then, the most blessed Pope Boni-
face, speaking of Bishop Antonius, has in his
epistle, with the vigilant caution becoming a
pastor, inserted in his judgment the additional
clause, " if he has faithfully narrated the facts of
the case to us," receive now the facts of the
case, which in his statement to you he passed
over in silence, and also the transactions which
took place after the letter of that man of blessed
memory had been read in Africa, and in the
mercy of Christ extend your aid to men implor-

' Translations from one see to another, now permitted, had been
forbidden by the Councils of Nice, Sardis, and Antioch.


562


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


ing it more earnestly than he does from whose
turbulence they desire to be freed. For either
from himself, or at least from very frequent ru-
mours, threats are held out that the courts of
justiciary, and the public authorities, and the
violence of the military, are to carry into force
the decision of the Apostolic See ; the effect of
which is that these unhappy men, being now
Catholic Christians, dread greater evils from a
Catholic bishop than those which, when they
were heretics, they dreaded from the laws of
Catholic emperors. Do not permit these things
to be done, I implore you, by the blood of
Christ, by the memory of the Apostle Peter, who
has warned those placed over Chistian people
against violently "lording it over their brethren." '
I commend to the gracious love of your Holi-
ness the Catholics of Fussala, my children in
Christ, and also Bishop Antonius, my son in
Christ, for I love both, and I commend both to
you. I do not blame the people of Fussala for
bringing to your ears their just complaint against
me for imposing on them a man whom I had
not proved, and who was in age at least not yet
established, by whom they have been so afflicted ;
nor do I wish any wrong done to Antonius,
whose evil covetousness I oppose with a deter-
mination proportioned to my sincere affection
for him. Let your compassion be extended to
both, — to them, so that they may not suffer
evil ; to him, so that he may not do evil ; to
them, so that they may not hate the Catholic
Church, if they find no aid in defence against a
Catholic bishop extended to them by Catholic
bishops, and especially by the Apostolic See
itself; to him, on the other hand, so that he
may not involve himself in such grievous wicked-
ness as to alienate from Christ those whom
against their will he endeavours to make his
own.

lo. As for myself, I must acknowledge to
your Holiness, that in the danger which threat-
ens both, I am so racked with anxiety and grief
that I think of retiring from the responsibilities
of the episcopal office, and abandoning myself
to demonstrations of sorrow corresponding to
the greatness of my error, if I shall see (through
the conduct of him in favour of whose election
to the bishopric I imprudendy gave my vote)
the Church of God laid waste, and (which may
God forbid) even perish, involving in its destruc-
tion the man by whom it was laid waste. Rec-
ollecting what the apostle says : " If we would
judge ourselves, we should not be judged." ^ I
will judge myself, that He may spare me who is
hereafter to judge the quick and the dead. If,
however, you succeed in restoring the members
of Christ in that district from their deadly fear

' I Pet. V. 3.
^ I Cor. xi. 31.


and grief, and in comforting my old age by the
administration of justice tempered with mercy.
He who brings deliverance to us through you in
this tribulation, and who has established you in
the seat which you occupy, shall recompense
unto you good for good, both in this life and in
that which is to come.


LETTER CCX.

(a.d. 423.)

to the most beloved and most holy mother
felicitas,3 and brother rusticus, and to the
sisters who are with them, augustin and
those who are with him send greeting in

THE LORD.

I. Good is the Lord, and to every place ex-
tends His mercy, which comforts us by your
love to us in Him, How much He loves those
who believe and hope in Him, and who both
love Him and love one another, and what bless-
ings He keeps in store for them hereafter, He
proves most remarkably in this, that on the un-
believing, the abandoned, and the perverse,
whom He threatens with eternal fire, if they
persevere in their evil disposition to the end,
He does in this life bestow so many benefits,
making " His sun to rise on the evil and on the
good," "on the just and on the unjust," ■♦ words
in which, for the sake of brevity, some instances
are mentioned that many more may be sug-
gested to reflection ; for who can reckon up
how many gracious benefits the wicked receive
in this life from Him whom they despise?
Amongst these, this is one of great value, that
by the experience of the occasional afflictions,
which like a good physician He mingles with
the pleasures of this life, He admonishes them,
if only they will give heed, to flee from the
wrath to come, and while they are in the way,
that is, in this life, to agree with the word of
God, which they have made an adversary to
themselves by their wicked lives. What, then,
is not bestowed in mercy on men by the Lord
God, since even affliction sent by Him is a
blessing? For prosperity is a gift of God when
He comforts, adversity a gift of God when He
warns ; and if He bestows these things, as I
have said, even on the wicked, what does He
prepare for those who bear with one another?
Into this number you rejoice that through His
grace you have been gathered, " forbearing
one another in love ; endeavouring to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace." 5
For there shall not be awanting occasion for


3 The prioress of the nunnery at Hippo, appointed to that office
after tlie death of the sister of Augustin.
* Matt. V. 45
5 Eph IV. 2, 3.


t


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


i63


your bearing one with another till God shall
have so purified you, that, death being " swal-
lowed up in victory," ' " God shall be all in
all." ^

2. We ought never, indeed, to take pleasure in
quarrels ; but however averse we may be to them,
they occasionally either arise from love, or put it
to the test. For how ditificult is it to find any
one willing to be reproved ; and where is the
wise man of whom it is said, " Rebuke a wise
man, and he will love thee"?^ But are we on
that account not to reprove and find fault with a
brother, to prevent him from going down through
false security to death ? For it is a common and
frequent experience, that when a brother is found
fault with he is mortified at the time, and resists
and contradicts his friend, but afterwards recon-
si lers the matter in silence alone with God,
where he is not afraid of giving offence to men
by submitting to correction, but is afraid of of-
fending God by refusing to be reformed, and
thenceforward refrains from doing that for which
he has been justly reproved ; and in proportion
as he hates his sin, he loves the brother whom
he feels to have been the enemy of his sin. But
if he belong to the number of those of whom it
is said, " Reprove not a scorner lest he hate
thee," 3 the quarrel does not arise from love on
the part of the reproved, but it exercises and
tests the love of the reprover ; for he does not
return hatred for hatred, but the love which con-
strains him to find fault endures unmoved, even
when he who is found fault with requites it with
hatred. But if the reprover renders evil for evil
to the man who takes offence at being reproved,
he was not worthy to reprove another, but evi-
dently deserves to be himself reproved. Act
upon these principles, so that either quarrels
may not arise, or, if they do arise, may quickly
terminate in peace. Be more earnest to dwell
in concord than to vanquish each other in con-
troversy. For as vinegar corrodes a vessel if it
remain long in it, so anger corrodes the heart
if it is cherished till the morrow. These things,
therefore, observe, and the God of peace shall
be with you. Pray also unitedly for us, that we
may cheerfully practise the good advices which
we give to you.

LETTER CCXI.

(a.d. 423.)

in this letter augustin rebukes the nuns of
the monastery in which his sister had been
prioress, for certain turbulent manifesta-
tions of dissatisfaction with her successor,


' I Cor. XV. 24.
^ I Cor. XV. 28.
3 Prov. ix. 8,


AND L.WS DOWN GENER.AL RULES FOR THEIR
GUIDANCE.-*

1. As severity is ready to punish the faults
which it may discover, so charity is reluctant to
discover the faults which it must punish. This
was the reason of my not acceding to your re-
quest for a visit from me, at a time when, if I
had come, I must have come not to rejoice in
your harmony, but to add more vehemence to
your strife. For how could I have treated your
behaviour with indifference, or have allowed it
to pass unpunished, if so great a tumult had
arisen among you in my presence, as that which,
when I was absent, assailed my ears with the din
of your voices, although my eyes did not witness
your disorder ? For perhaps your rising against
authority would have been even more violent in
my presence, since I must have refused the con-
cessions which you demanded, — concessions
involving, to your own disadvantage, some most
dangerous precedents, subversive of sound disci-
pline ; and I must thus have found you such as
I did not desire, and must have myself been
found by you such as you did not desire.

2. The apostle, writing to the Corinthians,
says : " Moreover, I call God for a record upon
my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet to
Corinth. Not for that we have dominion over
your faith, but are helpers of your joy." 5 I
also say the same to you ; to spare you I have
not come to you. I have also spared myself,
that I might not have sorrow upon sorrow, and
have chosen not to see you face to face, but to
pour out my heart to God on your behalf, and
to plead the cause of your great danger not in
words before you, but in tears before God ; en-
treating Him that He may not turn into grief
the joy wherewith I am wont to rejoice in you,
and that amid the great offences with which this
world everywhere abounds, I may be comforted
at times by thinking of your number, your pure
affection, your holy conversation, and the abun-
dant grace of God which is given to you, so that
you not only have renounced matrimony, but
have chosen to dwell with one accord in fellow-
ship under the same roof, that you may have one
soul and one heart in God.

3. When I reflect on these good things, these
gifts of God in you, my heart, amid the many
storms by which it is agitated through evils else-
where, is wont to find perfect rest. " Ye did run
well ; who did hinder you, that ye should not
obey the truth ? This persuasion cometh not of
Him that calleth you." ^ " A little leaven " — 7


* This letter is of historical value, as embodying the rules of nun-
neries belongine to the Augustinian orders. In the end of the first
volume of the Benedictine edition of his writings, this rule of monas-
tic life is given, adapted by some later writer to convents of monks.

5 2 Cor. i. 23.

6 Gal. V. 7,8.
' I Cor. V. 6.


564


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


I am unwilling to complete the sentence, for 1 1
rather desire, entreat, and exhort that the leaven
itself be transformed into something better, lest :
it change the whole lump for the worse, as it has
already almost done. If, therefore, you have {
begun to put forth again the buddings of a sound i
discernment as to your duty, pray that you enter
not into temptation, nor fall again into strifes,
emulations, animosities, divisions, evil speaking,
seditions, whisperings. For we have not la-
boured as we have done in planting and water-
ing the garden of the Lord among you, that we
may reap these thorns from you. If, however,
your weakness be still disturbed by turbulence,
pray that you may be delivered from this tempta-
tion. As for the troublers of your peace, if such
there be still among you, they shall, unless they
amend their conduct, bear their judgment, who-
ever they be.

4. Consider how evil a thing it is, that at the
very time when we rejoice in the return of the
Donatists to our unity, we have to lament inter-
nal discord within our monastery. Be stedfast
in observing your good vows, and you will not
desire to change for another the prioress whose
care of the monastery has been for so many
years unwearied, under whom also you have both
increased in numbers and advanced in age, and
who has given you the place in her heart which a
mother gives to her own children. All of you
when you came to the monastery found her
there, either discharging satisfactorily the duties
of assistant to the late holy prioress, my sister,
or, after her own accession to that office, giving
Jyou a welcome to the sisterhood. Under her
you spent your noviciate, under her you took
the veil, under her your number has been mul-
tiplied, and yet you are riotously demanding that
she should be replaced by another, whereas, if
the proposal to put another in her place had
come from us, it would have been seemly for
you to have mourned over such a proposal. For
she is one whom you know well ; to her you
came at first, and under her you have for so
many years advanced in age and in numbers.
No official previously unknown to you has been
I appointed, excepting the prior ; if it be on his
I account that you seek a change, and if through
aversion to him you thus rebel against your
mother, why do you not rather petition for his
removal? If, however, you recoil from this sug-
gestion, for I know how you reverence and love
him in Christ, why do you not all the more for
his sake reverence and love her? For the first
measures of the recently appointed prior in pre-
siding over you are so hindered by your disor-
derly behaviour, that he is himself disposed to
leave you, rather than be subjected on your
account to the dishonour and odium which must
arise from the report going abroad, that you


would not have sought another prioress unless
you had begun to have him as your prior. May
God therefore calm and compose your minds :
let not the work of the devil prevail in you, but
may the peace of Christ gain the victory in your
hearts ; and do not rush headlong to death,
either through vexation of spirit, because what
you desire is refused, or through shame, because
of having desired what you ought not to have
desired, but rather by repentance resume tlie
conscientious discharge of duty ; and imitate
not the repentance of Judas the traitor, but the
tears of Peter the shepherd.

5. The rules which we lay down to be ob-
served by you as persons settled in a monastery
are these : —

First of all, in order to fulfil the end for which
you have been gathered into one community,
dwell in the house with oneness of spirit, and
let your hearts and minds be one in God. Also_
call not anything the property of any one, but
let all things be common property, and let dis-
tribution of food and raiment be made to each
of you by the prioress, — not equally to all, be-
cause you are not all equally strong, but to every
one according to her need. For you read in
the Acts of the Apostles : " They had all things
common : and distribution was made to every
man according as he had need." ' Let those
who had any worldly goods when they entered
the monastery cheerfully desire that these be-
come common property. Let those who had no
worldly goods not ask within the monastery for
luxuries which they could not have while they
were outside of its walls ; nevertheless, let the
comforts which the infirmity of any of them may
require be given to such, though their poverty
before coming in to the monastery may have
been such that they could not have procured for
themselvs the bare necessaries of life ; and let
them in such case be careful not to reckon it the
chief happiness of their present lot that they
have found within the monastery food and rai-
ment, such as was elsewhere beyond their reach.

6. Let them, moreover, not hold their heads
high because they are associated on terms of
equality with persons whom they durst not have
approached in the outer world ; but let them
rather lift their hearts on high, and not seek after
earthly possessions, lest, if the rich be made
lowly but the poor puffed up with vanity in our
monasteries, these institutions become useful
only to the rich, and hurtful to the poor. On
the other hand, however, let not those who
seemed to hold some position in the world regard
with contempt their sisters, who in coming into
this sacred fellowship have left a condition of
poverty ; let them be careful to glory rather in

' Acts iv. 32, 35.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


565


the fellowship of their poor sisters, than in the
rank of their wealthy parents. And let them not
lift themselves up above the rest because of their
having, perchance, contributed something from
their own resources to the maintenance of the
community, lest they find in their riches more
occasion for pride, because they divide them with
others in a monastery, than they might have
found if they had spent them in their own en-
joyment in the world. For every other kind of
sin finds scope in evil works, so that by it they \
are done, but pride lurks even in good works, so
that by it they are undone ; and what avails it to
lavish money on the poor, and become poor one-
self, if the unhappy soul is rendered more proud
by despising riches than it had been by possess-
ing them? Live, then, all of you, in unanimity
and concord, and in each other give honour to
that God whose temples you have been made.

7. Be regular {instate^ in prayers at the ap-
pointed hours and times. In the oratory let no
one do anything else than the duty for which the
place was made, and from which it has received
its name ; so that if any of you, having leisure,
wish to pray at other hours than those appointed,
they may not be hindered by others using the
place for any other purpose. In the psalms and
hymns used in your prayers to God, let that be
pondered in the heart which is uttered by the
voice ; chant nothing but what you find pre-
scribed to be chanted ; whatever is not so pre-
scribed is not to be chanted.

8. Keep the flesh under by fastings and by
abstinence from meat and drink, so far as health
allows. When anv one is not able to fast, let her
not, unless she be ill, take any nourishment except
at the customary hour of repast. From the time
of your coming to table until you rise from it,
listen without noise and wrangling to whatever
may be in course read to you ; let not your
mouths alone be exercised in receiving food, let
your ears be also occupied in receiving the word
of God.

9. If those who are weak in consequence of
their early training are treated somewhat differ-
ently in regard to food, this ought not to be
vexatious or seem unjust to others whom a dif-
ferent trainmg has made more robust. And let
them not esteem these weaker ones more favoured
than themselves, because they receive a fare
somewhat less frugal than their own, but rather
congratulate themselves on enjoying a vigour of
constitution which the others do not possess.
And if to those who have entered the monastery
after a more delicate upbringing at home, there
be given any food, clothing, couch, or covering
which to others who are stronger, an(i in that
respect more favourably circumstanced, is not
given, the sisters to whom these indulgences are
not given ought to consider how great a descent


the others have made from their style of living
in the world to that which they now have,
although they may not have been able to come
altogether down to the severe simplicity of oth-
ers who have a more hardy constitution. And
when those who were originally more wealthy see
others receiving — not as mark of higher honour,
but out of consideration for infirmity — more
largely than they do themselves, they ought not
to be disturbed by fear of any such detestable
perversion of monastic discipline as this, that
the poor are to be trained to luxury in a monas-
tery in which the wealthy are, so far as they can
bear it, trained to hardships. For, of course, as
those who are ill must take less food, otherwise
they would increase their disease, so after illness,
those who are convalescent must, in order to
their more rapid recovery, be so nursed — even
though they may have come from the lowest
poverty to the monastery — as if their recent
illness had conferred on them the same claim for
special treatment as their former style of liv-
ing confers upon those who, before entering the
monastery, were rich. So soon, however, as
they regain their wonted health, let them return
to their own happier mode of living, which, as
involving fewer wants, is more suitable for those
who are servants of God ; and let not inclination
detain them when they are strong in that
amount of ease to which necessity had raised
them when they were weak. Let those regard
themselves as truly richer who are endowed with
greater strength to bear hardships. For it is
better to have fewer wants than to have larger
resources.

10. Let your apparel be in no wise conspicu-
ous ; and aspire to please others by your be-
haviour rather than by your attire. Let your
head-dresses not be so thin as to let the nets
below them be seen. Let your hair be worn
wholly covered, and let it neither be carelessly
dishevelled nor too scrupulously arranged when
you go beyond the monastery. When you go
anywhere, walk together ; when you come to the
place to which you were going, stand together.
In walking, in standing, in deportment, and in
all your movements let nothing be done which
might attract the improper desires of any one,
but rather let all be in keeping with your sacred
character. Though a passing glance be directed
towards any man, let your eyes look fixedly at
none ; for when you are walking you are not for-
bidden to see men, but you must neither let
your desires go out to them, nor wish to be the
objects of desire on their part. For it is not
only by touch that a woman awakens in any man
or cherishes towards him such desire, this may
be done by inward feelings and by looks. And
say not that you have chaste minds though you
may have wanton eyes, for a wanton eye is the


566


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


index of a wanton heart. And when wanton
hearts exchange signals with each other in looks,
though the tongue is silent, and are, by the force
of sensual passion, pleased by the reciprocation
of inflamed desire, their purity of character is
gone, though their bodies are not defiled by any
act of uncleanness. Nor let her who fixes her
eyes upon one of the other sex, and takes pleas-
ure in his eye being fixed on her, imagine that
the act is not observed by others ; she is seen
assuredly by those by whom she supposes her-
self not to be remarked. But even though she
should elude notice, and be seen by no human
eye, what shall she do with that Witness above
us from whom nothing can be concealed ?


Is


He to be regarded as not seeing because His
eye rests on all things with a long-suffering pro-
portioned to His wisdom? Let every holy
woman guard herself from desiring sinfully to
please man by cherishing a fear of displeasing
God ; let her check the desire of sinfully look-
ing upon man by remembering that God's eye is
looking upon all things. For in this very matter
we are exhorted to cherish fear of God by the
words of Scripture : — " He that looks with a
fixed eye is an abomination to the Lord." '
When, therefore, you are together in the church,
or in any other place where men also are present,
guard your chastity by watching over one an-
other, and God, who dwelleth in you, will thus
guard you by means of yourselves.

II. And if you perceive in any one of your
number this frowardness of eye, warn her at
once, so that the evil which has begun may not
go on, but be checked immediately. But if,
after this admonition, you see her repeat the
offence, or do the same thing on any other sub-
sequent day, whoever may have had the oppor-
tunity of seeing this must now report her as one
who has been wounded and requires to be
healed, but not without pointing her out to
another, and perhaps a third si'^te •, so that she
ii^v be convicted by the testimony of two or
three .vitppss-ej,- and may be reprimanded with
necessary severity. And do not think that in
thus informing upon one another you are guilty of
malevolence. For the truth rather is, that you
are not guiltless if by keeping silence you allow
sisters to perish, whom you may correct by giv-
ing information of their faults. For if your
sister had a wound on her person which she
wished to conceal through fear of the surgeon's
lance, would it not be cruel if you kept silence
about it, and true compassion if you made it
known ? How much more, then, are you bound
to make known her sin, that she may not suffer
more fatally from a neglected spiritual wound.
But before she is pointed out to others as wit-

' Prov. xxvii. 20, LXX. /3fi«Avy/aa Kvpiu tTTripi^iuv 6(j>9a\ix'oi',
2 Matt, xviii. 16.


nesses by whom she may be convicted if she deny
the charge, the offender ought to be brought
before the prioress, if after admonition she has
refused to be corrected, so that by her being in
this way more privately rebuked, the fault which
she has committed may not become known to
all the others. If, however, she then deny the
charge, then others must be employed to ob-
serve her conduct after the denial, so that now
before the whole sisterhood she may not be ac-
cused by one witness, but convicted by two or
three. When convicted of the fault, it is her
duty to submit to the corrective discipline which
may be appointed by the prioress or the prior.
If she refuse to submit to this, and does not go
away from you of her own accord, let her be
expelled from your society. For this is not
done cruelly but mercifully, to protect very many
from perishing through infection of the plague
with which one has been stricken. Moreover,
what I have now said in regard to abstaining
from wanton looks should be carefully ol>served,
with due love for the persons and hatred of the
sin, in observing, forbidding, reporting, proving,
and punishing of all other faults. But if any
one among you has gone on into so great sin as
to receive secretly from any man letters or gifts
of any description, let her be pardoned and
prayed for if she confess this of her own ac-
cord. If, however, she is found out and is
convicted of such conduct, let her be more
severely punished, according to the sentence of
the prioress, or of the prior, or even of the bishop.
12. Keep your clothes in one place, under
the care of one or two, or as many as may be
required to shake them so as to keep them from
being injured by moths ; and as your food is
supplied from one storeroom, let your clothes be
provided from one wardrobe. And whatever
may be brought out to you as wearing apparel
suitable for the season, regard it, if possible, as
a matter of no importance whether each of you
receives the very same article of clothing which
she had formerly laid aside, or one receive what
another formerly wore, provided only that what
is necessary be denied to no one. But if con-
tentions and murmurings are occasioned among
you by this, and some one of you complains
that she has received some article of dress in-
ferior to that which she formerly wore, and
thinks it beneath her to be so clothed as her
other sister was, by this prove your own selves,
and judge how far deficient you must be in the
inner holy dress of the heart, when you quarrel
with each other ab.out the clothing of the body.
Nevertheless, if your infirmity is indulged by
the concession that you are to receive again the
identical article which you had laid aside, let
whatever you put past be nevertheless, kept in
one place, and in charge of the ordinary keep-


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


i67


ers of the wardrobe ; it being, of course, under-
stood that no one is to work in making any
article of clothing or for the couch, or any gir-
dle, veil, or head-dress, for her own private com-
fort, but that all your works be done for the
common good of all, with greater zeal and more
cheerful perseverance than if you were each
working for your individual interest. For the
love concerning which it is written, " Charity
seeketh not her own," ' is to be understood as
that which prefers the common good to personal
advantage, not personal advantage to the com-
mon good. Therefore the more fully that you
give to the common good a preference above
your personal and private interests, the more
fully will you be sensible of progress in securing
that, in regard to all those things which supply
wants destined soon to pass away, the charity
which abides may hold a conspicuous and influ-
ential place. An obvious corollary from these
rules is, that when persons of either sex bring to
their own daughters in the monastery, or to in-
mates belonging to them by any other relation-
ship, presents of clothing or of other articles
which are to be regarded as necessary, such
gifts are not to be received privately, but must
be under the control of the prioress, that, being
added to the common stock, they may be placed
at the service of any inmate to whom they may
be necessary. If any one conceal any gift be-
stowed on her, let sentence be passed on her as
guilty of theft.

13. Let your clothes be washed, whether by
yourselves or by washerwomen, at such intervals
as are approved by the prioress, lest the indul-
gence of undue solicitude about spotless raiment
produce inward stains upon your souls. Let the
washing of the body and the use of baths be
not constant, but at the usual interval assigned
to it, i.e. once in a month. In the case, how-
ever, of illness rendering necessary the washing
of the person, let it not be unduly delayed ; let
it be done on the physician's recommendation
without complaint ; and even though the patient
be reluctant, she must do at the order of the
prioress what health demands. If, however, a
patient desires the bath, and it happen to be not
for her good, her desire must not be yielded to,
for sometimes it is supposed to be beneficial
because it gives pleasure, although in reality it
may be doing harm. Finally, if a handmaid of
God suffers from any hidden pain of body, let
her statement as to her suffering be believed
without hesitation ; but if there be any uncer-
tainty whether that which she finds agreeable be
really of use in curing her pain, let the physician
be consulted. To the baths, or to any place
whither it may be necessary to go, let no fewer


I Cor.


xiii. 5.


than three go at any time. Moreover, the sister
requiring to go anywhere is not to go with those
whom she may choose herself, but with those
whom the prioress may order. The care of the
sick, and of those who require attention as con-
valescents, and of those who, without any feverish
symptoms, are labouring under debility, ought to
be committed to some one of your number, who
shall procure for them from the storeroom what
she shall see to be necessary for each. More-
over, let those who have charge, whether in the
storeroom, or in the wardrobe, or in the library,
render service to their sisters without murmuring.
Let manuscripts be applied for at a fixed hour
every day, and let none who ask them at other
hours receive them. But at whatever time clothes
and shoes may be required by one in need of
these, let not those in charge of this department
delay supplying the want.

14. Quarrels should be unknown among you,
or at least, if they arise, they should as quickly
as possible be ended, lest anger grow into hatred,
and convert " a mote into a beam," ^ and make
the soul chargeable with murder. For the say-
ing of Scripture : " He that hateth his brother
is a murderer," ^ does not concern men only,
but women also are bound by this law through
its being enjoined on the other sex, which was
prior in the order of creation. Let her, who-
ever she be, that shall have injured another by
taunt or abusive language, or false accusation,
remember to remedy the wrong by apology as
promptly as possible, and let her who was injured
grant forgiveness without further disputation. If
the injury has been mutual, the duty of both
parties will be mutual forgiveness, because of
your prayers, which, as they are more frequent,
ought to be all the more sacred in your esteem.
But the sister who is prompt in asking another
whom she confesses that she has wronged to
grant her forgiveness is, though she may be more
frequently betrayed by a hasty temper, better
than another who, though less irascible, is with
more difficulty persuaded to ask forgiveness.
Let not her who refuses to forgive her sister ex-
pect to receive answers to prayer : as for any
sister who never will ask forgiveness, or does not
do it from the heart, it is no advantage to such
an one to be in a monastery, even though, per-
chance, she may not be expelled. Wherefore
abstain from hard words ; but if they have
escaped your lips, be not slow to bring words of
healing from the same lips by which the wounds
were inflicted. When, however, the necessity of
discipline compels you to use hard words in re-
straining the younger inmates, even though you
feel that in these you have gone too far, it is not
imperative on you to ask their forgiveness, lest

2 Matt. vii. 3.

3 I John ill. 15.


568


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


\


while undue humility is observed by you towards
those who ought to be subject to you, the au-
thority necessary for governing them be impaired ;
but pardon must nevertheless be sought from the
Lord of all, who knows with what goodwill you
love even those whom you reprove it may be
with undue severity. The love which you bear
to each other must be not carnal, but spiritual :
for those things which are practised by immodest
women in shameful frolic and sporting with one
another ought not even to be done by those of
your sex who are married, or are intending to
marry, and much more ought not to be done by
widows or chaste virgins dedicated to be hand-
maids of Christ by a holy vow.

15. Obey the prioress as a mother, giving her
all due honour, that God may not be offended
by your forgetting what you owe to her : still
more is it incumbent on you to obey the pres-
byter who has charge of you all. To the prior-
ess most specially belongs the responsibility of
seeing that all these rules be observed, and that
if any rule has been neglected, the offence be
not passed over, but carefully corrected and
punished ; it being, of course, open to her to '
refer to the presbyter any matter that goes be- j
yond her province or power. But let her count |
herself happy not in exercising the power which i
rules, but in practising the love which serves.
In honour in the sight of men let her be raised
above you, but in fear in the sight of God let
her be as it were beneath your feet. Let her
show herself before all a " pattern of good
works." ' Let her " warn the unruly, comfort
the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient
toward all."^ Let her cheerfully observe and
cautiously impose rules. And, though both are
necessary, let her be more anxious to be loved
than to be feared by you ; always reflecting that
for you she must give account to God. For
this reason yield obedience to her out of com-
passion not for yourselves only but also for her,
because, as she occupies a higher position among
you, her danger is proportionately greater than
your own.

16. The Lord grant that you may yield loving
submission to all these rules, as persons enam-
oured of spiritual beauty, and diffusing a sweet
savour of Christ by means of a good conversa-
tion, not as bondwomen under the law, but as
established in freedom under grace. That you
may, however, examine yourselves by this trea-
tise as by a mirror, and may not through forget-
fulness neglect anything, let it be read over by
you once a week ; and in so far as you find
yourselves practising the things written here,
give thanks for this to God, the Giver of all
good ; in so far, however, as any of you finds

' Titus ii. 7.
2 1 Thess. V. 14.


herself to be in some particular defective, let her
lament the past and be on her guard in the time
to come, praying both that her debt may be for-
given, and that she may not be led into temp-
tation.

LETTER CCXIL

(A.D. 423.)


TO QUINTILIANUS, MV LORD MOST BLESSED AND
BROTHER AND FELLOW BISHOP DESERVEDLY VEN-
ERABLE, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.

Venerable father, I commend to you in the
love of Christ these honourable servants of God
and precious members of Christ, Galla, a widow
(who has taken on herself sacred vows), and
her daughter Simplicia, a consecrated virgin, who
is subject to her mother by reason of her age,
but above her by reason of her holiness. We
have nourished them as far as we have been able
with the word of God ; and by this episde, as
if it were with my own hand, I commit them to
you, to be comforted and aided in every way
which their interest or necessity requires. This
duty your Holiness would doubtless have under-
taken without any recommendation from me ;
for if it is our duty on account of the Jerusalem
above, of which we are all citizens, and in which
they desire to have a place of distinguished
holiness, to cherish towards them not only the
affection due to fellow-citizens, but even brotherly
love, how much stronger is their claim on you,
who reside in the same country in this earth in
which these ladies, for the love of Christ, re-
nounced the distinctions of this world ! I also
ask you to condescend to receive with the same
love with which I have offered it my official
salutation, and to remember me in your prayers.
These ladies carry with them relics of the most
blessed and glorious martyr Stephen : your Holi-
ness knows how to give due honour to these, as
we have done.^

LETTER CCXIII.

(September 26th, a.d. 426.)

RECORD, prepared BY ST. AUGUSTIN, OF THE
PROCEEDINGS ON THE OCCASION OF HIS DES-
IGNATING ERACLIUS TO SUCCEED HIM IN THE
EPISCOPAL CHAIR, AND TO RELIEVE HIM MEAN-
WHILE IN HIS OLD AGE OF A PART OF HIS
RESPONSIBILITIES.

In the Church of Peace in the district of
Hippo Regius, on the 26th day of September
in the year of the twelfth consulship of the
most 7-enowned Theodosius, and of the sec-
ond consulship of Valentinian Augustus : ^

3 A memorial chapel for the reception of relics of Saint Stephen
had been built at Hippo. — See City of God, book XXII.
* A.D. 426.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


569


— Bishop Aitgustin having taken his seat
along with his fellow hisliops Keligianus and
Martinianus, there being present Saturni-
nns, Leporius, Barnabas, Fortitnatianiis,
Riisticus, Lazarus, and E radius, — pi-es-
byters, — while the clergy and a huge con-
gregatiott of laymen stood by, — Bishop
Angus tin said : —

" The business which I brought before you
yesterday, my beloved, as one in connection with
which I wished you to attend, as I see you have
done in greater numbers than usual, must be at
once disposed of. Yox while your minds are
anxiously preoccupied with it, you would scarcely
listen to me if I were to speak of any other sub-
ject. We all are mortal, and the day which
shall be the last of life on earth is to every man
at all times uncertain ; but in infancy there is
hope of entering on boyhood, and so our hope
goes on, looking forward from boyhood to youth,
from youth to manhood, and from manhood to
old age : whether these hopes may be realized
or not is uncertain, but there is in each case
something which may be hoped for. But old
age has no other period of this life to look for-
ward to with expectation : how long old age may
in any case be prolonged is uncertain, but it is
certain that no other age destined to take its
place lies beyond. I came to this town — for
such was the will of God — when I was in the
prime of life. I was young then, but now I am
old. I know that churches are wont to be dis-
turbed after the decease of their bishops by
ambitious or contentious parties, and I feel it to
be my duty to take measures to prevent this
community from suffering, in connection with
my decease, that which I have often observed
and lamented elsewhere. You are aware, my
beloved, that I recently visited the Church of
Milevi ; for certain brethren, and especially the
servants of God there, requested me to come,
because some disturbance was apprehended after
the death of my brother and fellow bishop Seve-
rus, of blessed memory. I went accordingly,
and the Lord was in mercy pleased so to help
us that they harmoniously accepted as bishop
the person designated by their former bishop in
his lifetime ; for when this designation had be-
come known to them, they willingly acquiesced
in the choice which he had made. An omis-
sion, however, had occurred by which some were
dissatisfied; for brother Severus, believing that
it might be sufficient for him to mention to the
clergy the name of his successor, did not speak
of the matter to the people, which gave rise to
dissatisfaction in the minds of some. But why
should I say more ? By the good pleasure of
God, the dissatisfaction was removed, joy took
Its place in the minds of all, and he was or-


dained as bishop whom Severus had proposed.
To obviate all such occasion of complaint in
this case, I now intimate to all here my desire,
which I believe to be also the will of God : I
wish to have for my successor the presbyter
Eraclius."

The people shouted^ " To God be thanks ! To
Christ be praise" {this was repeated twenty-
three times). "6> Christ, hear us; may
Angus tin live long!" {repeated sixteen
times). " IVe will have thee as our father,
thee as our bishop " {repeated eight times).

2. Silence having been obtained, Bishop An-
gus tin said : —

" It is unnecessary for me to say anything in
praise of Eraclius ; I esteem his wisdom and
spare his modesty ; it is enough that you know
him : and I declare that I desire in regard to
him what I know you also to desire, and if I had
not known it before, I would have had proof of
it to-day. This, therefore, I desire ; this I ask
from the Lord our God in prayers, the warmth
of which is not abated by the chill of age ; this
I exhort, admonish, and entreat you also to pray
for along with me, — that God may confirm that
which He has wrought in us ' by blending and
fusing together the minds of all in the peace of
Christ. May He who has sent him to me pre-
serve him ! preserve him safe, preserve him
blameless, that as he gives me joy while I liv'e,
he may fiU.my place when I die.

" The notaries of the church are, as you ob-
serve, recording what I say, and recording what
you say ; both my address and your acclamations
are not allowed to fall to the ground. To speak
more plainly, we are making up an ecclesiastical
record of this day's proceedings ; for I wish
them to be in this way confirmed so far as per-
tains to men."

The people shouted thirty-six times, " To God
be thanks! To Christ be pi-aise!" "O
Christ, licar us ; may Augustin live long!"
was said thirteeti times. " Thee, our father !
thee, our bishop!" was said eight times.
"He is worthy and Just," was said tioenty
times. " Well desennng, well worthy ! " %oas
said five times. '■'■He is worthy and just!"
was said six times.

3. Silence having been obtained, Bishop Au-
gustin said : —

" It is my wish, as I was just now saying, that
my desire and your desire be confirmed, so
far as pertains to men, by being placed on an
ecclesiastical record ; but so far as pertains to
the will of the Almighty, let us all pray, as I said

» Ps. Ixviii. 28.


570


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


before, that God would confirm that which He
has wrought in us."

The people shouted, saying sixteen times, " We
give thanks /or your decision:" tJien tivelve
times, "Agreed! Agreed!" and then six
times, " Thee, our father ! Eraclius, our
bishop!"

4. Silence having been obtained, Bishop An-
gus tin said : —

" I approve of that of which you also express
your approval ; ' but I do not wish that to be
done in regard to him which was done in my
own case. What was done many of you know ;
in fact, all of you, excepting only those who at
that time were not born, or had not attained to
the years of understanding. When my father
and bishop, the aged Valerius, of blessed mem-
ory, was still living, I was ordained bishop and
occupied the episcopal see along with him,
which I did not know to have been forbidden
by the Council of Nice ; and he was equally
ignorant of the prohibition. I do not wish to
have my son here exposed to the same censure
as was incurred in my own case."

The people shouted, saying thirteen times, " To
God be thanks ! To Christ be praise ! "

5. Silence having been obtained, Bishop An-
gus tin said : —

" He shall be as he now is, a presbyter, mean-
while ; but afterwards, at such time as may
please God, your bishop. But now I will assur-
edly begin to do, as the compassion of Christ
may enable me, what I have not hitherto done.
You know what for several years I would have
done, had you permitted me. It was agreed
between you and me that no one should intrude
on me for five days of each week, that I might
discharge the duty in the study of Scripture
which my brethren and fathers the co-bishops
were pleased to assign to me in the two coun-
cils of Numidia and Carthage. The agreement
was duly recorded, you gave your consent, you
signified it by acclamations. The record of
your consent and of your acclamations, was
read aloud to you. For a short time the agree-
ment was observed by you ; afterwards, it was
violated without consideration, and I am not
permitted to have leisure for the work which I
wish to do : forenoon and afternoon alike, I am
involved in the affairs of other people demand-
mg my attention. I now beseech you, and sol-
emnly engage you, for Christ's sake, to suffer
me to devolve the burden of this part of my
labours on this young man, I mean on Eraclius,

' Referring to their last words, giving to Eraclius the title of
bishop


the presbyter, whom to-day I designate in the
name of Christ as my successor in the office of
bishop."

The people shouted, saying tivent\-six times,
" We give thanks for your decision,"

6. Silence having been obtained. Bishop Au-
gustin said: —

" I give thanks before the Lord our God for
your love and your goodwill ; yes, I give thanks
to God for these. Wherefore, henceforth, my
brethren, let everything which was wont to be
brought by you to me be brought to him. In
any case in which he may think my advice ne-
cessary, I will not refuse it ; far be it from me to
withdraw this : nevertheless, let everything be
brought to him which used to be brought to me.
Let Eraclius himself, if in any case, perchance,
he be at a loss as to what should be done, either
consult me, or claim an assistant in me, whom
he has known as a father. By this arrangement
you will, on the one hand, suffer no disadvan-
tage, and I will at length, for the brief space
during which God may prolong my life, devote
the remainder of my days, be they few or many,
not to idleness nor to the indulgence of a love
of ease, but, so far as Eraclius kindly gives me
leave, to the study of the sacred Scriptures : this
also will be of service to him, and through him
to you likewise. Let no one therefore grudge
me this leisure, for I claim it only in order to do
important work.

" I see that I have now transacted with you
all the business necessary in the matter for which
I called you together. The last thing I have
to ask is, that as many of you as are able be
pleased to subscribe your names to this record.
At this point I require a response from you.
Let me have it : show your assent by some
acclamations."

The people shouted, saying twenty-five times,
"Agreed! agreed! " then twenty-eight times,
"It is worthy, it is Just ! " then fourteen
ti?nes," Agreed ! agired!" then twenty -five
times, " He has long been worthy, he has
long been deserving !" then thirteen times,
" We give thanks for your decisio?i ! " then
eighteen times, "O Christ, hear us; pre-
serve Eraclius ! "

7. Silence having beeti obtained. Bishop An-
gus tin said : —

" It is well that we are able to transact around
His sacrifice those things which belong to God ;
and in this hour appointed for our supplications,
I especially exhort you, beloved, to suspend all
your occupations and business, and pour out
before the Lord your petitions for this church,
and for me, and for the presbyter Eraclius."


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


571


LETTER CCXVIIL

(a.d. 426.)

to palatinus, my well-beloved lord and son,
most tenderly longed for, augustin sends
greeting.

1. Your life of eminent fortitude and fruit-
fulness towards the Lord our God has brought
to us great joy. For " you have made choice
of instruction from your youth upwards, that you
may still find wisdom even to grey hairs ; " ' for
" wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an un-
spotted life is old age ; " ^ which may the Lord,
who knoweth how to give good gifts unto His
children, give to you asking, seeking, knocking. ^
Although you have many counsellors and many
counsels to direct you in the path which leads
to eternal glory, and although, above all, you
have the grace of Christ, which has so effectually
spoken in saving power in your heart, neverthe-
less we also, as in duty bound by the love which
we owe to you, offer to you, in hereby recipro-
cating your salutation, some words of counsel,
designed not to awaken you as one hindered by
sloth or sleep, but to stimulate and quicken you
in the race which you are already running.

2. You require wisdom, my son, for stedfast-
ness in this race, as it was under the influence
of wisdom that you entered on it at first. Let
this then be " a part of your wisdom, to know
whose gift it is." * " Commit thy w^ay unto the
Lord ; trust also in Him, and He shall bring it
to pass : and He shall bring forth thy righteous-
ness as the light, and thy judgment as the noon-
day." 5 " He will make straight thy path, and
guide thy steps in peace." "^ As you despised
your prospects of greatness in this world, lest you
should glory in the abundance of riches which
you had begun to covet after the manner of the
children of this world, so now, in taking up the
yoke of the Lord and His burden, let not your
confidence be in your own strength ; so shall
" His yoke be easy, and His burden light." ?
For in the book of Psalms those are alike cen-
sured " who trust in their strength," and " who
boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches." ^ Therefore, as formerly you did not
seek glory in riches, but most wisely despised
that which you had begun to desire, so now be
on your guard against insidious temptation to
trust in your strength ; for you are but man, and
"cursed is every one that trusteth in man." 9


' Ecclus. vi. t8.

* Wisd. iv. 9.
3 Matt. vii. II.

* Wisd. viii. 20.

5 Ps. xxxvii. 5, 6.

6 Prov. iv. 27, LXX.

7 Matt. xi. 30

8 Ps. xlix. 6, LXX.

9 Jer. xvii. 5.


But by all means trust in God with your whole
heart, and He will Himself be your strength,
wherein you may trust with piety and thankful-
ness, and to Him you may say with humility
and boldness, " I will love thee, O Lord, my
strength ; '° because even the love of God, which,
when it is perfect, "casteth out fear," " is shed
abroad in our hearts, not by our strength, that
is, by any human power, but, as the apostle says,
" by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us." '^

3. " Watch, therefore, and pray that you enter
not into temptation." '^ Such prayer is indeed
in itself an admonition to you that you need the
help of the Lord, and that you ought not to rest
upon yourself your hope of living well. For now
you pray, not that you may obtain the riches

; and honours of this present world, or any un-
substantial human possession, but that you may
' not enter into temptation, a thing which would
! not be asked in prayer if a man could accom-
i plish it for himself by his own will. Wherefore
j we would not pray that we may not enter into
1 temptation if our own will sufficed for our pro-
tection ; and yet if the will to avoid temptation
I were wanting to us, we could not so pray. It
may, therefore, be present with us to will,'-* when
we have through his own gift been made wise,
but we must pray that we may be able to per-
form that which we have so willed. In the fact
that you have begun to exercise this true wis-
dom, you have reason to give thanks. " For what
have you which you have not received ? But if
you have received it, beware that you boast not
as if you had not received it," '5 that is, as if you
could have had it of yourself. Knowing, how-
ever, whence you have received it, ask Him by
whose gift it was begun to grant that it may
be perfected. " Work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling : for it is God that
worketh in you, both to will and to do, of
His good pleasure ; " '^ for " the will is prepared
by God," '' and " the steps of a good man are
ordered by the Lord, and He delighteth in his
way." '^ Holy meditation on these things will
preserve you, so that your wisdom shall be piety,
that is, that by God's gift you shall be good, and
not ungrateful for the grace of Christ.

4. Your parents, unfeignedly rejoicing with
you in the better hope which in the Lord you
have begun to cherish, are longing earnestly for
your presence. But whether you be absent from
us or present with us in the body, we desire to
have you with us in the one Spirit by whom love


'° Ps. xviii. I.

*i I John iv. 18.

'2 Rom. V. 5.

■3 Markxiy. 38.

■'' Rom. vii. 18.

'5 I Cor. iv. 7.

■" Phil ii. 12, 13.

•' Prov. viii. 35, LXX.

'^ Ps. xxxvii. 23.


572


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


is shed abroad in our hearts, so that, in whatever '
place our bodies may sojourn, our spirits may be
in no degree sundered from each other.

We have most thankfully received the cloaks
of goat's-hair cloth ' which you sent to us, in
which gift you have yourself anticipated me in
admonition as to the duty of being often en-
gaged in prayer, and of practising humility in
our supplications.


LETTER CCXIX.

(a.d. 426.)

to proculus and cylinus, brethren most be-
loved and honourable, and partners in the
sacerdotal office, augustin, florentius, and
secundinus send greeting in the lord.

I. When our son Leporius, whom for his ob-
stinacy in error you had justly and fitly rebuked,
came to us after he had been expelled by you,
we received him as one afflicted for his good,
whom we should, if possible, deliver from error
and restore to spiritual health. For, as you
obeyed in regard to him the apostolic precept,
" Warn the unruly," so it was our part to obey
the precept immediately annexed, " Comfort the
feeble-minded, and support the weak." ^ His
error was indeed not unimportant, seeing that
he neither approved what is right nor per-
ceived what is true in some things relating to
the only-begotten Son of God, of whom it is
written that, " In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the ^Vord was
God," but that when the fulness of time had
come, " the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us ; " ^ for he denied that God became
man, regarding it as a doctrine from which it
must follow necessarily that the divine substance
in which He is equal to the Father suffered some
unworthy change or corruption, and not seeing
that he was thus introducing into the Trinity a
fourth person, which is utterly contrary to the
sound doctrine of the Creed and of Catholic
truth. Since, however, dearly beloved and hon-
ourable brethren, he had as a fallible man " been
overtaken " in this error, we did our utmost, the
Lord helping us, to instruct him " in the spirit
of meekness," especially remembering that when
the " chosen vessel " gave this command to which
we refer, he added, " Considering thyself, lest
thou also be tempted," — lest some, perchance,
should so rejoice in the measure of spiritual prog-
ress as to imagine that they could no longer be
tempted like other men, — and joined with it the
salutary and peace-promoting sentence, " Bear


' Cilicia.

^ I Thess. V. 14.

3 John i. I, 14.


ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law
of Christ. For if a man think himself to be
something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth
himself." •♦

2. This restoration of Leporius we could per-
haps in nowise have accomplished, had you not
previously censured and punished those things
in him which required correction. So then the
same Lord, our Divine Physician, using His own
instruments and servants, has by you wounded
him when he was proud, and by us healed him
when he was penitent, according to his own
saying, " I wound, and I heal." 5 The same Di-
vine Ruler and Overseer of His own house has
by you thrown down what was defective in the
building, and has by us replaced with a well-
ordered structure what he had removed. The
same Divine Husbandman has in His careful
diligence by you rooted up what was barren and
noxious in His field, and by us planted what is
useful and fruitful. Let us not, therefore, as-
cribe glory to ourselves, but to the mercy of
Him in whose hand both we and all our words
are. And as we humbly praise the work which
you have done as His ministers in the case of
our son aforesaid, so do you rejoice with holy
joy in the work performed by us. Receive,
then, with the love of fathers and of brethren,
him whom we have with merciful severity cor-
rected. For although one part of the work was
done by you and another part by us, both parts,
being indispensable to our brother's salvation,
were done by the same love. The same God
was therefore working in both, for " God is
love."^

3. Wherefore, as he has been welcomed into
fellowship by us on the ground of his repent-
ance, let him be welcomed by you on the ground
of his letter,^ to which letter we have thought it
right to adhibit our signatures attesting its gen-
liiness. We have not the least doubt that you,
in the exercise of Christian love, will not only
hear with pleasure of his amendment, but also
make it known to those to whom his error was
a stumbling-block. For those who came with
him to us have also been corrected and restored
along with him, as is declared by their signa-
tures, which have been adhibited to the letter in
our presence. It remains only that you, being
made joyful by the salvation of a brother, con-
descend to make us joyful in our turn by send-
ing a reply to our communication. Farewell in
the Lord, most beloved and honourable breth-
ren ; such is our desire on your behalf : remem-
ber us.


* Gal. vi. I, 3.
5 Deut. xxxii. 39.
^ 1 John iv. 8, 16.

7 A formal written retractation of his errors, called elsewhere
" emendationis libellum."


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


573


LETTER CCXX.

(a.d. 427.)

to my lord boniface,' my son commended to
the guardianship and guidance of divine
mercy, for present and eternal salvation,
augustin sends greeting.

1. Never could I have found a more trust-
worthy man, nor one who could have more ready
access to your ear when bearing a letter from
me, than this servant and minister of Christ, the
deacon Paulus, a man very dear to both of us,
whom the Lord has now brought to me in order
that I may have the opportunity of addressing
you, not in reference to }-our power and the |
honour which you hold in this evil world, nor in
reference to the preservation of your corruptible
and mortal body, — because this also is destined
to pass away, and how soon no one can tell, —
but in reference to that salvation which has been
promised to us by Christ, who was here on earth
despised and crucified in order that He might
teach us rather to despise than to desire the
good things of this world, and to set our affec-
tions and our hope on that world which He
has revealed by His resurrection. For He has
risen from the dead, and now " dieth no more •
death hath no more dominion over Hun." ^

2. I know that you have no lack of friends,
who love you so far as life in this world is con-
cerned, and who in regard to it give you coun-
sels, sometimes useful, sometimes the reverse ;
for they are men, and therefore, though they use
their wisdom to the best of their ability in regard
to what is present, they know not what may hap-
pen on the morrow. But it is not easy for any
one to give you counsel in reference to God,
to prevent the perdition of your soul, not be-
cause you lack friends who would do this, but
because it is difficult for them to find an oppor-
tunity of speaking with you on these subjects.
For 1 myself have often longed for this, and
never found place or time in which I miglit deal
with you as I ought to deal with a man whom I
ardently love in Christ. You know besides in

I what state you found me at Hippo, when you
did me the honor to come to visit me, — how I
was scarcely able to speak, being prostrated by
bodily weakness. Now, then, my son, hear me
when I have this opportunity of addressing you
at least by a letter, — h, rare opportunity, for it
was not in my power to send such communica-
tion to you in the midst of your dangers, both
because I apprehended danger to the bearer,
and because I was afraid lest my letter should
reach persons into whose hands I was unwill-
ing that it should fall. Wherefore I beg you to

* See note to Letter CLXXXIX, p. 552.

* Rom. VI. 9.


forgive me if you think that I have been more
afraid than I should have been ; however this
may be, I have stated what I feared.

3. Hear me, therefore ; nay, rather hear the
Lord our God speaking by me. His feeble ser-
vant. Call to remembrance what manner of
man you were while your former wife, of hal-
lowed memory, still lived, and how under the
stroke of her death, while that event was yet
recent, the vanity of this world made you recoil
from it, and how you earnestly desired to enter
the service of God. We know and we can tes-
tify what you said as to your state of mind and
your desires when you conversed with us at Tu-
bunae. My brother Alypius and I were alone
with you. [I beseech you, then, to call to
remembrance that conversation], for I do not
think that the worldly cares with which you are
now engrossed can have such power over you
as to have effaced this wholly from your memory.
You were then desirous to abandon all the pub-
lic business in which you were engaged, and to
withdraw into sacred retirement, and live like
the servants of God who have embraced a mo-
nastic life. And what was it that prevented you
from acting according to these desires? Was it
not that you were influenced by considering, on
our representation of the matter, how much ser-
vice the work which then occupied you might
render to the churches of Christ if you pursued
it with this single aim, that they, protected from
all disturbance by barbarian hordes, might live
" a quiet and peaceable life," as the apostle says,
" in all godliness and honesty ; " ^ resolving at
the same time for your own part to seek no more
from this world than would suffice for the sup-
port of yourself and those dependent on you,
wearing as your girdle the cincture of a per-
fectly chaste self-restraint, and having under-
neath the accoutrements of the soldier the surer
and stronger defence of spiritual armour.

4. At the very time when we were full of joy
that you had formed this resolution, you em-
barked on a voyage and you married a second
wife. Your embarkation was an act of the obe-
dience due, as the apostle has taught us, to the
" higher powers ; " •♦ but you would not have
married again had you not, abandoning the con-
tinence to which you had devoted yourself, been
overcome by concupiscence. When I learned
this, I was, I must confess it, dumb with amaze-
ment ; but, in my sorrow, I was in some degree
comforted by hearing that you refused to marry
her unless she became a Catholic before the mar-
riage, and yet the heresy of those who refiise to
believe in the true Son of God has so prevailed in
your house, that by these heretics your daughter
was baptized. Now, if the report be true (would

3 I Tim. ii. 2.

4 Rom. xiii. t.


574


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


to God that it were false !) that even some who
were dedicated to God as His handmaids have
been by these heretics re-baptized, with what
floods of tears ought this great calamity to be
bewailed by us ! Men are saying, moreover, —
\ perhaps it is an unfounded slander, — that one
wife does not satisfy your passions, and that you
have been defiled by consorting with some other
women as concubines.

5. What shall I say regarding these evils —
so patent to all, and so great in magnitude as
well as number — of which you have been, direct-
ly or indirectly, the cause since the time of your
being married ? You are a Christian, you have
a conscience, you fear God ; consider, then, for
yourself some things which I prefer to leave un-
said, and you will find for how great evils you
ought to do penance ; and I believe that it is to
afford you an opportunity of doing this in the
way in which it ought to be done, that the Lord
is now sparing you and delivering you from all
dangers. But if you will listen to the counsel
of Scripture, I pray you, " make no tarrying to
turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to
day." ' You allege, indeed, that you have good
reason for what you have done, and that I can-
not be a judge of the sufficiency of that reason,
because I cannot hear both sides of the ques-
tion ; ^ but, whatever be your reason, the nature
of which it is not necessary at present either to
investigate or to discuss, can you, in the pres-
ence of God, affirm that you would ever have
come into the embarrassments of your present
position had you not loved the good things of
this world, which, being a servant of God, such
as we knew you to be formerly, it was your duty
to have utterly despised and esteemed as of no
value, — accepting, indeed, what was offered to
you, that you might devote it to pious uses, but
not so coveting that which was denied to you,
or was entrusted to your care, as to be brought
on its account into the difficulties of your pres-
ent position, in which, while good is loved, evil
things are perpetrated, — few, indeed, by you,
but many because of you, and while things are
dreaded which, if hurtful, are so only for a short
time, things are done which are really hurtful for
eternity?

6. To mention one of these things, — who
can help seeing that many persons follow you
for the purpose of defending your power or
safety, who, although they may be all faithful to
you, and no treachery is to be apprehended from
any of them, are desirous of obtaining through
you certain advantages which they also covet,
not with a godly desire, but from worldly mo-
tives? And in this way you, whose duty it is to
curb and check your own passions, are forced

' Ecclus. V. 8.

^ See note on Letter CLXXXIX. p. 552.


to satisfy those of others. To accomplish this,
many things which are displeasing to God must
be done ; and yet, after all, these passions are
not thus satisfied, for they are more easily mor-
tified finally in those who love God, than satis-
fied even for a time in those who love the world.
Therefore the Divine Scripture says : " Love not
the world, nor the things that are in the world.
If any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not in him. For all that is in the world, the
lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the
world. And the world passeth away, and the
lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God
abideth for ever, as God abideth for ever." ^
Associated, therefore, as you are with such mul-
titudes of armed men, whose passions must be
humoured, and whose cruelty is dreaded, how
can the desires of these men who love the world
ever be, I do not say satiated, but even partially
gratified by you, in your anxiety to prevent still
greater wide-spread evils, unless you do that
which God forbids, and in so doing become
obnoxious to threatened judgment? So com-
plete has been the havoc wrought in order to
indulge their passions, that it would be difficult
now to find anything for the plunderer to carry
away.

7. But what shall I say of the devastation of
Africa at this hour by hordes of African barbari-'
ans, to whom no resistance is offered, while you
are engrossed with such embarrassments in your
own circumstances, and are taking no measures
for averting this calamity? Who would ever
have believed, who would have feared, after
Boniface had become a Count of the Empire
and of Africa, and had been placed in command!
in Africa with so large an army and so great au-
thority, that the same man who formerly, as,
Tribune, kept all these barbarous tribes in peace,
by storming their strongholds, and menacing
them with his small band of brave confederates,
should now have suffered the barbarians to be so
bold, to encroach so far, to destroy and plunder
so much, and to turn into deserts such vast re-
gions once densely peopled ? AVhere were any '
found that did not predict that, as soon as you
obtained the authority of Count, the African
liordes would be not only checked, but made
tributaries to the Roman Empire ? And now,
how completely the event has disappointed
men's hopes you yourself perceive ; in fact, I
need say nothing more on this subject, because
your own reflection must suggest much more
than I can put in words.

8. Perhaps you defend yourself by replying
that the blame here ought rather to rest on per-
sons who have injured you, and, instead of justly

3 I John ii. 15-17.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


575


requiting the services rendered by you in your
ofifice, have returned evil for good. These mat-
ters I am not able to examine and judge. I be-
seech you rather to contemplate and inquire into
the matter, in which you know that you have to
do not with men at all, but with God ; living in
Christ as a believer, you are bound to fear lest
you offend Him. For my attention is more en-
gaged by higher causes, believing that men ought
to ascribe Africa's great calamities to their own
sins. Nevertheless, I would not wish you to be-
long to the number of those wicked and unjust
men whom God uses as instruments in inflicting
temporal punishments on whom He pleases ; for
He who justly employs their malice to inflict tem-
poral judgments on others, reserves eternal pun-
ishments for the unjust themselves if they be not
reformed. Be it yours to fix your thoughts on
God, and to look to Christ, who has conferred
on you so great blessings and endured for you so
great sufferings. Those who desire to belong to
His kingdom, and to live for ever happily with
Him and under Him, love even their enemies,
do good to them that hate them, and pray for
those from whom they suffer persecution ; ' and
if, at any time, in the way of discipline they use
irksome severity, yet they never lay aside the
sincerest love. If these benefits, though earthly
and transitory, are conferred on you by the Ro-
man Empire, — for that empire itself is earthly,
not heavenly, and cannot bestow what it has not
in its power, — if, I say, benefits are conferred
on you, return not evil for good ; and if evil be
inflicted on you, return not evil for evil. Which
of these two has happened in your case I am un-
willing to discuss, I am unable to judge. I speak
to a Christian — return nut either evil for good,
nor evil for evil.

9. You say to me, perhaps : In circumstances
so difficult, what do you wish me to do ? If you
ask counsel of me in a worldly point of view how
your safety in this transitory life may be secured,
and the power and wealth belonging to you at
present may be preserved or even increased, I
know not what to answer you, for any counsel
regarding things so uncertain as these must par-
take of the uncertainty inherent in them. But
if you consult me regarding your relation to God
and the salvation of your soul, and if you fear
the word of truth which says : " What is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul?"^ I have a plain answer to give.
I am prepared with advice to which you may
well give heed. But what need is there for my
saying anything else than what I have already
said. " Love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world. If any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him. For all that

' Matt. V. 44.
2 Matt. xvi. 26.


is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the
Father, but is of the world. And the world pass-
eth away, and the lust thereof: but he that do-
eth the will of God abideth forever." ^ Here is
counsel ! Seize it and act on it. Show that you
are a brave man. Vanquish the desires with
which the world is loved. Do penance for the
evils of your past life, when, vanquished by your
passions, you were drawn away by sinful desires.
If you receive this counsel, and hold it fast, and
act on it, you will both attain to those blessings
which are certain, and occupy yourself in the
midst of these uncertain things without forfeiting
the salvation of your soul.

10. But perhaps you again ask of me how
you can do these things, entangled as you are
with so great worldly difficulties. Pray earnestly,
and say to God, in the words of the Psalm :
"Bring Thou me out of my distresses,""^ for
these distresses terminate when the passions in
which they originate are vanquished. He who
has heard your prayer and ours on your behalf,
that you might be delivered from the numerous
and great dangers of visible wars in which the
body is exposed to the danger of losing the life
which sooner or later must end, but in which
the soul perishes not unless it be held captive by
evil passions, — He, I say, will hear your prayer
.that you may, in an invisible and spiritual con-
flict, overcome your inward and invisible ene-
mies, that is to say, your passions themselves,
and may so use the world, as not abusing it, so
that with its good things you may do good, not
become bad through possessing them. Because
these things are in themselves good, and are not
given to men except by Him who has power
over all things in heaven and earth. Lest these
gifts of His should be reckoned bad, they are
given also to the good ; at the same time, lest
they should be reckoned great, or the supreme
good, they are given also to the bad. Further,
these things are taken away from the good for
their trial, and from the bad for their punish-
ment.

11. For who is so ignorant, who so foolish, as
not to see that the health of this mortal body,
and the strength of its corruptible members, and
victory over men who are our enemies, and tem-
poral honours and power, and all other mere
earthly advantages are given both to the good
and to the bad, and are taken away both from
the good and from the bad alike ? But the sal-
vation of the soul, along with immortality of the
body, and the power of righteousness, and vic-
tory over hostile passions, and glory, and honour,
and everlasting peace, are not given except to
the good. Therefore love these things, covet

3 1 John ii. 15-17.

4 Ps. XXV. 17.


5/6


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


these things, and seek them by every means in
your power. \Vith a view to acquire and retain
these things, give ahiis, pour forth prayers, prac-
tise fasting as far as you can without injury to
your body. But do not love these earthly goods,
how much soever they may abound to you. So
use them as to do many good things by them,
but not one evil thing for their sake. For all
such things will perish ; but good works, yea,
even those good works which are performed by
means of the perishable good things of this
world, shall never perish.

12. If you had not now a wife, I would say
to you what we said at Tubunce, that you should
live m the holy state of continence, and would
add that you should now do what we prevented
you from doing at that time, namely, withdraw
yourself so far as might be possible without
prejudice to the public welfare from the labours
of military service, and take to yourself the lei-
sure which you then desired for that life in the
society of the saints in which the soldiers of
Christ fight in silence, not to kill men, but to
" wrestle against principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickedness," ' that is, the devil and his
angels. For the saints gain their victories over
enemies whom they cannot see, and yet they
gain the victory over these unseen enemies by
gaining the victory over things which are the
objects of sense. I am, however, prevented
from exhorting you to that mode of life by your
having a wife, since without her consent it is
not lawful for you to live under a vow of conti-
nence ; because, although you did wrong in
marrying again after the declaration which you
made at Tubunse, she, being not aware of this,
became your wife innocently and without restric-
tions. Would that you could persuade her to
agree to a vow of continence, that you might
without hindrance render to God what you know
to be due to Him ! If, however, you cannot
make this agreement with her, guard carefully
by all means conjugal chastity, and pray to God,
who will deliver you out of difficulties, that you
may at some future time be able to do what is
meanwhile impossible. This, however, does not
affect your obligation to love God and not to
love the world, to hold the faith stedfasdy even
in the cares of war, if you must still be engaged
in them, and to seek peace ; to make the good
things of this world serviceable in good works,
and not to do what is evil in labouring to obtain
these earthly good things, — in all these duties
your wife is not, or, if she is, ought not to be, a
hindrance to you.

These things I have written, my dearly be-
loved son, at the bidding of the love with which
I love you with regard not to this world, but to

' Eph. vi. 12.


God ; and because, mindful of the words of
Scripture, " Reprove a wise man, and he will
love thee ; reprove a fool, and he will hate thee
more," ^ I was bound to think of you as certainly
not a fool but a wise man.


LETTER CCXXVII.
(a.d. 428 or 429.)

TO THE AGED ALVPIUS, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.

Brother Paulus has arrived here safely : he
reports that the pains devoted to the business
which engaged him have been rewarded with
success ; the Lord will grant that with these his
trouble in that matter may terminate. He sa-
lutes you warmly, and tells us tidings concerning
Gabinianus which give us joy, namely, that hav-
ing by God's mercy obtained a prosperous issue
in his case, he is now not only in name a Chris-
tian, but in sincerity a very excellent convert to
the faith, and was baptized recently at Easter,
having both in his heart and on his lips the
grace which he received. How much I long
for him I can never express ; but you know that
I love him.

The president of the medical faculty,^ Diosco-
rus, has also professed the Christian faith, hav-
ing obtained grace at the same time. Hear the
manner of his conversion, for his stubborn neck
and his bold tongue could not be subdued with-
out some miracle. His daughter, the only com-
fort of his life, was sick, and her sickness became
so serious that her life was, according even to
her father's own admission, despaired of. It is
reported, and the truth of the report is beyond
question, for even before brother Paul's return
the fact w^as mentioned to me by Count Peregri-
nus, a most respectable and truly Christian man, ■
who was baptized at the same time with Dios-
corus and Gabinianus, — it is reported, I say, that
the old man, feeling himself at last constrained
to implore the compassion of Christ, bound him-
self by a vow that he would become a Christian
if he saw her restored to health. She recovered,
but he perfidiously drew back from fulfilling his
vow. Nevertheless tlie hand of the Lord was
still stretched forth, for suddenly he is smitten
with blindness, and immediately the cause of
this calamity was impressed upon his mind. He
confessed his fault aloud, and vow^ed again that
if his sight were given back he would perform
what he had vowed. He recovered his sight,
fulfilled his vow, and still the hand of God was
stretched forth. He had not committed the
Creed to memory, or perhaps had refused to
commit it, and had excused himself on the plea
of inability. God had seen this. Inmiediately

2 Prov. ix. 8.

3 A rchiater.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


577


after all the ceremonies of his reception he is
'seized with paralysis, affecting many, indeed
almost all his members, and even his tongue.
I Then, being warned by a dream, he confesses in
writing that it had been told to him that this had
happened because he had not repeated the
Creed. After that confession the use of all his
members was restored to him, except the tongue
alone ; nevertheless he, being still under this
affliction, made manifest by writing that he had,
notwithstanding, learned the Creed, and still re-
tained it in his memory ; and so that frivolous
loquacity which, as you know, blemished his
natural kindliness, and made him, when he
mocked Christians, exceedingly profane, was al-
together destroyed in him, What shall I say,
but, " Let us sing a hymn to the Lord, and
highly exalt Him for ever ! Amen."

LETTER CCXXVIIL
(a.d. 428 or 429.)

TO HIS HOLY BROTHER AND COBISHOP HONO-
RATUS," AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING IN THE
LORD.

1. I thought that by sending to your Grace a
copy of the letter which I wrote to our brother
and co-bishop Quodvultdeus,^ I had earned

^ exemption from the burden which you have
imposed upon me, by asking my advice as to
what you ought to do in the midst of the dan-
gers which have befallen us in these times. For
although I wrote briefly, I think that I did not
pass over anything that was necessary either to
be said by me or heard by my questioner in cor-
respondence on the subject : for I said that, on
the one hand, those who desire to remove, if
they can, to fortified places are not to be forbid-
den to do so ; and, on the other hand, we ought
not to break the ties by which the love of Christ
has bound us as ministers not to forsake the
churches which it is our duty to serve. The
words which I used in the letter referred to
were : " Therefore, however small may be the
congregation of God's people among whom we
are, if our ministry is so necessary to them that
it is a clear duty not to withdraw it from them,
it remains for us to say to the Lord, ' Be Thou
to us a God of defence, and a strong fortress.' " ^

2. But this counsel does not commend itself
to you, because, as you say in your letter, it does
not become us to endeavour to act in opposition
to the precept or example of the Lord, admon-
ishing us that we should flee from one city to
another. We remember, indeed, the words of
the Lord, " When they persecute you in one


' Bishop of Thiaba in Mauritania.
' This letter is not extant.
3 P.s. xxxi. 3, LXX.


city, flee to another ; " ■♦ but who can believe
that the Lrod wished this to be done in cases in
which the flocks which He purchased with His
own blood are by the desertion of their pastors
left without that necessary ministry which is in-
dispensable to their life? Did Christ do this
Himself, when, carried by His parents, He fled
into Egypt in His infancy? No; for He had
not then gathered churches which we could
affirm to have been deserted by Him. Or, when
the Apostle Paul was " let down in a basket
through a window," to prevent his enemies from
seizing him, and so escaped their hands,5 was
the church in Damascus deprived of the neces-
sary labours of Christ's servants ? Was not all
the service that was requisite supplied after his
departure by other brethren settled in that city ?
For the apostle had done this at their request,
in order that he might preserve for the Church's
good his life, which the persecutor on that occa-
sion specially sought to destroy. Let those,
therefore, who are servants of Christ, His minis-
ters in word and sacrament, do what he has
commanded or permitted. When any of them
is specially sought for by persecutors, let him by
all means flee from one city to another, provided
that the Church is not hereby deserted, but that
others who are not specially sought after remain
to supply spiritual food to their fellow-servants,
whom they know to be unable otherwise to
maintain spiritual life. 'When, however, the
danger of all, bishops, clergy, and laity, is alike,
let not those who depend upon the aid of others
be deserted by those on whom they depend.
Li that case, either let all remove together to
fortified places, or let those who must remain be
not deserted by those through whom in things
pertaining to the Church their necessities must
be provided for ; and so let them share life in
common, or share in common that which the
Father of their family appoints them to suffer.

3. But if it shall happen that all suffer, whether
some suffer less, and others more, or all suffer
equally, it is easy to see who among them are
suffering for the sake of others : they are obvi-
ously those who, although they might have freed
themselves from such evils by flight, have chosen
to remain rather than abandon others to whom
they are necessary. By such conduct especially
is proved the love commended by the Apostle
John in the words : " Christ laid down His life
for us : and we ought to lay down our lives for
the brethren."^ For those who betake them-
selves to flight, or are prevented from doing so
only by circumstances thwarting their design, if
they be seized and made to suffer, endure this
suffering only for themselves, not for their breth-


* Matt. X. 23.
5 2 Cor xi. 33.
^ I John iii. i6.


578


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


ren ; but those who are involved in suffering
because of their resolving not to abandon others,
whose Christian welfiire depended on them, are
unquestionably " laying down their lives for the
brethren."

4. For this reason, the saying which we have
heard attributed to a certain bishop, namely :
" If the Lord has commanded us to flee, in
those persecutions in which we may reap the
fruit of martyrdom, how much more ought we
to escape by flight, if we can, from barren suffer-
ings inflicted by the hostile incursions of barba-
rians ! " is a saying true and worthy of acceptation,
but applicable only to those who are not confined
by the obligations of ecclesiastical office. For
the man who, having it in his power to escape
from the violence of the enemy, chooses not to
flee from it, lest in so doing he should abandon
the ministry of Christ, without which men can
neither become Christians nor live as such, as-
suredly finds a greater reward of his love, than
the man who, fleeing not for his brethren's sake
but for his own, is seized by persecutors, and,
refusing to deny Christ, suffers martyrdom.

5. What, then, shall we say to the position
which you thus state in your former epistle : —
" I do not see what good we can do to ourselves
or to the people by continuing to remain in the
churches, except to see before our eyes men
slain, women outraged, churches burned, our-
selves expiring amid torments applied in order to
extort from us what we do not possess "? God
is powerful to hear the prayers of His children,
and to avert those things which they fear ; and
we ought not, on account of evils that are un-
certain, to make up our minds absolutely to
the desertion of that ministry, without which
the people must certainly suffer ruin, not in the
affairs of this life, but of that other life which
ought to be cared for with incomparably greater
diligence and solicitude. For if those evils
which are apprehended, as possibly visiting the
places in which we are, were certain, all those
for whose sake it was our duty to remain would
take flight before us, and would thus exempt us
from the neccessity of remaining ; for no one
says that ministers are under obligation to remain
in any place where none remain to whom their
ministry is necessary. In this way some holy
bishops fled from Spain when their congregations
had, before their flight, been annihilated, the
members having either fled, or died by the
sword, or perished in the siege of their towns,
or gone into captivity : but many more of the
bishops of that country remained in the midst
of these abounding dangers, because those for
whose sakes they remained were still remaining
there. And if some have abandoned their flocks,
this is what we say ought not to be done, for
they were not taught to do so by divine author-


ity, but were, through human infirmity, either
deceived by an error or overcome by fear.

6. [We maintain, as one alternative, that they
were deceived by an error,] for why do they
think that indiscriminate compliance must be
given to the precept in which they read of flee-
ing from one city to another, and not shrink
with abhorrence from the character of the " hire-
ling," who " seeth the wolf coming, and fleeth,
because he careth not for the sheep"?' Why
do they not honour equally both of these true
sayings of the Lord, the one in which flight is
permitted or enjoined, the other in which it
is rebuked and censured, by taking pains so to
understand them as to find that they are, as is
indeed the case, not opposed to each other?
And how is their reconciliation to be foimd, un-
less that which I have above proved be borne in
mind, that under pressure of persecution we who
are ministers of Christ ought to flee from the
places in which we are only in one or other of
two cases, namely, either that there is no con-
gregation to which we may minister, or that
there is a congregation, but that the ministry
necessary for it can be supplied by others who
have not the same reason for flight as makes it
imperative on us? Of which we have one ex-
ample, as already mentioned, in the Apostle
Paul escaping by being let down from the wall
in a basket, when he was personally sought by
the persecutor, there being others on the spot
who had not the same necessity for flight,
whose remaining would prevent the Church from
being destitute of the service of ministers. An-
other example we have in the holy Athanasius,
Bishop of Alexandria, who fled when the Em-
peror Constantius wished to seize him specially,
the Catholic people who remained in Alexandria
not being abandoned by the other ser\'ants of
God. But when the people remain and the ser-
vants of God flee, and their service is withdrawn,
what is this but the guilty flight of the " hireling "
who careth not for the sheep? For the wolf
will come, — not man, but the devil, who has
very often perverted to apostasy believers to
whom the daily ministry of the Lord's body was
wanting ; and so, not " through thy knowledge,"
but through thine ignorance, " shall the weak
brother perish for whom Christ died." ^

7. As for those, however, who flee not because
they are deceived by an error, but because they
have been overcome by fear, why do they not
rather, by the compassion and help of the Lord
bestowed on them, bravely fight against their
fear, lest evils incomparably heavier and much
more to be dreaded befall them? This victory
over fear is won wherever the flame of the love
of God, without the smoke of worldliness, burns

' John X. 12, 13.
* I Cor. viii. 9, 11,


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


579


in the heart. For love says, " Who is weak, and
I am not weak ? who is offended, and I burn
not?"' But love is from God. Let us, there-
fore, beseech Him who requires it of us to be-
stow it on us, and under its influence let us fear
more lest the sheep of Christ should be slaugh-
tered by the sword of spiritual wickedness reach-
ing the heart, than lest they should fall under
the sword that can only harm that body in which
men are destined at any rate, at some time, and
in some way or other, to die. Let us fear more
lest the purity of faith should perish through the
taint of corruption in the inner man, than lest
our women should be subjected by violence to
outrage ; for if chastity is preserved in the spirit,
it is not destroyed by such violence, since it is
not destroyed even in the body when there is
no base consent of the sufferer to the sin, but
only a submission without the consent of the
will to that which another does. Let us fear
more lest the spark of life in '' living stones" be
quenched through our absence, than lest the
stones and timbers of our earthly buildings be
burned in our presence. Let us fear more lest
the members of Christ's body should die for
want of spiritual food, than lest the members of
our own bodies, being overpowered by the vio-
lence of enemies, should be racked with torture.
Not because these are things which we ought
not to avoid when this is in our power, but be-
cause we ought to prefer to suffer them when
they cannot be avoided without impiety, unless,
perchance, any one be found to maintain that
that servant is not guilty of impiety who with-
draws the service necessary to piety at the very
time when it is peculiarly necessary.

8. Do we forget how, when these dangers
have reached their extremitv, and there is no
possibility of escaping from them by flight, an
extraordinary crowd of persons, of both sexes
and of all ages, is wont to assemble in the church,
— some urgently asking baptism, others recon-
ciliation, others even the doing of penance, and
all calling for consolation and strengthening
through the administration of sacraments? If
the ministers of God be not at their posts at
such a time, how great perdition overtakes those
who depart from this life either not regenerated
or not loosed from their sins ! - How deep also
is the sorrow of their believing kindred, who
shall not have these lost ones with them in the
blissful rest of eternal life ! In fine, how loud
are the cries of all, and the indignant impreca-
tions of not a few, because of the want of ordi-
nances and the absence of those who should
have dispensed them ! See what the fear of
temporal calamities may effect, and of how great
a multitude of eternal calamities it may be the

' 2 Cor. xi. 29.
- Li'zatt.


procuring cause. But if the ministers be at
their posts, through the strength which God be-
stows upon them, all are aided, — some are bap-
tized, others reconciled to the Church. None
are defrauded of the communion of the Lord's
body; all are consoled, edified, and exhorted to
ask of God, who is able to do so, to avert all
things which are feared, — prepared for both
alternatives, so that "if the cup may not pass"
from them, His will may be done^ who cannot
will anything that is evil.

9. Assuredly you now see (what, according to
your letter, you did not see before) how great
advantage the Christian people may obtain if, in
the presence of calamity, the presence of the
servants of Christ be not withdrawn from them.
You see, also, how much harm is done by their
absence, when " they seek their own, not the
things that are Jesus Christ's," ■♦ and are desti-
tute of that charity of which it is said, " it seek-
eth not her own," 5 and fail to imitate him who
said, " I seek not mine own profit, but the profit
of many, that they may be saved," ^ and who,
moreover, would not have fled from the insidious
attacks of the imperial persecutor, had he not
wished to save himself for the sake of others to
whom he was necessary ; on which account he
says, " I am in a strait betwixt two, having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ ; which
is far better : nevertheless to abide in the flesh is
more needful for you." 7

10. Here, perhaps, some one may say that
the servants of God ought to save their lives by
flight when such evils are impending, in order
that they may reserve themselves for the benefit
of the Church in more peaceful times. This is
rightly done by some, when others are not want-
ing by whom the service of the Church may be
supplied, and the work is not deserted by all,
as we have stated above that Athanasius did ;
for the whole Catholic world knows how neces-
sary it was to the Church that he should do so,
and how useful was the prolonged life of the man
who by his word and loving service defended
her against the Arian heretics. But this ought
by no means to be done when the danger is
common to all ; and the thing to be dreaded
above all is, lest any one should be supposed to
do this not from a desire to secure the welfare
of others, but from fear of losing his own life,
and should therefore do more harm by the
example of deserting the post of duty than
all the good that he could do by the preserva-
tion of his life for future service. Finally,
observe how the holy David acquiesced in the
urgent petition of his people, that he should

3 Malt. xxvi. 42.

* Phil. ii. 21.

5 I Cor. xiii. 5.

'i I Cor. X. 33.

7 Phil. i. 23, 24.


58o


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


not expose himself to the dangers of battle,
and, as it is said in the narrative, " quench the
light of Israel," ' but was not himself the first to
propose it ; for had he been so, he would have
made many imitate the cowardice which they
might have attributed to him, supposing that he
had been prompted to this not through regard
to the advantage of others, but under the agita-
tion of fear as to his own life.

II. Another question which we must not
regard as unworthy of notice is suggested here.
For if the interests of the Church are not to be
7ost sight of, and if these make it necessary that
when any great calamity is impending some
ministers should flee, in order that they may
survive to minister to those whom they may find \
remaining after the calamity is passed, — the i
question arises, what is to be done when it
appears that, unless some flee, all must perish
together? what if the fury of the destroyer were
so restricted as to attack none but the ministers
of the Church? What shall we reply? Is the
Church to be deprived of the service of her
ministers because of fleeing from their work
through fear lest she should be more unhappily
deprived of their service because of their dying
in the midst of their work ? Of course, if the
laity are exempted from the persecution, it is in
their power to shelter and conceal their bishops
and clergy in some wa}', as He shall help
them under whose dominion all things are, and
who, by His wondrous power, can preserve even
one who does not flee from danger. But the
reason for our inquiring what is the path of our
duty in such circumstances is, that we may not
be chargeable with tempting the Lord by expect-
ing divine miraculous interposition on every
occasion.

There is, indeed, a difference in the severity
of the tempest of calamity when the danger is
common to both laity and clergy, as the perils of
stormy weather are common to both merchants
and sailors on board of the same ship. But
far be it from us to esteem this ship of ours so
lightly as to admit that it would be right for the
crew, and especially for the pilot, to abandon
her in the hour of peril, although they might
have it in their power to escape by leaping into
a small boat, or even swimming ashore. For in
the case of those in regard to whom we fear lest
through our deserting our work they should
perish, the evil which we fear is not temporal
death, which is sure to come at one time or
other, but eternal death, which may come or may
not come, according as we neglect or adopt
measures whereby it may be averted. More-
over, when the lives of both laity and clergy are
exposed to common danger, what reason have


Sam.


XXI. 17.


we for thinking that in every place which the
enemy may invade all the clergy are likely to be
put to death, and not that all the laity shall also
die, in which event the clergy, and those to
whom they are necessary, would pass from this
life at the same time ? Or why may we not hope
that, as some of the laity are likely to sur\'ive,
some of the clergy may also be spared, by whom
the necessary ordinances may be dispensed to
them?

12. Oh that in such circumstances the ques-
tion debated among the servants of God were
which of their number should remain, that the
Church might not be left destitute by all fleeing
from danger, and which of their number should
flee, that the Church might not left destitute by
all perishing in the danger. Such a contest will
arise among the brethren who are all alike glow-
ing with love and satisfying the claims of love.
And if it were in any case impossible otherwise
to terminate the debate, it appears to me that
the persons who are to remain and who are to
flee should be chosen by lot. For those who
say that they, in preference to others, ought to
flee, will appear to be chargeable either with
cowardice, as persons unwilling to face impend-
ing danger, or with arrogance, as esteeming their
own lives more necessary to be preserved for the
good of the Church than those of other men.
Again, perhaps, those who are better will be the
first to choose to lay down their lives for the
brethren ; and so preservation by flight will be
given to men whose life is less valuable because
their skill in counselling and ruling the Church is
less ; yet these, if they be pious and wise, will
resist the desires of men in regard to whom they
see, on the one hand, that it is more important
for the Church that they should live, and on the
other hand, that they would rather lose their
hves than flee from danger. In this case, as it
is written, " the lot causeth contentions to cease,
and parteth between the mighty ; " ^ for, in diffi-
culties of this kind, God judges better than men,
whether it please Him to call the better among
His servants to the reward of suffering, and to
spare the weak, or to make the weak stronger to
endure trials, and then to withdraw them from this
life, as persons whose lives could not be so ser-
viceable to the Church as the lives of the others
who are stronger than they. If such an appeal to
the lot be made, it will be, I admit, an unusual
proceeding, but if it is done in any case, who
will dare to find fault with it? Who but the
ignorant or the prejudiced will hesitate to praise
with the approbation which it deserves? If,
however, the use of the lot is not adopted be-
cause there is no precedent for such an appeal,
let it by all means be secured that the Church

^ Prov. xviii. i8.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


581


be not, through the flight of any one, left desti-
tute of that ministry which is more especially
necessary and due to her in the midst of such
great dangers. Let no one hold himself in such
esteem because of apparent superiority in any
grace as to say that he is more worthy of life
than others, and therefore more entided to seek
safety in flight. For whoever thinks this is too
self-satisfied, and whoever utters this must make
all dissatisfied with him.

13. There are some who think that bishops
and clergy may, by not fleeing but remaining in
such dangers, cause the people to be misled,
because, when they see those who are set over
them remaining, this makes them not flee from
danger. It is easy for them, however, to ob-
viate this objection, and the reproach of mis-
leading others, by addressing their congregations,
and saying : " Let not the fact that we are not
fleeing from this place be the occasion of mis-
leading you, for we remain here not for our own
sakes but for yours, that we may continue to
minister to you whatever we know to be neces-
sary to your salvation, which is in Christ ; there-
fore, if you choose to flee, you thereby set us
also at liberty from the obligations by which we
are bound to remain." This, I think, ought to
be said, when it seems to be truly advantageous
to remove to places of greater security. If, after
such words have been spoken in their hearing,
either all or some shall say: "We are at His
disposal from whose anger none can escape
whithersoever they may go, and whose mercy
may be found wherever their lot is cast by those
who, whether hindered by known insuperable
difficulties, or unwilling to toil after unknown
refuges, in which perils may be only changed
not finished, prefer not to go away elsewhere,"
— most assuredly those who thus resolve to re-
main ought not to be left destitute of the service
of Christian ministers. If, on the other hand,
after hearing their bishops and clergy speak as
above, the people prefer to leave the place, to
remain behind them is not now the duty of
those who were only remaining for their sakes,
because none are left there on whose account
it would still be their duty to remain.

14. Whoever, therefore, flees from danger in
circumstances in which the Church is not de-
prived, through his flight, of necessary service,
is doing that which the Lord has commanded
or permitted. But the minister who flees when
the consequence of his flight is the withdrawal
from Christ's flock of that nourishment by which
its spiritual life is sustained, is an " hireling who
seeth the wolf coming, and fleeth because he
careth not for the sheep."

With love, which I know to be sincere, I have
now written what I believe to be true on this
question, because you asked my opinion, my


dearly beloved brother ; but I have not enjoined
you to follow my advice, if you can find any
better than mine. Be that as it may, we cannot
find anything better for us to do in these dan-
gers than continually beseech the Lord our God
to have compassion on us. And as to the mat-
ter about which I have written, namely, that
ministers should not desert the churches of God,
some wise and holy men have by the gift of God
been enabled both to will and to do this thing,
and have not in the least degree faltered in the
determined prosecution of their purpose, even
though exposed to the attacks of slanderers.

LETTER CCXXIX.

(a.d. 429.)

to darius,' his deservedly illustrious and
very powerful lord and dear son in
christ, augustin sends greeting in the

LORD.

1. Your character and rank I have learned
from my holy brothers and co-bishops, Urbanus
and Novatus. The former of these became
acquainted with you near Carthage, in the town
of Hilari, and more recently in the town of Sicca ;
the latter at Sitifis. Through them it has come
to pass that I cannot regard you as unknown
to me. For though my bodily weakness and the
chill of age do not permit me to converse with
you personally, it cannot on this account be
said that I have not seen you ; for the conver-
sation of Urbanus, when he kindly visited me,
and the letters of Novatus, so described to me
the features, not of your face but of your mind,
that I have seen you, and have seen you with all
the more pleasure, because I have seen not the
outward appearance but the inner man. These
features of your character are joyfully seen both
by us, and through the mercy of God by your-
self also, as in a mirror in the holy Gospel, in
which it is written in words uttered by Him who
is truth : " Blessed are the peacemakers : for
they shall be called the children of God." ^

2. Those warriors are indeed great and worthy
of singular honour, not only for their consum-
mate bravery, but also (which is a higher praise)
for their eminent fidelity, by whose labours and
dangers, along with the blessing of divine pro-
tection and aid, enemies previously unsubdued
are conquered, and peace obtained for the State,
and the provinces reduced to subjection. But
it is a higher glory still to stay war itself with a
word, than to slay men with the sword, and to

' This Darius was an officer of distinction in the ser\'ice of the
Empress Placidia, and was the instrument of effecting a reconciliation
between her and Count Boniface. He was also successful in obtain-
ing a truce with the Vandals, on which Augustin congratulates him
in this letter.

2 Matt. V. 9.


582


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


procure or maintain peace by peace, not by
war. For those who fight, if they are good men,
doubtless seek for peace ; nevertheless it is
through blood. Your mission, however, is to
prevent the shedding of blood. Yours, therefore,
is the privilege of averting that calamity which
others are under the necessity of producing.
Therefore, my deservedly illustrious and very
powerful lord and very dear son in Christ,
rejoice in this singularly great and real bless-
ing vouchsafed to you, and enjoy it in God, to
whom you owe that you are what you are, and
that you undertook the accomplishment of such
a work. May God "strengthen that which He
hath wrought for us through you." ' Accept
this our salutation, and deign to reply. From
the letter of my brother Novatus, I see that
he has taken pains that your learned Excel-
lency should become acquainted with me also
through my works. If, then, you have read what
he has given you, I also shall have become
known to your inward perception. As far as I
can judge, they will not greatly displease you if
you have read them in a loving rather than a criti-
cal spirit. It is not much to ask, but it will be a
great favour, if for this letter and my works you ^
send us one letter in reply. I salute with due
affection the pledge of peace,^ which through
the favour of our Lord and God you have hap-
pily received.

LETTER CCXXXI.

(a.d. 429.)

to darius, his son, and a member of christ,
augustin, a servant of christ and of the
members of christ^ sends greeting in the

LORD.

I. You requested an answer from me as a
proof that I had gladly received your letter.^
Behold, then, I write again ; and yet I cannot
express the pleasure I felt, either by this answer
or by any other, whether I write briefly or at the
utmost length, for neither by few words nor by
many is it possible for me to express to you
what words can never express. I, indeed, am
not eloquent, though ready in speech ; but I
could by no means allow any man, however
eloquent, even though he could see as well into
my mind as I do myself, to do that which is
beyond my own power, viz. to describe in a letter,
however able and however long, the effect which
your epistle had on my mind. It remains, then,

' Ps. Ixviii, 29.

2 Verimodus, the son of Darius.

3 Referring to Darius' reply (Letter CCXXX.) to the foregoing
Letter (CCXXIX.). In it, Darius, after reciprocating in the warmest
manner every expression of admiration and esteem, expresses his
hope that the peace concluded with the Vandals may be permanent,
entreats Augustin to pray for him (alluding to the letter said to have
been written by Abgaris, king of Edessa, to our Saviour) , and asks
him to send a copy of his Confessions along with his reply to this
communication.


for me so to express to you what you wished to
know, that you may understand as being in my
words that which they do not express. What,
then, shall I say? That I was delighted with
your letter, exceedingly delighted ; — the repe-
tition of this word is not a mere repetition, but,
as it were, a perpetual affirmation ; because it
was impossible to be always saying it, therefore
it has been at least once repeated, for in this
way perhaps my feelings may be expressed.

2. If some one inquire here what after all
delighted me so exceedingly in your letter, —
"Was it its eloquence?" I will answer. No;
and he, perhaps, will reply, " Was it, then, the
praises bestowed on yourself? " but again I will
reply. No; and I shall reply thus not because
these things are not in that letter, for the elo-
quence in it is so great that it is very clearly
evident that you are naturally endowed with the
highest talents, and that you have been most
carefully educated ; and your letter is undeniably
full of my praises. Some one then may say, " Do
not these things delight you?" Yes, truly, for
" my heart is not," as the poet says, " of horn," *
so that I should either not observe these things
or obsen^e them without delight. These things
do delight ; but what have these things to do with
that with which I said I was highly delighted?
Your eloquence delights me since it is at once
genial in sentiment and dignified in expression ;
and though assuredly I am not delighted with
all sorts of praise from all sorts of persons, but
only with such praises as you have thought me
worthy of, and only coming from those who are
such as you are — that is, from persons who, for
Christ's sake, love His servants, I cannot deny
that I am delighted with the praises bestowed
upon me in your letter.

3. Thoughtful and experienced men will be
at no loss as to the opinion which they should
form of Themistocles (if I remember the name
rightly), who, having refused at a banquet to
play on the lyre, a thing which the distinguished
and learned men of Greece were accustomed to
do, and having been on that account regarded
as uneducated, was asked, when he expressed
his contempt for that sort of amusement, " \Vhat,
then, does it delight you to hear?" and is
reported to have answered : " My own praises."
Thoughtful and experienced men will readily see
with what design and in what sense these words
must have been used by him, or must be under-
stood by them, if they are to believe that he
uttered them ; for he was in the affairs of this
world a most remarkable man, as may be illus-
trated by the answer which he gave when he
was further pressed with the question : " What,
then, do you know?" "I know," he replied,

■♦ Persius, Sat. i. line 47. " Cornea."


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


583


" how to make a small republic great." As to
the thirst for praise spoken of by Ennius in the \
words : " All men greatly desire to be praised,"
I am of opinion that it is partly to be approved
of, partly guarded against. For as, on the one
hand, we should vehemently desire the truth,
which is undoubtedly to be eagerly sought after
as alone worthy of praise, even though it be not
praised : so, on the other hand, we must care-
fully shun the vanity which readily insinuates it-
self along with praise from men : and this vanity
is present in the mind when either the things
which are worthy of praise are not reckoned
worth having unless the man be praised for them
by his fellow-men, or things on account of pos-
sessing which any man wishes to be much praised
are deserving either of small praise, or it may be
of severe censure. Hence Horace, a more care-
ful observer than Ennius, says : " Is fame your
passion? Wisdom's powerful charm if thrice
read over shall its power disarm." '

4. Thus the poet thought that the malady
arising from the love of human praise, which
was thoroughly attacked w'ith his satire, was to
be charmed away by words of healing power.
The great Teacher has accordingly taught us by
His apostle, that we ought not to do good with
a view to be praised by men, that is, we ought
not to make the praises of men the motive for
our well-doing ; and yet, for the sake of men
themselves. He teaches us to seek their appro-
bation. For when good men are praised, the
praise does not benefit those on whom it is
bestowed, but those who bestowed it. For to
the good, so far as they are themselves con-
cerned, it is enough that they are good ; but
those are to be congratulated whose interest it
is to imitate the good when the good are praised
by them, since they thus show that the persons
whom they sincerely praise are persons whose
conduct they appreciate. The apostle says in a
certain place, " If I yet pleased men, I should
not be the servant of Christ;"^ and the same
apostle says in another place, " I please all men
in all things," and adds the reason, " Not seeking
mine own profit, but the profit of many, that
they may be saved." ^ Behold what he sought
in the praise of men, as it is declared in these
words : " Finally, my brethren, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, what- j
soever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of I
good report ; if there be any virtue, and if there be '
any praise, think on these things. Those things, |
which ye have both learned, and received, and j
heard, and seen in me, do : and the God of peace |
shall be with you." * All the other things which '


' Horace, Book I. Ep. i. lines 36-37.
^ Gal i. 10.
3 I Cor. X. 33.
■« Phil. IV. 8-9.


Francis' translatioa.


I have named above, he summed up under the
name of Virtue, saying, " If there be any virtue ; "
but the definition which he subjoined, " Whatso-
ever things are of good report," he followed up by
another suitable word, " If there be any praise."
What the apostle says, then, in the first of these
passages, " If I yet pleased men, I should not be
the servant of Christ," is to be understood as if he
said. If the good things which I do were done
by me with human praise as my motive, if I were
puffed up with the love of praise, I should not
be the servant of Christ. The apostle, then,
wished to please all men, and rejoiced in pleas-
ing them, not that he might himself be inflated
with their praises, but that he being praised
might build them up in Christ. Why, then,
should it not delight me to be praised by you,
since you are too good a man to speak insincerely,
and you bestow your praise on things which you
love, and which it is profitable and wholesome
to love, even though they be not in me ? This,
moreover, does not benefit you alone, but also
me. For if they are not in me, it is good for
me that I am put to the blush, and am made to
burn with desire to possess them. And in regard
to anything in your praise which I recognise as
in my possession, I rejoice that I possess it, and
that such things are loved by you, and that I am
loved for their sake. And in regard to those
things which I do not recognise as belonging to
me, I not only desire to obtain them, that I may
possess them for myself, but also that those who
love me sincerely may not always be mistaken in
praising me for them.

5. Behold how many things I have said, and
still I have not yet spoken of that in your letter
which delighted me more than your eloquence,
and far more than the praises you bestowed on
me. What do you tliink, O excellent man, that
this can be ? It is that I have acquired the friend-
ship of so distinguished a man as you are, and
that without having even seen you ; if, indeed,
I ought to speak of one as unseen whose soul I
have seen in his own letters, though I have not
seen his body. In which letters I rest my
opinion concerning you on my own knowledge,
and not, as formerly, on the testimony of my
brethren. For what your character was I had
already heard, but how you stood affected to me
I knew not until now. From this, your friend-
ship to me, I doubt not that even the praises
bestowed on me, which give me pleasure for a
reason about which I have already said enough,
will much more abundantly benefit the Church
of Christ, since the fact that you possess, and
study, and love, and commend my labours in
defence of the gospel against the remnant of
impious idolaters, secures for me a wider influ-
ence in these writings in proportion to the high
position which you occupy ; for, illustrious your-


5S4


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


self, you insensibly shed a lustre upon them.
You, being celebrated, give celebrity to them,
and wherever you shall see that the circulation
of them might do good, you will not suffer them
to remain altogether unknown. If you ask me
how I know this, my reply is, that such is the
impression concerning you produced on me by
reading your letters. Herein you will now see
how great delight your letter could impart to
me, for if your opinion of me be favourable, you
are aware how great delight is given to me by
gain to the cause of Christ. Moreover, when
you tell me concerning yourself that, although, as
you say, you belong to a family which not for
one or two generations, but even to remote
ancestors, has been known as able to accept the
doctrine of Christ, you have nevertheless been
aided by my writings against the Gentile rites so
to understand these as you never had done be-
fore, can I esteem it a small matter how great
benefit our writings, commended and circulated
by you, may confer upon others, and to how
many and how illustrious persons your testimony
may bring them, and how easily and profitably
through these persons they may reach others?
Or, reflecting on this, can the joy diffused in my
heart be small or moderate in degree ?

6. Since, then, I cannot in words express how
great delight I have received from your letter,
I have spoken of the reason why it delighted me,
and may that which I am unable adequately to
utter on this subject I leave to you to conjecture.
Accept, then, my son — accept, O excellent
man, Christian not by outward profession merely,
but by Christian love — accept, I say, the books
containing my " Confessions," which you desired
to have. In these behold me, that you may not
praise me beyond what I am ; in these believe
what is said of me, not by others, but by myself;
in these contemplate me, and see what I have
been in myself, by myself; and if anything in
me please you, join me, because of it, in praising
Him to whom, and not to myself, I desire praise
to be given. For " He hath made us, and not
we ourselves ; " ' indeed, we had destroyed our-
selves, but He who made us has made us anew.
When, however, you find me in these books,
pray for me that I may not fail, but be perfected.
Pray, my son ; pray. I feel what I say ; I know
what I ask. Let it not seem to you a thing
unbecoming, and, as it were, beyond your merits.
You will defraud me of a great help if you do
not do so. Let not only you yourself, but all
also who by your testimony shall come to love
me, pray for me. Tell them that I have entreated
this, and if you think highly of us, consider that
we command what we have asked ; in any case,

I Ps. c. 3.


whether as granting a request or obeying a com-
mand, pray for us. Read the Divine Scriptures,
and you will find that the apostles themselves,
the leaders of Christ's flock, requested this from
their sons, or enjoined it on their hearers. I
certainly, since you ask it of me, will do this for
you as far as I can. He sees this who is the
Hearer of prayer, and who saw that I prayed for
you before you asked me ; but let this proof of
love be reciprocated by you. We are placed
over you ; you are the flock of God. Consider
and see that our dangers are greater than yours,
and pray for us, for this becomes both us and
you, that we may give a good account of you to
the Chief Shepherd and Head over us all, and
may escape both from the trials of this world
and its allurements, which are still more dan-
gerous, except when the peace of this world has
the effect for which the apostle has directed us
to pray, " That we may lead a quiet and peace-
able life in all godliness and honesty." "= For if
godliness and honesty be wanting, what is a
quiet and peaceful exemption from the evils of
the world but an occasion either of inviting men
to enter, or assisting men to follow, a course of
self-indulgence and perdition? Do you, then,
ask for us what we ask for you, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godhness
and honesty. Let us ask this for each other
wherever you are and wherever we are, for He
whose we are is everywhere present.

7. I have sent you also other books which
you did not ask, that I might not rigidly restrict
myself to what you asked : — my works on Faith
in Things Unseen, on Patience, on Continence, on
Providence, and a large work on Faith, Hope, and
Charity. If, while you are in Africa, you shall
read all these, either send your opinion of them
to me, or let it be sent to some place whence it
may be sent us by my lord and brother Aurelius,
though wherever you shall be we hope to have
letters from you ; and do you expect letters from
us as long as we are able. I most gratefully
received the things you sent to me, in which you
deigned to aid me both in regard to my bodily
health,^ since you desire me to be free from the
hindrance of sickness in devoting my time to
God, and in regard to my library, that I may have
the means to procure new books and repair the
old. May God recompense you, both in the pres-
ent life and in that to come, with those favours
which He has prepared for such as He has willed
you to be. I request you now to salute again
for me, as before, the pledge of peace entrusted
to you, very dear to both of us.


2 I Tim. ii. 2.

3 The reference is to some medicines sent by Darius, and men-
tioned by him in the end of his letters.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


585


FOURTH DIVISION.

[Hitherto the order followed in the arrangement of the letters has been the chronological. It being impossible
to ascertain definitely the date of composition of thirty-nine of the letters, these have been placed by the Bene-
dictine editors in the fourth division, and in it they are arranged under two principal divisions, the first
embracing some controversial letters, and the second a number of those which were occasioned either by
Augustin's interest in the welfare of individuals, or by the claims of official duty.]


LETTER CCXXXII.

TO THE PEOPLE OF MADAURA, MY LORDS WORTHY
OF PRAISE, AND BRETHREN MOST BELOVED,
AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING, IN REPLY TO THE
LETLER RECEIVED BY THE HANDS OF BROTHER
FLORENTINUS.

1. If, perchance, such a letter as I have
received was sent to me by those among you
who are Cathohc Christians, the only thing
at which I am surprised is, that it was sent in
the name of the municipality, and not in their
own name. If, however, it has pleased all or
almost all of your men of rank to send a letter
to me, I am surprised at the title " Father "
and the "salutation in the Lord" addressed
to me by you, of whom I know certainly, and
with much regret, that you regard with supersti-
tious veneration those idols against which your
temples are more easily shut than your hearts ;
or, I should rather say, those idols which are
not more truly shut up in your temples than
in your hearts.' Can it be that you are at last,
after wise reflection, seriously thinking of that
salvation which is in the Lord, in whose name
you have chosen to salute me ? For if it be not
so, I ask you, my lords worthy of all praise, and
brethren most beloved, in what have I injured,
in what have I offended your benevolence, that
you should think it right to treat me with ridi-
cule rather than with respect in the salutation
prefixed to your letter?

2. For when I read the words, "To Father
Augustin, eternal salvation in the Lord," I was
suddenly elated with such fulness of hope, that
I believed you either already converted to the
Lord Himself, and to that eternal salvation of
which He is the author, or desirous, through our
ministry, to be so converted. But when I read
the rest of the letter my heart was chilled. I
inquired, however, from the bearer of the letter,
whether you were already Christians or were de-
sirous to be so. After I learned from his answer
that you were in no way changed, I was deeply
grieved that you thought it right not only to re-
ject the name of Christ, to whom you already
see the whole world submitting, but even to in-

' Reference is here made to the laws of Honorius against idolatry,
passed in a.d. 399. See below in sec. 3.


suit His name in my person ; for I could not
think of any other Lord than Christ the Lord in
whom a bishop could be addressed by you as a
father, and if there had been any doubt as to
the meaning to be attached to your words, it
would have been removed by the closing sen-
tence of your letter, where you say plainly, " We
desire that, for many years, your lordship may
always, in the midst of your clergy, be glad in
God and His Christ." After reading and pon-
dering all these things, what could I (or, indeed,
could any man) think but that these words were
written either as the genuine expression of the
mind of the writers, or with an intention to de-
ceive ? If you write these things as the genuine
expression of your mind, who has barred your
way to the truth? Who has strewn it with
thorns? What enemy has placed masses of
rock across your path ? In fine, if you are de-
siring to come in, who has shut the door of our
places of worship against you, so that you are
unwilling to enjoy the same salvation with us in
the same Lord in whose name you salute us?
But if you write these things deceitfully and
mockingly, do you, then, in the very act of im-
posing on me the care of your affairs, presume
to insult, with the language of feigned adula-
tion, the name of Him through whom alone I
can do anything, instead of honouring Him with
the veneration which is due to Him ?

3. Be assured, dearest brethren, that it is with
inexpressible trembUng of heart on your account
that I write this letter to you, for I know how
much greater in the judgment of God must be
your guilt and your doom if I shall have said these
things to you in vain. In regard to everything
in the history of the human race which our fore-
fathers obser\'ed and handed down to us, and
not less in regard to everything connected with
the seeking and holding of true religion which
we now see and put on record for those who
come after us, the Divine Scriptures have not
been silent ; so far from this, all things come to
pass exactly according to the predictions of
Scripture. You cannot deny that you see the
Jewish people torn from the abodes of their an-
cestry, dispersed and scattered over almost every
country : now, the origin of that people, their
gradual increase, their losing of the kingdom,


586


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


their dispersion through all the world, have hap-
pened exactly as foretold. You cannot deny
that you see that the word of the Lord, and the
law coming forth from that people through Christ,
who was miraculously born among their nation,
has taken and retained possession of the faith
of all nations : now we read of all these an-
nounced beforehand as we see them. You can-
not deny that you see what we call heresies and
schisms, that is, many cut off from the root of
the Christian society, which by means of the
Apostolic Sees, and the successions of bishops, is
spread abroad in an indisputably world-wide
diffusion, claiming the name of Christians, and
as withering branches boasting of the mere ap-
pearance of being derived from the true vine :
all this has been foreseen, predicted, and de-
scribed in Scripture. You cannot deny that you
see some temples of the idols fallen into ruin
through neglect, others thrown down by violence,
others closed, and some applied to other pur-
poses ; you see the idols themselves either
broken to pieces, or burnt, or shut up, or de-
stroyed, and the same powers of this world, who
in defence of idols persecuted Christians, now
vanquished and subdued by Christians, who did
not fight for the truth but died for it, and direct-
ing their attacks and their laws against the very
idols in defence of which they put Christians to
death, and the highest dignitary of the noblest
empire laying aside his crown and kneeling as a
suppliant at the tomb of the fisherman Peter.

4. The Divine Scriptures, which have now
come into the hands of all, testified long before
that all these things would come to pass. We
rejoice that all these things have happened, with
a faith which is strong in proportion to the dis-
covery thereby made of the greatness of the
authority with which they are declared in the
sacred Scriptures. Seeing, then, that all these
things have come to pass as foretold, are we, I
ask, to suppose that the judgment of God,
which we read of in the same Scriptures as ap-
pointed to separate finally between the believing
and the unbelieving, is the only event in regard
to which the prophecy is to fail ? Yea, certain-
ly, as all these events have come, it shall also
come. Nor shall there be a man of our time
who shall be able in that day to plead anything
in defence of his unbelief. For the name of
Christ is on the lips of every man : it is invoked
by the just man in doing justice, by the perjurer
in the act of deceiving, by the king to confirm
his rule, by the soldier to nerve himself for
battle, by the husband to establish his authority,
by the wife to confess her submission, by the
father to enforce his command, by the son to
declare his obedience, by the master in support-
ing his right to govern, by the slave in perform-
ing his duty, by the humble in quickening piety.


by the proud in stimulating ambition, by the
rich man when he gives, and by the poor when
he receives an alms, by the drunkard at his
wine-cup, by the beggar at the gate, by the good
man in keeping his word, by the wicked man in
violating his promises : all frequently use the
name of Christ, the Christian with genuine rever-
ence, the Pagan with feigned respect ; and they
shall undoubtedly give to that same Being whom
they invoke an account both of the spirit and
of the language in which they repeat His name.

5. There is One invisible, from whom, as the
Creator and First Cause, all things seen by us
derive their being : He is supreme, eternal, un-
changeable, and comprehensible by none save
Himself alone. There is One by whom the
supreme Majesty utters and reveals Himself,
namely, the Word, not inferior to Him by whom
it is begotten and uttered, by which Word He
who begets it is manifested. There is One who
is holiness, the sanctifier of all that becomes
holy, who is the inseparable and undivided mutu-
al communion between this unchangeable Word
by whom that First Cause is revealed, and that
First Cause who reveals Himself by the Word
which is His equal. But who is able with per-
fectly calm and pure mind to contemplate this
whole Essence (whom I have endeavoured to
describe without giving His name, instead of
giving His name without describing Him), and
to draw blessedness from that contemplation,
and by sinking, as it were, in the rapture of such
meditation, to become oblivious of self, and to
press on to that the sight of which is beyond
our sphere of perception ; in other words, to be
clothed with immortality, and obtain that eternal
salvation which you were pleased to desire on
my behalf in your greeting? Who, I say, is able
to do this but the man who, confessing his sins,
shall have levelled with the dust all the vain ris-
ings of pride, and prostrated himself in meek-
ness and humility to receive God as his Teacher?

6. Since, therefore, it is necessary that we be
first brought down from vain self-sufficiency to
lowliness of spirit, that rising thence we may
attain to real exaltation, it was not possible that
this spirit could be produced in us by any meth-
od at once more glorious and more gentle (sub-
duing our haughtiness by persuasion instead of
violence) than that the Word by whom the Fa-
ther reveals Himself to angels, who is His Power
and Wisdom, who could not be discerned by the
human heart so long as it was blinded by love
for the things which are seen, should condescend
to assume our nature, and so to exercise and
manifest His personality when incarnate as to
make men more afraid of being elated by the
pride of man, than of being brought low after
the example of God. Therefore the Christ who
is preached throughout the whole world is not


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


587


Christ adorned with an earthly crown, nor Christ
rich in earthly treasures, nor Christ illustrious for
earthly prosperity, but Christ crucified. This
was ridiculed, at first, by whole nations of proud
men, and is still ridiculed by a remnant among
the nations, but it was the object of faith at first
to a few and now to whole nations, because when
Christ crucified was preached at that time, not-
. withstanding the ridicule of the nations, to the
few who believed, the lame received power to
walk, the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the
blind to see, and the dead were restored to life.
Thus, at length, the pride of this world was con-
vinced that, even among the things of this world,
there is nothing more powerful than the humility
of God,' so that beneath the shield of a divine
example that humility, which it is most profitable
for men to practise, might find defence against
the contemptuous assaults of pride.

7. O men of Madaura, my brethren, nay, my
fathers,- I beseech you to awake at last : this op-
portunity of writing to you God has given to me.
So far as I could, I rendered my service and
help in the business of brother Florentinus, by
whom, as God willed it, you wrote to me ; but
the business was of such a nature, that even
without my assistance it might have been easily
transacted, for almost all the men of his family,
who reside at Hippo, know Florentinus, and
deeply regret his bereavement. But the letter
was sent by you to me, that, having occasion to
reply, it might not seem presumptuous on my
part, when the opportunity was afforded me by
yourselves, to say something concerning Christ
to the worshippers of idols. But I beseech you,
if you have not taken His name in vain in that
epistle, suffer not these things which 1 write to
you to be in vain ; but if in using His name you
wished to mock me, fear Him whom the world
formerly in its pride scorned as a condemned
criminal, and whom the same world now, sub-
jected to His sway, awaits as its Judge. For the
desire of my heart for you, expressed as far as
in my power by this letter, shall witness against
you at the judgment-seat of Him who shall estab-
lish for ever those who believe in Him and con-
found the unbelieving. May the one true God
deliver you wholly from the vanity of this world,
and turn you to Himself, my lords worthy of all
praise and brethren most beloved.

LETTER CCXXXVII.

This letter was addressed to Ceretius, a bishop,
who had sent to Augustin certain apocryphal writ-
ings, on which the Spanish heretical sect called
Priscillianists ^ founded some of their doctrines.

• 1 Cor. i. 23-25.

2 Referring lo his birth at Tagaste (not far distant from Ma-
daura), and lo Madaura as the scene of the studies of his boyhood.

3 See p. 268, note 6.


Ceretius had especially directed his attention to a
hymn which they alleged to have been composed
by the Lord Jesus Christ, and given by Him to
His disciples on that night on which He was be-
trayed, when they sang an " hymn " before going
out to the Mount of Olives, The length of the
letter precludes its insertion here, but we believe
it will interest many to read the few lines of this
otherwise long- forgotten hymn, which Augustin
has here preserved. They are as follows : —

" Salvare volo et salvari volo ;
Solvere volo et solvi volo;
Ornaie volo et ornari volo ;
Generari volo ;
Cantare volo, saltate cuncti :
Plangere volo, tundite vos omnes :
Lucerna sum tibi, ille (lui me vides ;
Janua sum tibi, c[uicunt|ue me pulsas ;
Qui vides (|uod ago, tace opera mea ;
Verbo illusi cuncta et non sum illusus in totum."

The reader who ponders these extracts, and re-
members the occasion on which the hymn is
alleged to iiave been composed, will agree with
us that Augustin employs a very unnecessary ful-
ness of argument in devoting several paragraphs
to demolish the claims advanced on its behalf
as a revelation more profound and sacred than
anything contained in the canonical Scriptures.
Augustin also brings against the Priscillianists
the charge of justifying perjury when it might
be of service m conceahng their real opinions,
and quotes a line in which, as he had heard
from some who once belonged to that sect,
the lawfulness of such deceitful conduct was
taught : —

"Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli."


LETTER CCXLV.

TO POSSIDIUS," MY MOST BELOVED LORD AND VEN-
ER.^BLE BROTHER AND PARTNER IN THE SACER-
DOTAL OFFICE, AND TO THE BRETHREN WHO
ARE WITH HIM, AUGUSTIN AND THE BRETHREN
WHO ARE WITH HIM SEND GREETING IN THE
LORD.

I. It requires more consideration to decide
what to do with those who refuse to obey you,
than to discover how to show them that things
which they do are unlawful. Meanwhile, how-
ever, the letter of your Holiness has come upon
m^ when I am exceedingly pressed with busi-
ness, and the very hasty departure of the bearer
has made it necessary for me to write you in re-
ply, but has not given me time to answer as I
ought to have done in regard to the matters on
which you have consulted me. Let me say,

* Possidius, a disciple of. Augustin, spoken of in Letter CI. sec. i,
p. 412, was the Bishop of Calama who made the narrow escape re-
corded in Letter XCl. sec. 8, p. 379. He was for forty years an iii-
timate friend of Augustin, was with him at his death, and wrote his
biography.


588


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


however, in regard to ornaments of gold and
costly dress, that I would not have you come to
a precipitate decision in the way of forbidding
their use, except in the case of those who, neither
being married nor intending to marry, are bound
to consider only how they may please God. But
those who belong to the world have also to con-
sider how they may in these things please their
wives if they be husbands, their husbands if they
,/ be wives ; ' with this limitation, that it is not
' becoming even in married women to uncover |
their hair, since the apostle commands women
I to keep their heads covered.^ As to the use of I
pigments by women in colouring the face, in
order to have a ruddier or a fairer complexion,
this is a dishonest artifice, by which I am sure
that even their own husbands do not wish to be
deceived ; and it is only for their own husbands
that women ought to be permitted to adorn
themselves, according to the toleration, not the
injunction, of Scripture. For the true adorning,
especially of Christian men and women, consists
not only in the absence of all deceitful painting
of the complexion, but in the possession not of
magnificent golden ornaments or rich apparel,
but of a blameless life.

2. As for the accursed superstition of wearing
amulets (among which the ear-rings worn by
men at the top of the ear on one side are to be
reckoned), it is practised with the view not of
pleasing men, but of doing homage to devils.
But who can expect to find in Scripture express
prohibition of every form of wicked superstition,
seeing that the apostle says generally, " I would
not that ye should have fellowship with devils," ^
and again, " What concord hath Christ with
Belial?"-* unless, perchance, the fact that he
named Belial, while he forbade in general terms
fellowship with devils, leaves it open for Chris-
tians to sacrifice to Neptune, because we nowhere
read an express prohibition of the worship of
Neptune ! Meanwhile, let those unhappy peo-
ple be admonished that, if they persist in diso-
bedience to salutary precepts, they must at least
forbear from defending their impieties, and there-
by involving themselves in greater guilt. But
why should we argue at all with them if they are
afraid to take off their ear-rings, and are not
afraid to receive the body of Christ while wear-
ing the badge of the devil?

As to ordaining a man who was baptized in
the Donatist sect, I cannot take the responsi-
bility of recommending you to do this ; it is one
thing for you to do it if you are left without al-
ternative, it is another thing for me to advise
that you should do it.


' I Cor. vii. 32-34.
^ I Cor. xi. 5-13.
3 I Cor. X. 20.
•* 2 Cor. vi. 15.


LETTER CCXLVI.

TO LAMPADIUS, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.

1. On the subject of Fate and Fortune, by
which, as I perceived when I was with you, and
as I now know in a more gratifying and more
reliable way by your own letter, your mind is
seriously disturbed, I ought to write you a con-
siderable volume ; the Lord will enable me to
explain it in the manner which He knows to be
best fitted to preserve your faith. For it is no
small evil that when men embrace perverse
opinions they are not only drawn by the allure-
ment of pleasure to commit sin, but are also
turned aside to vindicate their sin rather than
seek to have it healed by acknowledging that
they have done wrong.

2. Let me, therefore, briefly remind you of
one thing bearing on the question which you
certainly know, that all laws and all means of
discipline, commendations, censures, exhorta-
tions, threatenings, rewards, punishments, and all
other things by which mankind are managed and
ruled, are utterly subverted and overthrown, and
found to be absolutely devoid of justice, unless
the will is the cause of the sins which a man
commits. How much more legitimate and right,
therefore, is it for us to reject the absurdities of
astrologers \_/naihematici'\, than to submit to the
alternative necessity of condemning and reject-
ing the laws proceeding from divine authority,
or even the means needful for governing our own
families. In this the astrologers themselves
ignore their own doctrine as to Fate and For-
tune, for when any one of them, after selling to
moneyed simpletons his silly prognostications of
Fate, calls back his thoughts from the ivory tab-
lets to the management and care of his own
house, he reproves his wife, not with words only,
but with blows, if he finds her, I do not say jesting
rather forwardly, but even looking too much out
of the window. Nevertheless, if she were to
expostulate in such a case, saying : " Why beat
i?ie ? beat Venus, rather, if you can, since it is
under that planet's influence that I am compelled
to do what you complain of," — he would cer-
tainly apply his energies not to invent some of
the absurd jargon by which he cajoles the public,
but to inflict some of the just correction by
which he mamtains his authority at home.

3. When, therefore, any one, upon being re-
proved, affirms that Fate is the cause of the
action, and insists that therefore he is not to be
blamed, because he says that under the com-
pulsion of Fate he did the action which is cen-
sured, let him come back to apply this to his
own case, let him obser\'e this principle in man-
aging his own affairs : let him not chastise a
dishonest servant ; let him not complain of a dis-
respectful son ; let him not utter threats against


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


589


a mischievous neighbour. For in doing which
of these things would he act justly, if all from
whom he suffers such wrong are impelled to
commit it by Fate, not by any fault of their own ?
If, however, from the right inherent in himself,
and the duty incumbent on him as the head of
a family towards all whom for the time he has
under his control, he exhorts them to do good,
deters them from doing evil, commands them to
obey his wijl, honours those who yield implicit
obedience, inflicts punishment on those who set
him at naught, gives thanks to those who do him
good, and hates those who are ungrateful, — shall
I wait to prove the absurdity of the astrologer's
calculations of Fate, when I find him proclaim-
ing, not by words but by deeds, things so con-
clusive against his pretensions that he seems to
destroy almost with his own hands every hair on
the heads of the .astrologers?

If your eager desire is not satisfied with these
few sentences, and demands a book which will
take longer time to read on this subject, you
must wait patiently until I get some respite from
other duties ; and you must pray to God that
He may be pleased to allow both leisure and
capacity to write, so as to set your mind at rest
on this matter. I will, however, do this with
more willing readiness, if your Charity does not
grudge to remind me of it by frequent letters,
and to show me in your reply what you think of
this letter.

LETTER CCL.

TO HIS BELOVED LORD AND VENERABLE BROTHER
AND PARTNER IN THE PRIESTLY OFFICE, AUX-
ILIUS,' AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING IN THE LORD.

I. Our son Classicianus, a man of rank, has
addressed to me a letter complaining bitterly
that he has suffered excommunication wrongfully
at the hand of your Holiness. His account of
the matter is, that he came to the church with a
small escort suitable to his official authority, and
begged of you that you would not, to the det-
riment of their own spiritual welfare, extend the
privilege of the sanctuary to men who, after vio-
lating an oath which they had taken on the
Gospel, were seeking in the house of faith itself
assistance and protection in their crime of break-
ing faith ; that thereafter the men themselves,
reflecting on the sin which they had committed,
went forth from the church, not under violent
compulsion, but of their own accord ; and that
because of this transaction your Holiness was
so displeased with him, that with the usual forms
of ecclesiastical procedure you smote him and
all his household with a sentence of excommu-
nication.

' Probably the Bishop of Nurco, named Auxilius, who was pres-
ent at the conference in Carthage in 411.


On reading this letter from him, being very
much troubled, the thoughts of my heart being
agitated like the waves of a stormy sea, I felt it im-
possible to forbear from writing to you, to beg that
if you have thoroughly examined your judgment
in this matter, and have proved it by irrefragable
reasoning or Scripture testimonies, you will have
the kindness to teach me also the grounds on
which it is just that a son should be anathema-
tized for the sin of his father, or a wife for the
sin of her husband, or a servant for the sin of his
master, or how it is just that even the child as
yet unborn should lie under an anathema, and be
debarred, even though death were imminent,
from the deliverance provided in the laver of
regeneration, if he happen to be born in a family
at the time when the whole household is under
the ban of excommunication. For this is not one
of those judgments merely affecting the body,
in which, as we read in Scripture, some despis-
ers of God were slain with all their households,
though these had not been sharers in their im-
piety. In those cases, indeed, as a warning to
the survivors, death was inflicted on bodies which,
as mortal, were destined at some time to die ;
but a spiritual judgment, founded on what is
written, " That which ye shall bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven," ^ — is binding on
souls, concerning which it is said, "As the soul
of the father is mine, so also the soul of the son
is mine : the soul that sinneth it shall die." ^

2. It may be that you have heard that other
priests of great reputation have in some cases
included the household of a transgressor in the
anathema pronounced on him ; but these could,
perchance, if they were required, give a good
reason for so doing. For my own part, although
I have been most grievously troubled by the
cruel excesses with which some men have vexed
the Church, I have never ventured to do as you
have done, for this reason, that if any one were
to challenge me to justify such an act, I could
give no satisfactory reply. But if, perchance,
the Lord has revealed to you that it may be
justly done, I by no means despise your youth and
your inexperience, as having been but recently
elevated to high office in the Church. Behold,
though far advanced in life, I am ready to learn
from one who is but young ; and notwithstand-
ing the number of years for which I have been
a bishop, I am ready to learn from one who has
not yet been a twelvemonth in the same ofiice,
if he undertakes to teach me how we can justify
our conduct, either before men or before God,
if we inflict a spiritual punishment on innocent
souls because of another person's crime, in
which they are not involved in the same way as
they are involved in the original sin of Adam,

2 Matt. xvi. 19.

3 Ezek. xviii. 14.


590


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


in whom " all have sinned." For although the
son of Classicianus derived through his father,
from our first parent, guilt which behoved to be
washed away by the sacred waters of baptism,
who hesitates for a moment to say that he is in
no way responsible for any sin which his father
may have committed, since he was born, with-
out his participation? ^\'hat shall I say of his
wife? What of so many souls in the entire
household? — of which if even one, in conse-
quence of the severity which included the whole
household in the excommunication, should per-
ish through departing from the body without
baptism, the loss thus occasioned would be an !
incomparably greater calamity than the bodily
death of an innumerable multitude, even though
they were innocent men, dragged from the courts
of the sanctuary and murdered. If, therefore,
you are able to give a good reason for this, I
trust that you will in your reply communicate it
to me, that I also may be able to do the same ;
but if you cannot, what right have you to do,
under the promptings of inconsiderate excite-
ment, an act for which, if you were asked to
give a satisfactory reason, you could find none ?

3 What I have said hitherto applies to the
case even on the supposidon that our son Clas-
sicianus has done something which might appear
to demand most righteously at your hands the
punishment of excommunication. But if the
letter which he sent to me contained the truth,
there was no reason why even he himself (even
though his household had been exempted from
the stroke) should have been so punished. As
to this, however, I do not interfere with your
Holiness ; I only beseech you to pardon him
when he asks forgiveness, if he acknowledges
his fault ; and if, on the other hand, you, upon
leflection, acknowledge that he did nothing
wrong, since in fact the right rather lay on his
side who earnestly demanded that in the house
of faith, faith should be sacredly kept, and that
it should not be broken in the place where the
smfulness of such breach of faith is taught from
day to day, do, in this event, what a man of
piety ought to do, — that is to say, if to you as
a man anything has happened such as was con-
fessed by one who was truly a man of God in
the words of the psalm, " Mine eye was discom-
posed by anger," ' fail not to cry to the Lord, as
he did, " Have pity on me, O Lord, for I am
weak," ^ so that He may stretch forth His right
hand to you, rebuking the storm of your passion,
and making your mind calm that you may see
and may perform what is just ; for, as it is writ-
ten, " the wrath of man worketh not the riglit-

I Ps. vi. 8, LXX.
^ Ps. vi. 3.


eousness of God." ^ And think not that, because ,
we are bishops, it is impossible for unjust pas-
sionate resentment to gain secretly upon us ; let
us rather remember that, because we are men, .
our life in the midst of temptation's snares is
beset with the greatest possible dangers. Cancel,
therefore, the ecclesiastical sentence which, per-
haps under the influence of unusual excitement,
you have passed ; and let the mutual love which,
even from the time when you were a catechumen,
has united him and you, be restored again ; let
strife be banished and peace invited to return,
lest this man who is your friend be lost to you,
and the devil who is your enemy rejoice over
you both. Mighty is the mercy of our God ; it
may be that His compassion shall hear even my
pray.er, imploring of Him that my sorrow on
your account may not be increased, but that
rather what I have begun to suffer may be re-
moved ; and may your youth, not despising my
old age, be encouraged and made full of joy by
His grace 1 Farewell !

[Annexed to this letter is a fragment of a let-
ter written at the same time to Classicianus ; it
is as follows : —

To restrain those who for the offence of one
soul bind a transgressor's entire household, that
is, a large number of souls, under one sentence of
excommunication, and especially to prevent any
one from departmg this life unbaptized in conse-
quence of such an anathema, — also to decide
the question whether persons ought not to be
driven forth even from a church, who seek a
refuge there in order that they may break the
faith pledged to sureties, I desire with the Lord's
help to use the necessary measures in our Coun-
cil, and, if it be necessary, to write to the Apos-
tolic See ; that, by a unanimous authoritative
decision of all, we may have the course which
ought to be followed in these cases determined
and established. One thing I say deliberately
as an unquestionable truth, that if any believer
has been wrongfully excommunicated, the sen-
tence will do harm rather to him who pronounces
it than to him who suffers this wrong. For it is
by the Holy Spirit dwelling in holy persons that
any one is loosed or bound, and He inflicts un-
merited punishment upon no one ; for by Him
the love which worketh not evil is shed abroad
in our hearts.^]

3 J as i. 20.

4 This noble vindication of Christian liberty merits quotation in
the original: — " lUud plane non temere dixerim, quod si quisquam
fidelium fuerit anathematus injuste, ei potius oberit qui faciet quam
ei qui banc patietur injuriam. Spiritus enim sanctus habitans in
Sanctis, per quern quisque ligatur aut solvltur, immeritam nulli p»-
nam ingerit: per eum quippe diffunditur charitas in cordibus nostris
quae non agit perperam."


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


591


LETTER CCLIV.

TO BENENATUS, MY MOST BLESSED LORD, MY ES-
TEEMED AND AMIABLE BROTHER AND PARTNER
IN THE PRIESTLY OFFICE, AND TO THE BRETH-
REN WHO ARE WITH HLM, AUGUSTIN AND THE
BRETHREN WHO ARE WITH HIM SEND GREETING
IN THE LORD.

The maiden ' about whom your Holiness wrote
to me is at present disposed to think, tliat if she
were of full age she would refuse every proposal
of marriage. She is, however, so young, that
even if she were disposed to marriage, she ought
not yet to be either given or betrothed to any
one. Besides this, my lord Benenatus, brother
revered and beloved, it must be remembered
tliat God takes her under guardianship in His
Church with the design of i)rotecting her against
wicked men ; placing her, therefore, under ray
care not so as that she can be given by me to
whomsoever I might choose, but so as that she
cannot be taken away against my will by any
person who would be an unsuitable partner.
The proposal which you have been pleased to
mention is one which, if she were disposed and
prepared to marry, would not displease me ; but
whether she will marry any one, — although for
my own part, I would much prefer that she car-
ried out what she now talks of, — I do not in the
meantime know, for she is at an age in which her
declaration that she wishes to be a nun is to be
received rather as the flippant utterance of one
talking heedlessly, than as the deliberate prom-
ise of one making a solemn vow. Moreover,
she has an aunt by the mother's side married to
our honourable brother Felix, with whom I have
conferred in regard to this matter, — for I nei-
ther could, nor indeed should liave avoided con-
sulting him, — and he has not been reluctant to
entertain the proposal, but has, on the contrary,
expressed his satisfaction ; but he expressed not
unreasonably his regret that nothing had been
written to him on the subject, although his rela-
tionship entitled him to be apprised of it. For,
perhaps, the mother of the maiden will also
come forward, though in the meantime she does
not make herself known, and to a mother's
wishes in regard to the giving away of a daugh-
ter, nature gives in my opinion the precedence
above all others, unless the maiden herself be

' The maiden referred to was an orphan whom a magistrate (?•?>
s/>e':tnliilis) had requested Augustin to bring up as a ward of the
Church. Four letters written by him concerning her have been pre-
served, viz. the 252d, in which he intim.ites to Fehx that he can de-
cide nothing in regard to her without consulting the friend by whom
she had been placed under his guardianshjp; the 253d, expressing to
Benenatus his surprise that he should propose for her a marriage
which would not strengthen the Church; the 254th, addressed also to
Benenatus, which we have translated as a specimen of the series; and
the 255th, in which, writing to Rusticus, a Pagan who had sought
her hand for his son, Augustin bluntly denies his request, referring him
for the grounds of the refusal to his correspondence with Benenatus.

Two Catholic bishops named Benenatus attended the conference
with the Donatists at Carthage in 412: the one who belonged to
Hospsti, in Numidia, is supposed to be Augustin's correspondent.


already old enough to have legitimately a
stronger claim to choose for herself what she
pleases. I wish your Honour also to under-
stand, that if the final and entire authority in the
matter of her marriage were committed to me,
and she herself, being of age and willing to
marry, were to entrust herself to me under God
as ray Judge to give her to whomsoever I thought
best, — I declare, and I declare the truth, in say-
ing that the proposal which you mention ])leases
me meanwhile, but because of God being my
Judge I cannot pledge myself to reject on her
behalf a better offer if it were made ; but whether
any such proposal shall at any future time be
made is wholly uncertain. Your Holiness per-
ceives, therefore, how many important consider-
ations concur to make it impossible for her to
be, in the meantime, definitely promised to any
one.

LETTER CCLXHL

TO THE EMINENTLY RELIGIOUS LADY AND HOLY
DAUGHTER SAPIDA, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING
IN THE LORD.

I. The gift prepared by the just and pious in-
dustry of your own hands, and kindly presented
by you to me, I have accepted, lest I should in-
crease the grief of one who needs, as I perceive,
much rather to be comforted by me ; especially
because you expressed yourself as esteeming it
no small consolation to you if I would wear this
tunic, which you had made for that holy servant
of God your brother, since he, having departed
from the land of the dying, is raised above the
need of the things which perish in the using. I
have, therefore, complied with your desire, and
whatever be the kind and degree of consolation
which you may feel this to yield, I have not re-
fused it to your affection for your brother.^ The
tunic which you sent I have accordingly ac-


^ The hesitation which Augustin here indicates in regard to ac-
cepting this gift may be understood from the following sentences of
one of his sermons: — " Let no one give me a present of clothing,
whether linen, or ttmic, or any other article of dress, except as a gift
to be used in common by my brethren and myself. I will accept
nothing for myself which is not to be of service to our community,
because I do not wish to have anything which does not equally be-
long to all the rest. Wherefore I request you, my brethren, to offer
me no gift of apparel which may not be worn by the others as suitably
as by me. A gift of costly raiment, for example, may sometimes be pre-
sented to me as becoming apparel for a bishop to wear; but it is not
becoming for Augustin, who is poor, and who is the son of poor par-
ents. Would you have men say that in the Church I found means to
obtain richer clothing than I could have had m my father's house, or
in the pursuit of secular employment? That would be a shame to
me! The clothing worn by me must be such that I can give it to my
brethren if they require it. I do not wish anything which would not
be suitable for a presbyter, a deacon, or a sub-deacon, for I receive
everything in common with them. If gifts of more costly apparel be
given to me, 1 shall sell them, as has been my custom hitherto, in
order that, if the dress be not available for all, the money realized by
the sale may be a common benefit. 1 sell them accordingly, and dis-
tribute their price among the poor. Wherefore, if any wish me to
wear articles of clothing presented to me as gifts, let them give such
clothing as shall not make me blush when I use it. For I assure you
that a costly dress makes me blush, because it is not in harmony with
my profession, or with such exhortations as 1 now give to you, and ill
becomes one whose frame is bent, and whose locks are whitened, as
you see, by age." — Sermon 356, Bened. edition, vol. v. col. 1389,
quoted by Tillemont, xiii. p. 222.


592


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


cepted, and have already begun to wear it before
writing this to you. Be therefore of good cheer ;
but apply yourself, I beseech you, to far better and
far greater consolations, in order that the cloud
which, through human weakness, gathers dark-
ness closely round your heart, may be dissipated
by the words of divine authority ; and, at all
times, so live that you may live with your
brother, since he has so died that he lives still.

2. It is indeed a cause for tears that your
brother, who loved you, and who honoured you
especially for your pious life, and your profession
as a consecrated virgin, is no more before your
eyes, as hitherto, going in and out in the assidu-
ous discharge of his ecclesiastical duties as a
deacon of the church of Carthage, and that you
shall no more hear from his lips the honourable
testimony which, with kindly, pious, and becom-
ing affection, he was wont to render to the holi-
ness of a sister so dear to him. When these
things are pondered, and are regretfully desired '
with all the vehemence of long-cherished affec-
tion, the heart is pierced, and, like blood from
the pierced heart, tears flow apace. But let
your heart rise heavenward, and your eyes will
cease to weep.^ The things over the loss of
which you mourn have indeed passed away, for
they were in their nature temporary, but their
loss does not involve the annihilation of that
love with which Timotheus loved [his sister]
Sapida, and loves her still : it abides in its own
treasury, and is hidden with Christ in God.
Does the raiser lose his gold when he stores it
in a secret place ? Does he not then become,
so far as lies in his power, more confidently as-
sured that the gold is in his possession when he
keeps it in some safer hiding-place, where it is
hidden even from his eyes? Earthly covet-
ousness believes that it has found a safer guard-
ianship for its loved treasures when it no longer
sees them ; and shall heavenly love sorrow as if it
had lost for ever that which it has only sent
before it to the garner of the upper world ? O
Sapida, give yourself wholly to your high calling,
and set your affections ^ on things above, where,
at the right hand of God, Christ sitteth, who
condescended for us to die, that we, though we
were dead, might live, and to secure that no
man should fear death as if it were destined to
destroy him, and that no one of those for whom
the Life died should after death be mourned for
as if he had lost life. Take to yourself these
and other similar divine consolations, before
which human sorrow may blush and flee away.

* For requiritiir the Benedictine editors suggest recitrrit, as a
conjectural emendation of the text. We propose, and adopt in the
translation, a simpler and perhaps more probable alteration, and read
reijuiruntur.

^ Sursutii sit cor et sicci erunt oculi.

3 In the Latin word sapere here employed, there is an allusion to
her name (Sapida), which he has with a view to this repeated imme-
diately before.


3. There is nothing in the sorrow of mortals
over their dearly beloved dead which merits dis-
pleasure ; but the sorrow of believers ought not
to be prolonged. If, therefore, you have been
grieved till now, let this grief suffice, and sorrow
not as do the heathen, "who have no hope."*
For when the Apostle Paul said this, he did not
prohibit sorrow altogether, but only such sorrow
as the heathen manifest who have no hope.
For even Martha and Mary, pious sisters, and
believers, wept for their brother Lazarus, of
whom they knew that he would rise again,
though they knew not that he was at that time
to be restored to life ; and the Lord Himself
wept for that same Lazarus, whom He was going
to bring back from death ; s wherein doubtless
He by His example permitted, though He did
not by any precept enjoin, the shedding of tears
over the graves even of those regarding whom
we believe that they shall rise again to the true
life. Nor is it without good reason that Scrip-
ture saith in the book of Ecclesiasticus : " Let
tears fall down over the dead, and begin to
lament as if thou hadst suffered great harm thy-
self; " but adds, a little further on, this counsel,
" and then comfort thyself for thy heaviness.
For of heaviness cometh death, and the heavi-
ness of the heart breaketh strength." ^

4. Your brother, my daughter, is alive as to
the soul, is asleep as to the body : " Shall not he
who sleeps also rise again from sleep?" 7 God,
who has already received his spirit, shall again
give back to him his body, which He did not
take away to annihilate, but only took aside to
restore. There is therefore no reason for pro-
tracted sorrow, since there is a much stronger
reason for everlasting joy. For even the mortal
part of your brother, which has been buried in the
earth, shall not be for ever lost to you ; — that part
in which he was visibly present with you, through
which also he addressed you and conversed with
you, by whicli he spoke with a voice not less thor-
oughly known to your ear than was his counte-
nance when presented to your eyes, so that,
wherever the sound of his voice was heard, even
though he was not seen, he used to be at once
recognised by you. These things are indeed
withdrawn so as to be no longer perceived by
the senses of the living, that the absence of the
dead may make surviving friends mourn for
them. But seeing that even the bodies of the
dead shall not perish (as not even a hair of the
head shall perish),^ but shall, after being laid
aside for a time, be received again never more
to be laid aside, but fixed finally in the higher
condition of existence into which they shall have

4 I Thess. iv. 12.

5 John xi. 19-35.

* Ecclus. xxxviii. 16-18.
7 Ps. xli. 8, LXX.

* Luke xxi. 18.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


593


been changed, certainly there is more cause for
thankfulness in the sure hope for an immeasur-
able eternity, than for sorrow in the transient
experience of a very short span of time. This
hope the heathen do not possess, because they
know not the Scriptures nor the power of God,'
who is able to restore what was lost, to quicken
what was dead, to renew what has been subjected
to corruption, to re-unite things which have been
severed from each other, and to preserve thence-
forward for evermore what was originally cor-
ruptible and shortlived. These things He has
promised, who has, by the fulfilment of other
promises, given our faith good ground to believe
that these also shall be fulfilled. Let your faith
often discourse now to you on these things,
because your hope shall not be disappointed,
though your love may be now for a season inter-
rupted in its exercise ; ponder these things ; in
them find more solid and abundant consolation.
For if the fact that I now wear (because he
could not) the garment which you had woven
for your brother yields some comfort to you,
how much more full and satisfactory the comfort
which you should find in considering that he
for whom this was prepared, and who then did
not require an imperishable garment, shall be
clothed with incorruption and immortality !

' Matt. xxii. 29.


LETTER CCLXIX.

TO NOBILIUS, MV MOST BLESSED AND VENERABLE
BROTHER AND PARTNER IN THE PRIESTLY
OFFICE, AUGUSTIN SENDS GREETING.

So important is the solemnity at which your
brotherly affection invites me to be present, that
my heart's desire would carry my poor body to
you, were it not that infirmity renders this impos-
sible. I might have come if it had not been
winter; I might have braved the. winter if I had
been young : for in the latter case the warmth
of youth would have borne uncomplainingly the
cold of the season ; in the former case the
warmth of summer would have met with gentle-
ness the chill languor of old age. For the pres-
ent, my lord most blessed, my holy and venerable
partner in the priestly office, I cannot undertake
in winter so long a journey, carrying with me as
I must the frigid feebleness of very many years.
I reciprocate the salutation due to your worth,
on behalf of my own welfare I ask an interest in
your prayers, and I myself beseech the Lord
God to grant that the prosperity of peace may
follow the dedication of so great an edifice to
His sacred service.^

2 This letter, probably one of the latest from the pen of Augustin,
is the last of his letters in the Benedictine edition ; the only remaining
one, the 270th, was not written by Augustin, but addressed to him
by an unknown correspondent.


INDEXES.


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Abraham's bosom, 131 and note, 192
(note).

Academics, Augustin has a leaning
towards the philosophy of the,
86 ; they doubted everything, 86,
88.

Academies, the three, 86 (note).

Actions of the patriarchs, 65.

Adam averted death by partaking of
the tree of life, 73 (note) ; the
first and second, 162 (note).

Adeodatus, Augustin's son, helps his
father in writing The Master, 134
and note ; he is baptized by Am-
brose, 134 (note).

Adversity the blessing of the New
Testament, prosperity of the Old,
76 (note) ; uses of, 159 (note).

iEneas, the wanderings of, 51.

^neid, quotations from the, 51, 53.

Affections, in darkened, lies distance
from God, 53 ; inordinate, bring
their own punishment, 51, 53,

55-
'Agetites tn rebus, their office, 123 and

note ; Evodius is one of the, 135.

Agonistic garland, Augustin receives
the, 69.

Allegories in Scripture, 92 (note) ;
Augustin was fond of, 189 (note).

Altar, Augustin begs that his mother
may be remembered at the, 141.

Alypius, bishop of Thagaste, 90
(note) ; was born at that city ;
had studied there and at Car-
■ thage with Augustin ; his love of
the circus, 94 ; was taken up as
a thief at Carthage, 96; how his
innocence was proved, 96; his
integrity in judgment and at
Milan, 97 ; his discussion with
Augustin as to celibacy, 98 ; Au-
gustin undertakes to write the
life of, 99 (note) ; retires with
Augustin into the garden, 124;
the conversion of, 128.

Ambrose, bishop of Alilan, effect of
his preaching ; his ministry, 45
and note; Augustin makes his
acquaintance, and is received by
him in a fatherly way; his elo-
quence, 88 ; distinction between
his teaching and that of Faustus,
and its influence, 88; Monica's


love for, 89, 90 ; celibacy of, 91 ;
in his study, 91 ; he expounded
the Scriptures every Lord's day,
91 ; Simplicianus succeeds him
as bishop, 116; the Song of, and
Augustin, 134 (note) ; is perse-
cuted by Justina, the mother of
Valentinian, 134 and note; mira-
cles wrought in behalf of, 134.

Amelius the Platonist, 107 (note).
"Amphitheatre of Titus, Gibbon's de-
scription of the, 95 (note).

Anaximenes of Miletus, his notions
about God, 144 and note.

Angels, source of their blessedness,
112 (note) ; God's eternity mani-
fest in their unchangeableness,
179; Augustin asserts that they
are changeable, 180; misery of,
shows their former excellence,
192.

Answer to prayer of Monica, 67, 84 ;
Augustin's faith strengthened by,

133-

Antony, an Egyptian monk, the
founder of Monachism, 122; was
born at Thebes, and visited Paul
in the desert before his death,
122 (note).

Anubis, 119.

'AnoKaTaaraaic, the doctrine unneces-
sary, 79 (note).

Apollinaris, bishop of Laodicea, 113
(note).

Approbation, Augustin's love of, 75;
especially that of Hierius, 75.

Arcesilas, teaching of, 86 (note).

'Apxv, "The Beginning," applied to
Christ, 166 (note).

Architect, God the great, 72 (note),
157; Alypius and the, 97.

Argument, Augustin's power in, 67
and note.

Arians, the Empress Justina seduced
by the, 131.

Aristotle's Ten Predicaments, 77 ;
categories of, 77 and note ; he
and Zeno prepared the way for
Neo-Platonism, 86 (note).

Arius, Victorinus wrote some books
against, 117 (note).

Arts, liberal, Augustin understood
the books relating to the, un-
aided, 77.


Asceticism, of Paul of Thebais, 122
(note) ; Manichaean, as compared
with Christian, 122 (note) ; by
embracing, we virtually deny the
right use of God's gifts, 155
(note).

Astrologers, Augustin's classification
of, 69 (note) ; belief of the Jews
in, 69 (note) ; divinations of the,
105 ; were called mathematicians,
106 (note).

Astrology, refutation of, 105, 106.

Atoms, in nature no two touch, 127
(note).

Atonement, the, 162.

Augustin, describes his infancy, 47,
etc. ; his boyhood, 49-54 ; how
he learns to speak, 49; he prays
to God that he may not be
beaten, 49 ; his fondness for play,
49; educated from his mother's
womb in the true faith, 50; he
was signed with the cross, and
seasoned with salt, 50 and note ;
his hatred of study and the Greek
language, but delight in Latin
and the empty fables of the
poets, 51 ; the reason of this,
52 ; Homer distasteful to him
because it was in Greek, 52 ; he
entreats that whatever he learnt
as a boy may be dedicated to
God, 52 ; his declamation ap-
plauded above that of his fellows,
53 ; he was more afraid of mak-
ing a mistake in grammar than
of offending God, 53; he com-
mitted petty thefts and sought
dishonest victories at play, 54;
he deplores the wickedness of
his youth, 55 ; especially that of
his sixteenth year, 56; he used to
go to Madaura to learn grammar
and rhetoric; his father, though
only a poor freeman of Thagaste,
made a great sacrifice to send
his son to Carthage, 56; he
plumes himself upon being more
licentious than his fellows ; his
mother unwisely opposes his
marrying, 57 ; he robs a neigh-
bouring pear-tree from a love of
mischief, 57 ; he is caught in the
snares of a licentious passion,

597


^


598 CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


60; his love of stage-plays, 60;
he is affected by a foul spiritual
disease, 61 ; his sacrilegious curi-
osity, 61 ; not even in church
does he suppress his desires, 6i ;
he becomes head in the school
of rhetoric, 61 ; he begins to
study eloquence ; his father dies
in his seventt-eitth year, 61 ; in his
nineteenth year he is led by the
Hortensius of Cicero to philoso-
phy, 6r ; he rejects the Sacred
Scriptures as too simple, 62 ; he
falls into the errors of the Mani-
chasans, 62, 76; his longing after
truth, 62, 63 ; Manichsean sys-
tem peculiarly enthralling to an
ardent mind like his, 63 (note);
his desire for knowledge caused
him to join the Manichaeans, 64
(note) ; his victory over inexperi-
enced persons, 67 and note ; the
nine years from his nineteenth
year, 68-78 ; he teaches rhetoric,
68 ; he has a mistress, 68 ; he
receives the Agonistic garland,
70; he is given to divination, 70;
his friend's illness and death, 70;
his grief, 70, 71; he leaves Tha-
gaste and goes to Carthage, 72 ;
he writes books on the " Fair
and Fit," 74 ; he dedicates them
to Hierius; he longs for his com-
mendation, 74, 75 ; he turns his
attention to the nature of the
mind, 75; in what he conceived
the chief good to consist, 75; he
calls it a Monad, and the chief
evil a Duad, 76 ; when scarce
twenty, he understood Aristotle's
Ten Predicaments, 77 ; his ready
understanding of the liberal arts,
77, and sciences, 77 ; his wit a
snare to him, "j"] ; thetzuenty-nintk
year of his age, 79-S8 ; he begins
to appreciate the knowledge of
God above secular learning, 81 ;
he points out the fallacy of the
Manichsean belief as to the Para-
clete, 81 (note); he withdraws
from the errors of the Mani-
chasans, being remarkably aided
by God, 83 ; he leaves Carthage
to go to Rome, 84 ; he deceives
his mother, 84; he is attacked
by fever, 84; is restored, 85 ; be-
comes one of the " elect " of the
Manichasans, 86 ; his view of
Arcesilas' philosophy, 86 (note) ;
his erroneous views as to Chris-
tianity, 86 ; he goes to Milan to
teach rhetoric, and there makes
the acquaintance of Ambrose,
88 ; he resolves to abandon the
Manichasans and become a cate-
chumen, 88 ; liis thirtieth year,
89-101 ; his mother follows him
over the sea, 89; he recognises
the falsity of his old opinions,
92 ; he describes how Alypius,
led into the circus by his fellow-
students, becomes fascinated by
the fights held there, 95, 96; he
becomes inflamed with the love
of wisdom, 98 ; he is troubled in
mind, 98, 100; he is prevented


from marrying by Alypius, 98 ;
he undertakes to write the life
of Alypius, 99 (note); is urged
by his mother to marry, and a
maiden sought for him, 99 ; he
sends his mistress back to Africa,
but takes another, 100; in his
thirty-first year he recalls the be-
ginning of his youth, 102-115;
his conception of God, 102 and
note, 103, 104 ; his mind is
severely exercised as to the origin
of evil, 106; is stimulated to
wisdom by the Hortensius of Ci-
cero, 107 (note), 123; his concep-
tion of Christ, 112; he rejoices
that he proceeded from Plato to
the Scriptures, and not the re-
verse, 114; he found in the latter
what was not in the former, 1 14;
he consults Simplicianus as to
the renewing of his mind, 116;
he describes the thirty-second year
of his age, 116, 128; he is still
held by the love of women, 116;
he burns to imitate Victorinus,
120; his review of his life, 123;
he retires with Alypius into the
garden, 124; his trouble of spirit,
125; he refutes the Manichiean
notion of two kinds of minds,
125, 126; was still enthralled by
his old loves, 126; he retires into
solitude to meditate, and hears
a voice saying, " Take up and
read," 127; his reason forgiving
up his professorship, 129, 130
(note) ; his lungs become af-
fected, 130; he retires to the
villa of his friend Verecundus,
130; he finally gives up the pro-
fessorship, 131 ; he found in re-
tirement preparation for future
work, 131 (note); effect of the
Psalms on him, especially the
fourth, 131, 132 ; his anger
against the Manichasans, 132 ;
in his thirty-fourth year he writes
his book The Master, a dialogue
between him and his son, 133;
he suffers from toothache, but
loses it in answer to prayer, 133;
he attributes all that he was to
his mother's tears, 135 (note);
his last conversation with his
mother, 137 ; his grief at her
death, 139-140; he is troubled
that he was so long without God,
152; effect of church nmsic on
him, 156; object and use of his
Confessions, 143, 163; he en-
treats of God that he may be led
to the truth through the Scrip-
tures, 163, 164; he designates
Eraclius as his successor, 163;
he prays to be taught by God,
170 ; his old notions as to matter,
177; his longings for the heav-
enly Jerusalem, 182 ; was ad-
dicted to the allegorical explana-
tion of Scripture, 190.
Authority, and morals, 65 ; of the
holy writings, 93 and note.

Bacon, the sentiments of, concerning
friendship, 72 (note).


Baptism, Augustin being seized with
illness, prays for ; on his recov-
ery it was postponed, 50 ; in
Augustin's days often deferred
till death approached, 50 (note) ;
wrongly deferred, 50 (note) ; guilt
after, greater than before, 50 and
note ; those who attended stage-
plays were excluded from, by the
Fathers, 60 (note); that of Ne-
bridius took place when he was
ill and unconscious, 70; candi-
dates for, seasoned with salt, 89
(note) ; martyrdom described as
a second, 90 (note) ; the washing
of, called illumination, 118 (note),
194 ; renunciation of Satan be-
fore, 118 (note); customs of the
Eastern Churches at, 119 (note) ;
being the sacrament of initiation,
is not so profitable without the
Lord's Supper, 199 (note); gives
life. Lord's Supper maintains it,
199 ; the entrance into the
Church, 199 (note).

i<'^3 and H Jp distinguished, 1 1 5 (note).

Basilica, the Portian, 134 and note.
Bath, soothing powers of the, 139.
Bauto, the consul at Milan, 94 (note).
Beasts of the field, symbolical of
those given to carnal pleasures,

80 (note), 81 ; clean and unclean,
explanation of the division of,
91 (note).

Beautiful, love of the, 74.

Beauty of God, 46, 63.

Beggar, the joyous, 94.

Beginning, Christ the, of all things ;
the Word the, 166; the words,
" In the beginning," interpreted
differently, 183, 1S7.

Bible, literary merit of the, 62 (note),

81 (note); the Psalms "a Bible
in little," 131 (note).

Birds of the air symbolical of pride,

80 (note).
Blessedness, true, to be attained only

by adhering to God, 190 (note).
Blind man, the, cured, 134; his vow,

134 (note).
Blindness, Augustin compares sin to,

192 (note).
Body, soul, and spirit, in (note) ; as

distinct from soul, in, 112; the

mind commands the, 125.
Books, the Manichaean, 83.
Boyhood, Augustin's fondness for

play in, 50; he thanks God for

his, 54.

Caesar, Christ paid tribute to, 80.

Calling upon God, 45.

Carthage, Augustin sent by his father
to pursue his studies at, 56, 60 ;
he leaves that city on account of
the violent habits of the students''
there, 84.

Cassiacum, Verecundus' villa at, 130.

Catechumens, seasoned with salt, 50
and note, 89 (note) ; or " Hear-
ers " of the Manichaeans, their
privileges, 66 (note) ; Augustin
resolves to become one in the
Catholic Church, 88; customs
of, at baptism, 119 (note) ; before
baptism, 197 (note) ; when ready


CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 599


for, they were termed Competen-
tes, 197 (note).

Categories of Aristotle maybe classed
under two heads, 77 and note.

Catiline loved not his villanies, but
had a motive for committing
them, 58.

Cavils, Manichaean, 167, 174.

Celibacy, discussion of Augustin and
Alypius concerning, 98, 99.

Chief evil, nature of the, 76.

Chief good, Augustin's conception of
the, 75; Varro gives 288 differ-
ent opinions as regards the, 75
(note); God the, 194, 151 (note).

Childhood, the sins of, found in man-
hood ; an emblem of humility, 54.

Christ, the fulness of the Godhead is
in, 62 ; perfect human sympathy
of, 71 (note) ; humiliation of, for
us, 74 and note ; our very life, 74 ;
paid tribute to Csesar, 80; hu-
manity of, 85 (note), 108; Mani-
chrean belief as to the human
birth of, 87 (note) ; fulness of,
108; the Mediator, 112, 114
(note); a perfect man, 113; the
two natures of, 113 (note), 161
and note, 162; as God, the coun-
try to which we go, as man, the
way by which we go, 114; healing
in Him alone, 114; the Victor and
Victim, Priest and Sacrifice, 162 ;
the Beginning, 166.

Christian, certainty of the faith of
the, as compared with the un-
certainty of the teaching of the
philosophers, 86 (note) ; the al-
most and altogether, 121 (note).

Christianity gives the golden key to
happiness, 75 (note) ; Augustin's
erroneous views as to, 86 (note).

Church, the, history of, creation type
of the, 194; music of, its effect
on Augustin, 156.

Circensian games, Alypius' love of
the, 94 ; how cured of it, 95 ; he
becomes Augustin's pupil, and is
involved in the same superstition
as his friend, 95 ; Augustin be-
comes carried away by the love
of the, 95 ; they were put a stop
to by the sacrifice of Telemachus
the monk, 96 (note).

Cicero's writings as compared with
the Word of God, 81 (note) ; his
opinion concerning Arcesilas'
teaching, 86 (note); Augustin
studies his Hortensiics, 61, and
is stimulated to wisdom thereby,
107 (note), 123, 124.

Circus, games of the, 95 and note,
158 (note).

Classics, highly esteemed in Augus-
tin's day, 51 ; objections to the
study of the, 53.

Commandments, modes of dividing
the Ten, 65 and note.

Community, Augustin and his friends

propose to establish a, 99, 100.
Companions, influence of bad, 59.
Conifetentes, name given to catechu-
mens when ready for baptism, 197.
Conception of Christ, Augustin's,
112; of God, 102 and note, 103,
104.


Confession to God, Augustin urges
the duty of, 79; is piety. Si ; use
of Augustin's, 143 ; object of
his, 163.

Confirmation sometimes called a sac-
rament by the Fathers, 1 18 (note).

Constantine was not baptized till the
end of his life, 50 (note) ; his
controversy with Sylvester, 69
(note).

Constantius enacted laws against
Paganism, 120.

Contemplation, the Christian ascends
the mount of, by faith, 181 (note);
the reward of practical duties,
197 ; of things eternal, 197 (note).

Continency, false and seducing, of the
Manichceans, 95 and note ; beau-
ty of, 126; imposed on us, 153.

Coiitinentia and Sustineittia, differ-
ence between, 153 (note).

Conversion, Monica's dream of her
son's, 66; of Victorinus, 119; of
Paul, 120 and note, 138 (note);
of Alypius, 128.

Converts, how received in Justin
Martyr's time, iiS (note).

Corporeal brightness, Augustin
thought of God as a, 71 (note),
77 ; of the Manichasans, 109
(note) ; forms, Augustin's mind
ranges through, 75, 76, but later
on he repudiates the notion of a,
92.

Corruption, the five regions of, 103.

Courtiers, history of the two, 122-123.

Creasti, explanation of, 115.

Creation praises God, 79, no; har-
mony of the, iio-iii; testifies
to a Creator, 165; time began
from the, not it from time, 1S8
(note) ; doctrine of the Trinity
emblemized in the, 191 ; history
of the, a type of the Church,
194.

Creator, true joy to be found only m
the, 58; putting the creature
above the, 81 ; God the, 165.

Credulity of the Manichaeans, 93
(note).

Cross of Christ symbolized, 52 (note).

Curds, the mountain of, 130 and note.

Curiosity, a help to learning, 52;
affects a desire for knowledge,
58; Augustin's sacrilegious, 61;
fishes of the sea symbolical of,
80 (note); evil of, to Augustin,
95 ; a snare to Alypius, 99 ;
temptation of, stimulated by the
lust of the eyes, 157, 158; for
experiment's sake, 158 ; manifold
temptations of, 158.

Curtain of Ps. civ. 2, rendered " skin,"
195 (note).

Custom, force of, 52; true inner
righteousness doth not judge ac-
cording to, 64 ; versus law, 84 ;
conforming to, 90 (note) ; the
weight of carnal, in; power of,
121.

Customs, human, to be obeyed, 65.

Cyprian, oratory in memory of, 84.

Danae, 52.

Daniel praying in captivity, 181 (note).

Darkness and light, 103 (note).


Dead, prayers for the, 90 (note), 139,
141 (note); festivals in honour
of the, 90 ; origin of the custom,
90 (note).

Death, origin of the law of, 73 (note) ;
Augustin says Adam was able to
avert it by partaking of the tree
of life, 73 (note).

Death-bed baptism of Nebridius, 70.

Declamation, Augustin's, applauded
above that of his fellow-students,

53- . , .

" Deep, the great," Augustm s mter-

pretation of the, 191 (note), 194

(note).

Dido, 51.

Distentio, distraction, 174 and notes.

Divination, the soothsayers used sac-
rifices in their, 68 ; the mathe-
maticians did not do so, 69 ;
Augustin's obstinate belief in,
but his friend Nebridius scoffs
at it, 70; afterwards influenced
by Augustin, he too believes in
it, 70; of the astrologers, 105, 106.

Divinity of Christ, 113 (note).

Docetae, belief of the, 113 (note).

Donatism, how developed in Augus-
tin's time, 90 (note) ; spiritual
pride of the Donatists, 162
(note).

Drachma, the woman and the, 119,
149.

Dream of Monica concerning her
son's conversion, 66; temptation
in, 154; Augustin's view of, 154
(note) ; Thorwaldsen's, result of,
154 (note).

Drunkenness forbidden by God, 154,

155-
Duad, Monad and, 76 and note; how

this dualistic belief affected the

Manichaean notion of Christ, 87

(note).

Dust, the mathematicians drew their

figures in, 77 (note).

Ear, the delights of the, 156.

Earth, beauty of the, 144 (note).

East, turning to the, at baptism, 119
(note).

Education, Augustin disapproves of
the mode of, in his day, 52.

Egyptians, Faustus' objection to the
spoiling of the, 66 (note); gold
of the, belongs to God, 109 and
note.

" Elect " of the Manichaeans, 66 and
note, 68, 83 (note) ; Augustin
becomes one of the, 86; divine
substance in the, 103, 104, 155
(note).

Eloquence, wit and, baits to draw
man to the Word, 45 (note) ; Au-
gustin begins to study, 61 ; Greek
and Latin, Hierius' knowledge
of, 75; of Faustus, 82, S3; of
Ambrose, 88.

'Evdwf^ETor, " in the bosom of the
Father," 108 (note), 166 (note).

Enemies of God, who are the, 79
(note).

Epicureanism, 100; popularity of,
100 (note).

Eraclius, Augustin designates, as his
successor, 163 (note).


6oo CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Esau, Jacob and, illustrations con-
cerning, 106; his longing after
the Egyptian food, loS and note.

Eternal, on comprehending the, 167,
175 (note).

Eternity, of God, 48, 109 and note;
relation of, to the mutable crea-
ture, 179; time has no relation
to, 167 ; God's to-day is, 16S ;
reason leads us to the necessity
of a belief in, 173 (note) ; has no
succession, 175 (note).

Eucharist, oblations for the, 85 (note) ;
regeneration necessary before the
reception of the, iiS (note), 138
(note) ; called by the ancients
"the sacrament of perfection;"
maintains life which baptism
gives, 200; Augustin's interpre-
tation of the, 200 (note).

EunucJnis, Terence's, 53 and note.

Eversores, or subverters, 61 and note.

Evil, whence is ? — see ManicIuTans ;
Augustin's notions concerning,
64 (note) ; the chief, Augustin
calls a Duad, 76 ; Manichrean
doctrine of, S3 (note), 86, 87 ;
the cause of, 103, 104; origin of,
104-106; not a substance, no,
III; Augustin's notion of, no
(note).

Evil habits bind like iron, 120 and
note, 121 ; conviction powerless
against, 121.

Evodius, became associated with Au-
gustin, 135; he leads the singing
at Monica's funeral, 139; Augus-
tin's endeavours to unravel his
difficulties as to the spirits in
prison, 164 (note).

Excess, by grace we avoid, 155.

Eyes, the lust of the, 157, 158.

Fables, Manichaean, 83 and note ; old
wives', 85 ; the use of, common
with mediaeval writers, 164 (note).

*' Fair and Fit," Augustin's book as
to the, 74, 76.

Faith, preaching leads to, 45; the
Manichasans exalted reason at
the expense of, 63 (note) ; the
rule of, 67, 128; reason and, 93
and note ; and sight, 201 (note).

Fame, the emptiness of popular, 68.

Fasting enjoined by Justin Martyr as
a preparation for baptism, 118
(note), 154 (note).

Faustus, a bishop of the Manichaeans,
goes to Carthage, 80; eloquence
of, 82, 83 ; his knowledge super-
ficial, 82, 83 ; distinction between
his teaching and that of Ambrose,
88.

Fear, "pure," 69 (note); joy in pro-
portion to past, 119, 120.

Fever, Nebridius falls sick of a, and
dies, 70; Augustin is attacked
by, 84.

Fichte's strange idea as to St. John's
teaching concerning the Word,
185 (note).

Fictions, Augustin's love of, 52, 53;
evils of, 52, 53; results of, to
Augustin, 61 ; Manichaean, 63 ;
Augustin's reply to Faustus as
to Manichaean, 93 (note).


Fideles, the, 89.

Fig-tree, Manichaean delusions con-
cerning, 66.

Firmament, allegorical explanation
of the, 195, 196, 199 (note).

Firminius, a friend of Augustin's,
105; studies the constellations,
and relates a story to disprove
astrology, 105, 106.

Fish of the sea, symbolical interpre-
tation of the, 80 (note), 200 (note).

Flesh, the Word made, 107 and note,
108, 1 1 2-1 13, 162; as distinct
from body, 164 (note).

Forgetfulness the privation of mem-
ory, 148, 149.

Fortunatus, Augustin's controversy
with, 103.

Free-will, 76 and note ; the cause of
evil, 103, 104; absence of, the
punishment of former sin, 125;
the Pelagians held that through
the power of, they could attain
perfection, 140 (note).

Friendship, of the world enmity to
God, 51; false, 59, 70; between
Augustin and Nebridius, 70; of
Pylades and Orestes, 71 ; Lord
Bacon's sentiments as to, 72
(note).

Fruit, distinction between the " gift "
and the, 203, 204; of the earth
allegorized, 203.

Funerals, Roman customs at, 139
(note); rites at Monica's, 139
and note.

Gassendi vitalized Epicureanism, 100
(note).

Genesis, what Moses meant in the
book of, 186; repetition of the
allegorical interpretation of, 206.

Gibbon, his description of the am-
phitheatre of Titus, 95 (note) ;
his charge of Platonism against
Christianity, 107 (note).

Gifts, diversities of, given by the
Spirit, 197 ; distinction between
the " gift " and the " fruit," 203-
204.

Gnostic opinion as to the origin of
the world, 205.

God, worthy of praise, 45, 79; man
desires to praise Him, His power
and wisdom, 45 ; true rest in Him
only, 45, 59, 74, 161 ; knowledge
of, 45; Augustin longs for that
knowledge, 158 (note); omni-
presence of, 79 ; attributes of, 45-
46, 58; naught can contain, 46;
He iilleth all things, 46; by filling
them He created them, 72; ma-
jesty of, 46 and note; unchange-
ableness of, 46, 63, 73, 79 (note),
116; beauty of, 46, 63; always
working, yet always at rest, 46,
207 ; imperfect man cannot com-
prehend the perfect, 46 (note) ;
providence of, 47 ; eternal, 48,
109 and note ; is Truth, 62, 72,
81, 109 and note, 151, 152, 187
and note ; sought wrongly not to
be found, 63 ; His care of us, 67 ;
held by the Manichaeans to be
an unmeasured light, 68 (note) ;
the true light, 76 (note), 109 and


note, 157; the source of light,
112 (note) ; the fountain of light,
161 ; the architect and artificer
of His Church, 72 (note) ; wounds
only to heal, 72 (note); should
be our highest love, 72 ; all good
is from, 74 ; unity of, 77 ; our
supreme good, 78, 151 (note); to
be preferred to learning, 87; Au-
gustin's conception of, 102 and
note, 103, 104; incomprehensible,
102 ; incorruptibility of, 103 and
note, 104 ; never suffers evil, 104 ;
the Chief Good, 105; subjection
to, our only safety, 107 ; the
Word, 108 ; " I AM that I AM,"
109, no (note) ; hope and joy in
Him alone, 142, 153; searchings
after, 144-145; the Creator, 165;
the Immutable Light of wisdom,
190 (note) ; the mercy of, in con-
veying His truth by symbols,

199-
Gods, why the poets attributed

wickedness to the, 52 ; Homer

transfers things human to the,

52-

Gold of Egypt, 109 and note.

Good, the Manichaeans taught that
good and evil were primeval, and
had independent existence, 64
(note); all, is from God, 74;
Augustin's conception of the
chief, 75, 105; God our Su-
preme, 78, 151, 190 (note); and
evil illustrated, no (note) ; God
saw that everything in creation
was, 204, 205.

Grace, the fulfilment of love, 183
(note).

Grammar, the Christians forbidden
by Julian to teach, 120.

Grammar schools, entrances of, cov-
ered with veils, 51 and note.

Great, joy in the conversion of the,
120 and note; influence of the,
120 (note).

Greek, Augustin's dislike to, 51 ; the
reason of his dislike, 51, 52; his
knowledge of, 107 (note) ; elo-
quence, Hierius' knowledge of,

74, 75-
Greeks, led to Christ by philosophy,

107 (note).

Grief, Augustin's, at the death of his

friend, 70-71; at his mother's

death, 139, 140; effect of time

on, 72; silence a good consoler

in, 127 (note); at the death of

friends natural, 139 (note).

Habits, evil, bind like iron, 120
and note ; conviction powerless
against, 121.

Happiness, Christianity gives the
golden key to, 75 (note) ; knowl-
edge of God the highest, 81;
the Word of God a fount of. Si
(note) ; whence comes true, 124;
consummation of, in heaven only,
131 (note) ; not joy merely, but
joy in God, 152.

Happy life, longings after the, 160-
161 ; to be found in God only,
151.

Harts of the forests, 164 and note.


CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 6oi


" Hearers " or catechumens, privi-
leges of the, 66 (note) ; why Au-
gustin never went beyond the
rank of a, 6S (note) ; did not
practise abstinence, 155 (note).

Heart, the law written on the, 74
(note) ; humility exalts the, 74
(note); lifting up of the, 192
(note); of man, Augustin inter-
prets the "deep" to mean, 194
(note).

Heaven, rest in, 45 (note), 207 ; the
double, 176; the third, 176; the
felicity of, 45 (note) ; fulness of
reward in, 76 (note) ; consumma-
tion of happiness only in, 131
(note ) ; a prepared place for pre-
pared people, 192 (note) ; and
earth shall pass away, but not
the Word, 196; the peace of,
207.

Heaven and earth, different inter-
pretations of, 182, 1S3.

Heavenly bodies, motions of the, not
time, 171, 172.

Hebrew, Augustin had no knowledge
of, 164, 165 and note.

Hedonism and Epicureanism, 100
(note).

Hedonists, their " good " is their own
pleasure, 75 (note).

Helpidius, disputes with the Mani-
chaeans, 87.

Heresies confirm the truth, 113.

Hierius, a native of Syria, an orator
of Rome ; Augustin dedicates
his books on the " Fair and Fit "
to, 74.

Hippocrates, Vindiclanus early un-
derstood, 70.

Holy Cit}', light, life, and joy of the,
is in God, 191 (note).

Holy Spirit, why spoken of in Gene-
sis as "borne over," 191, 192;
brings us to God, 192.

Homer, distasteful to Augustin be-
cause it was Greek, 51 ; fictions
of, 52.

Honoratus, a friend of Augustin, at
one time a Manichasan, 88 (note).

Hope, we are saved and made happy
by, 76 (note) ; all, is in the mer-
cy of God, 153.

Hope and joy in God alone, 142.

Horace, quotation from, 71.

Horoscope-casters, Vindicianus begs
Augustin to throw away the
books of the, 69.

Hortensiiis, Cicero's, 52 ; Augustin's
study of, 61 ; he is stimulated to
wisdom thereby, 107 (note) 123,
124.

Hour-glasses of Augustin's time, 163.

Human life a distraction, 174.

Humanity of Christ, 71 (note), 85
(note), 113 (note); Augustin
thinks it profane to believe in
the, 87 ; Manichseans' belief as to
the, 87 (note).

Humiliation of Christ for us, 74; to
draw us to Himself, 74 (note).

Humility, childhood the emblem of,
54; exalts the heart, 74 (note);
the holy, of Scripture, 93.

Hyle, or matter, the evil principle of
the Manichaeans, 76 (note).


^IxQvq, emblem of the, 200 (note).

Ignorance, danger of, 47 (note).

Illumination, the washing of baptism,
I iS (note), 194 (note), 19S (note).

Image of God, man created in the,
91 (note).

Importunity, Monica's, to the bishop,
67.

Incarnation of Christ, Manichaeans'
notion of the, 87 (note) ; a mys-
tery to Porphyry, 161 (note).

Infancy, sin in, 47 (note) ; wayward-
ness in, 47, 48 ; prone to sin, 48,
49 ; its innocence is not in its
will, but in its, weakness, 48.

Injury man does himself by sin, 79
(notes).

Intuitionists, their "good" lies in
following the dictates of con-
science, 75 (note).

Jacob and Esau, illustration concern-
ing, 166.

Jerome, his knowledge of Hebrew,
165 (note).

Jerusalem, Augustin longs for the
heavenly, 1S2 and note; the
mother of us all, 192 (note).

Jews, the, their influence on Neo-Pla-
tonism, 118 (note); Julian the
Apostate favoured the, and en-
couraged them to rebuild the
temple, 120 (note).

Jove, 52.

Joy, true, to be found in the Creator
only, 58 ; true and false, 94 ;
source of true, 94, 151 ; in pro-
portion to past fear, 119; in the
conversion of the great, 120
(note) ; and hope, in God alone,
_ 142.

Julian, the Emperor, forbade the
Christians to teach grammar
and oratory, 120; he favoured
Paganism, the Donatists, and
the Jews, 120.

Justice and mercy, illustration of
God's, 133 (note).

Justin Martyr, 107 (note) ; how con-
verts were received in his time,
118 (note).

Justina, persecution of Ambrose by,
134 and note.

njp and N'^3 distinguished, 115
(note).

Knowledge of God, 45 ; the highest
happiness, 81 ; Augustin's great
aim was to attain, 158 (note) ;
wonderful, 174, 175.

Knowledge, human, more sought
than divine, 53, 54 ; curiosity af-
fects a desire for, 58 ; Augustin's
desire for, made him join the
Manichccans, 64 (note) ; has to
do with action, 197 (note) ; not
to be an end, 15S; received by
sight, 201 ; difference between
that and divine, 207.

Latin, Augustin's love of, 51, 52.

Law of God, the same in itself, but
different in application, 64 ; of
development in Scripture, 64 ;
of death, 73 (note) ; written on
the heart (lex occulta), 74 (note) ;


and custom, 84 ; Levitical, con-
cerning the division of beasts
into clean and unclean, 91 (note) ;
natural and moral, 196 (note).

Laws, human, to be obeyed, 65 ; God
to be obeyed in, or contrary to
laws, 65, 66 and note.

Learning, rudiments of, distasteful to
Augustin, 51 ; curiosity a help
to, 52 ; vanity of, 53 ; knowledge
of God to be appreciated above
secular, 81 ; to be preferred to
money, and God to it, 87.

Lentile, the Egyptian food, loS (note).

Liberal arts and sciences, 68, 77, 80;
Faustus had no knowledge of
the, 82 ; Augustin sees that a
knowledge of, does not lead to
God, 158 (note).

Licentius' notion concerning truth,
123 (note).

Life, seeking for the blessed, 74;
Christ our very, 74 ; longing
after the blessed, 150-152; the
misery of human, 153.

Light, the Manichseans held God to
be an unmeasured, 68 (note) ;
God the true, 76 and note, 157;
and darkness, 103 (note) ; God
the unchangeable, 109 and note,
112; God the source of, 112
(note) ; that seen by Tobias, 157 ;
that seen by Isaac and by Jacob,
157 ; the fountain of, 161 ; what
Augustin understood by the
Word in Genesis i. 3, 191.

Likeness to God, our, 91 (note).

Little things, the power of, 135 (note),

, 136-

Koyoq, the, 107 (note), 113, 166.

Lord's Supper. See Eticharist.

Love, pure, 69 (note) ; God should
be our highest, 72; love not to
be condemned, but love in God
is to be preferred, 73 ; of the
beautiful, 74; of the world, 79;
what it is to love God, 144; of
praise, 159, 160 (note) ; grace the
fulfilment of, 182 (note) ; suprem-
acy of the law of, 188 (note).

Loving God purely, 69 and note.

Lust of the flesh, the, continency
from, 153; analogy between, and
one of our Lord's temptations,
153 (note); eating and drinking
a, 154, 155; of the eyes, curi-
osity stimulated by the, 157, 158;
difference between it and love,
153 (note).

Luther's Bible in Little, 131 (note).

Madaura, formerly an episcopal city,
now a village — Augustin learnt
grammer and rhetoric there, 56.

Man, moved by God to delight in
praising Him, 45; his existence
from God, 45, 46; imperfect,
cannot comprehend the perfect,
46 (note) ; made in God's image,
64,91 (note); a great deep, 75;
injures himself, not God, by sin,
79 (notes) ; Christ as, 108; a triad,
III; the trichotomy of, m
(note), 113 (note) ; the Mediator
between God and, 112 ; Christ a
perfect, 113, 114 (note) ; knoweth


6o2 CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


not himself, 144; God does not
need, although He created him,
190, 191 and note; faint signs of
the Trinity in, 193 and note;
how Augustin interprets the
dominion of, over the beasts,
200 ; is renewed in the knowl-
edge of God after His image,
201 ; knoweth nothing but by
the Spirit of God, 205; on the
creation of, 205 ; difference be-
tween his knowledge and God's,
207.
Manichaeans, their materialistic views
of God, 46 (note), 68 (note), 76,
86 ; Augustin falls into the errors
of the, 62 ; the Scriptures ob-
scured to their mocking spirit,

62 (note), 67 (note), 88 (note) ;
Augustin later on accused them
of professing to believe in the
New Testament to entrap the
unwary, 62 (note), 83 (note) ; their
system peculiarly enthralling to
an ardent mind like Augustin's,

63 (note) ; kindred in many ways
to modern Rationalism, 63 (note) ;
Augustin attacks their notions
concerning evil, 63; cavillings of
the, 64, 87, 93, 167, 174, their
doctrine concerning good and
evil, 64 (note), 76 (note), 83
(note) ; their delusions concern-
ing the fig-tree, 66; their reason
for refusing to give bread to any
but their own sect, 66 and note,
68; they held that God was an
unmeasured light, 68 (note) ; their
notion concerning the soul, 76
(note) ; when opposed, they pre-
tended the Scriptures had been
corrupted, 81 (note), 87 and note ;
their belief as to the humanity
of Christ, 87 (note) ; their false
and seducing continency, 95 and
note ; Romanianus falls into the
errors of, 100 (note) ; delusions
of the, 103 (note) ; Augustin's
anger against the, 132; Augus-
tin refutes their opinions as to
the origin of the world, 205.

Manichaianism, cannot satisfy, 63; a
strange mixture of the pensive
philosophy of Persia with Gnos-
ticism and Christianity, 64 (note).

Manichaius asserted that the Holy
Ghost was personally resident in
him, 81; asceticism of his fol-
lowers, 122 (note).

Manna, meaning of, 48 and note.

Marriage, Augustin desires, but his
parents oppose it, 57.

Mars, 117.

Martyrdom, reason for exalting, 90
(note) ; described as a second
baptism, 90 (note).

Martyrs, honour done to the, 90 and
notes ; two of the, buried in the
Ambrosian Basilica, 134 and
note.

Materialists, the, seek the common
"good" of all, 75 (note).

Mathematicians used no sacrifices in
their divinations, 69; they drew
their figures in dust or sand, 77
(note), 106 (note).


Matter, or Hyle, the evil principle
according to Faustus, 76 (note) ;
the Platonic theory concerning,
76 (note) ; God did not create
the world from, but by His word,
165; the world not created out
of, but by God's word, 165; Au-
gustin's old notion as to, 177 ;
not created out of God's sub-
stance, 177; Augustin discusses
whether it was from eternity or
was made by God, 184.

Medea, 63.

Mediator, Christ the, 112, 114 (note) ;
God and man, 162 and note; or
tnedhis, 162.

Memory, nature and power of, 145,
149; privation of, is forgetful-
ness, 149; God cannot be at-
tained unto by the power of;
possessed by beasts and birds,
149; manifoldness of, 149, 150,
i6i ; God dwells in the, 152.

Mercy, and misery, 47 (note), 60; of
God, all hope is in the, 153.

Milan, Augustin is sent to teach
rhetoric at, 87, 88 ; he recites his
panegyric to the Emperor at, 94
(note) ; Church hymns and
psalms first introduced at, 134.

Mind, Augustin turns his attention
to the nature of the, 75; com-
mands the body, 125; Augustin
refutes the Manichasan notion of
two kinds of, 125; four perturba-
tions of the, 148; time the im-
pression of things on the ; future
and past things in relation to
the, 173.

Minerva, 117.

Ministers, how they should work, 200.

Miracles, the cessation of, and its
probable result, 69 (note), 106
(note) ; wrought in behalf of
Ambrose, 134 and note; neces-
sary to some ignorant men, 204 ;
cessation of, 204 (note).

Misery of the angels and their former
excellence, 192.

Moderation in eating and drinking,

154-

Monachism, Antony the founder of,
122 and note.

Monad and Duad, 76 and notes.

Money, learning to be preferred to,
87.

Monica, the mother of Augustin, her
obedience to her husband, 50;
her dream concerning her son's
conversion, 66; the wooden rule
therein symbolical of the rule of
faith, 66; her anxiety about her
son ; she goes to consult a cer-
tain bishop, 67 ; how her prayers
for her son were answered, 67,
84 ; her son deceives her, 84 ;
her sorrow at his deception, 84;
she never failed to make obla-
tions at God's altar twice a day,
85; object of her prayers, 85;
her visions, 67, 85, 89; she fol-
lows her son over sea and land,
and encourages the sailors in
danger, 89; her confidence that
she could not die without seeing
her son a Catholic Christian, 89;


her love for and her obedience
to Ambrose, 89, 90 ; she gives
up making offerings at the ora-
tories, 90 ; she urges her son to
marry, and chooses a wife for
him, 99; early training and life
of, 135, 136; her youthful love
of wine, 135; how cured of it,
136; her conduct as a wife, 136;
her peace-making and endurance,
137; she gains her husband to
God, 137 ; her death draws near,
137 ; her last conversation with
her son, 137, 138; her death at
Ostia, 138.

Monophysites, still turn to the west
in renouncing Satan, 118 (note).

Montanus, the pretensions of, similar
to that of the Manichaeans, 82
(note).

Moon, sun and, Manichjean belief as
to the, 63 ; its falsity, 82, 83 and
note; influence of the, 103 (note) ;
the natural man and the, 198.

Morality of the Manichajans, 95.

Morals, authority and, 65.

Mortality, skins the emblem of, 112
and note, 195.

Mortification, pain better than, 100
and note.

Moses, 109 (note) ; on Mount Nebo,
181 (note) ; what he meant in
book of Genesis, 186; he is sup-
posed to have perceived all the
truth in its words, 188.

Mountain of milk and curds, 130 and
note.

Mountains of God, Augustin's inter-
pretation of the, 191.

Music, church, effect of, on Augustin,
156.

Mysteries, of Scripture, God's reason
for the, 48 (note); the mystery
and simplicity of Scripture, 62,
93; the unfolding of God's, in the
future life only, 124 (note); of
Scripture, 164 (note); symbolized,
164 (note); well-regulated minds
do not seek to pry into the, 193 ;
when revelation is clear and de-
void of, 196 (note) ; of God can
be revealed by Him alone, 207.

Mystery or "sacrament," 118 (note).

Natures, the two, 125, 126.

Nebridius, a goodly youth, Augustin's
friend, 70, 105, 130; he left Car-
thage for Milan to be near Au-
gustin, 97 ; tried to dissuade
Augustin from belief in the as-
trologers, 70, 105; his argument
against Manichasanism, 103 ; con-
sented to teach under Verecun-
dus; his humility, 122; dies in
Africa after the conversion of his
household, 131 ; letter of Augus-
tin to, 131.

Neo-Platonism, Aristotle and Zeno
prepared the way for, 86 (note) ;
Amelius developed and formu-
lated, 107 (note) ; doctrine of, as
to the " Word," 107 (note) ; as to
the soul's capacity, 198 (note) ;
Augustin speaks with admiration
of, 117 (note).

Neptune, 117.


CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 603


New Song, the, of Praise, 45 (note).

New Testament, the Manichscans
professed to believe in the, to
entrap the unwary, 62 (note);
adversity the blessing of the, 76
(note) ; the Manichseans asserted
that the writings of, had been
corrupted, 87 and note.

Obedience, to teachers enjoined, 49 ;
to princes, 65; to God, in or
against human laws, necessary,
63, 66.

Oblations, what they are, 85 (note) ;
Monica made them twice a day,
85; offered at Queen Victoria's
coronation, 85 (note); at the
tombs of the martyrs, 90 (note).

Odours, the attraction of, 156.

Oil of sinners, 160 and note.

Old Testament, its histories, typical
and allegorical, 65 (note) ; pros-
perity the blessing of the, 76
(note).

Omnipresence of God, 45.

Onesiphorus, hospitality of, 203.

Oratories, in memory of Cyprian, 84;
in memory of the saints and
martyrs, 90 and note ; offerings
at the, forbidden by Ambrose and
afterwards by Augustin ; Monica
discontinues hers, go and note.

Oratory, undue appreciation of, 53;
the Christians forbidden by Ju-
lian to teach, 120.

Orestes and Pylades, 71.

Origen's knowledge of Hebrew, 165
(note).

Origin of the law of death, 73 (note) ;
of evil, 104, 106; of the human
soul, Augustin on the, 1S3 (note) ;
of the world, the Manichsan no-
tion concerning the, 205.

Ostia, Augustin and his mother stay
at, 137 ; she dies at, and is buried
there, 138.

Ovid, quotations from, 71 (note).

Pachomius, the good done by the
monks of, 122 (note).

Paganism, Constantius enacted laws
against, but Julian the Apostate
reinstated it in its former splen-
dour, 120 (note).

Pain, spiritual and physical, better
than mortification, 100 and note.

Paraclete, the, of the Manichasans,
62 ; Manichasus asserted that He
was personally resident in him,
81 and note; the, the Spirit of
Truth, 132.

Paradise, allegorized by some, 92
(note).

Parents, make light of the childish
troubles of their offspring, 5 ;
ambition for their children's
progress often injudicious, 50;
our first, doctrine of the early
Church concerning their immor-
tality had they not sinned, -]'>,
(note).

Past and future, in the, there is time,
i6g; they exist only in the soul,
170.

Patriarchs, actions of the, prophetic,
65 and note.


Patricius, the father of Augustin, a
poor freeman of Thagaste, he
was only a catechumen when his
son was in his sixteenth year, 56;
he dies when Augustin is sixteen,
61 ; was at first unkind to his
wife, but was melted by her en-
during meekness, etc., 136; is
gained over to God by her, 137.

Paul, St., Augustin studies the writ-
ings of, 114; conversion of, 120
and note; his rejoicing at the
good works of the Philippians,
203.

Paul of Thebais, asceticism of, 122
(note).

Peace of heaven, the only true, 207
(note).

Pearl of great price, Augustin com-
pares Christ to the, 1 17 (note).

UeiparripLOV, a "warfare," 153 (note).

Pelagians, they laid claim to the at-
tainment of perfection through
power of free-will, 140 (note).

Pelagius and the bishop, dispute be-
tween, 155.

Pelican, the fable of the, 164 (note).

Pen of the Spirit, 114.

Phantasies, unreality of, 63 ; poetical
fictions less dangerous than, 63.

Phantasm, Augustin thinks of God
as a, 71, 72 ; and of Christ also,
85 (note), 86, 87 ; Augustin ceases
to look upon God as a, in.

Philo, the Therapeutas of, 122 (note).

Philosophy, made the beginning of
Augustin's conversion, 61 ; in
Greek, the love of wisdom is
called, 62 ; effect of, on the writ-
ings of the Fathers, 61 (note);
the various schools of, 75 (note) ;
revelation alone can reconcile the
different systems of, 75 (note) ;
the academic and other schools
of, 86 (note) ; unsatisfying, 100
(note) ; led the Greeks to Christ,
107 (note); Augustin's opinion
of the various schools of, 107
(note) ; Plato's, the nearest to
Christ, 117.

Photimus, heresy of, 113.

Pyrrhonists, doctrine of the, 86 (note).

Piety, confession to God is, 81.

Plato, works of, compared with the
Word of God, 81 (note); dog-
matic and sceptical sides of his
philosophy, 86 (note) ; doctrine
of, in connection with Christian-
ity, 107 (note), 114; parallels be-
tween his doctrine and that of
God, 109 ; much in Platonism in
common with asceticism, 122
(note).

Platonic theory of matter, 76 (note).

Platonists, Augustin studies the books
of the, probably those of Ame-
lius, 107 and note.

Pleasures, carnal, the beasts of the

field symbolical of, 80 (note). Si.

Plotinus, theories of, 107 and note,

112.
Tlvevfia, the, in (note), 113 (note).
Poetry, classical, evils of, 51-53.
Pompey, the ruse of, 135 (note).
Pontitianus, a countryman of Augus-
tin's, 122; his delight at finding


Augustin reading St. Paul's writ-
ings ; he relates to him the his-
tory of Antony, 122.

Porphyry's pride in regard to the In-
carnation of Christ, 161.

Poverty, in what that which dis-
pleases God consists, 123 (note).

Praise, God worthy of, 45; Augustin
begins his book with, 45 (note) ;
man desires to praise God, 45,
79; God's, is inexhaustible, 45,
46 and note ; silence the highest,
to God, 46 (note) ; love of world-
ly, 159, 160 and note ; sometimes
not to be avoided, 160.

Prayers, the manner of Easterns when
at, 66 (note), 84; God's answer
to Monica's, 67 ; how He an-
swered them, 84 ; Augustin's
faith strengthenecl by answer to,
133; for the dead, 139, 141.

Preaching, leads to faith, 45; effect
of Ambrose's, 45.

Prethini regiiuH, meaning of, 97 (note).

Pride, debases the heart, 74 (note);
Augustin errs through, 75-77;
birds of the air symbolical of,
80 (note); temptation of, 158.

Priority of origin illustrated, 187.

Prodigal son, the, allusions to, 53,

63, 77-
Progress, the law of, in Scripture, 64.
UpofopiKog, i.e. "made flesh," 107

(note), 166 (note).
Prosperity the blessing of the Old

Testament, adversity of the New,

76 (note).
Providence of God, 47.
Psalms and hymns first sung in church

at Milan, 134; sung at death-beds

and burials, 139 (note).
Psaltery of ten strings, 65 and note.
'^vxn, the, III (note), 113 (note).
■^vxiKOQ, "soulish" or "natural," 112

(note).
Punishment of sin, 72, 79 (note) ; the

absence of free-will a, 125.
Purgatory, prayers for the dead imply

a belief in, 141 (note).
Pylades and Orestes, 71.

il'P.1. " tlie firmament," 199.

Rationalem, term applied to holy
things, 203 (note).

Rationalism, modern, Manichasan
system kindred to, 63 (note).

Reason, the Manichjeans exalted it
at the expense of faith, 63 (note) ;
and faith, 93 and note ; leads us
to a belief in the necessity of
eternity, 173 (note).

Reddere, used of the creed, 1 18 (note).

Regeneration, 45 and notes; neces-
sary before receiving the Euchar-
ist, iiS (note).

Rest, true, in God alone, 45, 58, 59,
74, 94 (note) ; in heaven, ours
here an earnest of the future, 45
(note) ; God ever worketh and
yet is always at rest, 207.

Retirement, Augustin finds in, prep-
aration for future work, 131
(note).

Revelation, law of the development
of, 64 (note) ; can alone reconcile
the difficulties of the various


604 CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


systems of philosophy, 75 (note);
is like a broad and deep river,
178 (note) ; devoid of mystery,
196 (note).

Rhetoric, Augustin becomes head in
the school of, 61 ; he teaches it
at Thagaste, 68, then at Car-
thage, 72, then at Rome, 83.

Romanianus, a relative of Alypius,
rich and talented, and good to
Augustin, 100 and note; is influ-
enced by Augustin to embrace
the Manicha;an heresy, 100
(note) ; Augustin's explanation
of his conversion to, 115 (note).

Rome, Augustin's motive for wishing
to go to, 83, 84 ; he leaves, 88.

Rule, the wooden, seen by Monica in
her dream, 66 ; symbolical of the
Rule of Faith, 67, 128; the, or
"line," of Ps. xix. 3, 4, 199
(note).

Rumination, spiritual, 91 (note) ; of
the harts, 164 (note).

Sacrament, or mystery, 118 (note);
confirmation, etc., sometimes
spoken of by the Fathers as a,
118 (note), 197 and note.

Sacrifices were used by the sooth-
sayers in their divinations, 68.

Saint, a Manichaean, 66 and notes.

Sallust, quotation from, 58.

Salt, seasoning with, on admission as
a catechumen, 52 and note, 89
(note).

2apf, the "flesh," 112 (note).

Satan, renunciation of, before bap-
tism, 118.

Schools, Augustin disapproves of the
method of instruction in, 52, 53;
the different, of philosophy, etc.,
107 (note).

Science does not lead to God, 80,
158 (note).

Sciences called "liberal," 68; Au-
gustin read the books concern-
ing, unaided, 77 ; Faustus was
reputed to be skilled in, 80, but
had no real knowledge of them,
. 82, 83.

Scipio's change of name, 120 (note).

Scripture, God's reason for the mys-
teries in, 48 (note); veiled in
mysteries, 62, 93 ; made plain to
the " little ones," being obscured
to the mocking spirit of the Man-
ichaeans, 62 (note); Manichasan
perversion of, 62 (note), 67 (note) ;
they tried to deprive it of all
authority, 63 (note) ; the law of
progress in, 64 and note ; the
Manichaeans, when opposed, pre-
tended that the, had been cor-
rupted, 81 (note); what they
censured in the, 87 ; Ambrose
expounded the, every Lord's day,
91 ; " letter " of, 92 (note) ; types
in, 92 (note); Manichaean cavil-
lings at, 93; authority of, 93, 117
(note) ; belief in, 93 (note) ; plain-
ness and depth of, 93 and note ;
Augustin rejoices that he studied
Plato before, and not the reverse,
113, 114; Augustin entreats of
God that he may be led to the


truth through the study of, 163,
164, 178 and note ; mysteries and
right use of, 164 (notes); sym-
bolized, 164 (note) ; the Ifebrew
and Greek, 165; awful depth of,
180; truth to be seen in, but not
by all, 182.

Sea, allegorical explanation of the,
196 and notes.

Security, false, 156 and note.

Self-deception, Augustin's, 123.

Self-knowledge to be preferred to
ignorance, 47 (note).

Self-love and pride the sources of
sin, 65.

Sense, God has given to each its
proper pleasure as well as use,
79 (note).

Sermons, Goodwin's description of
the effect of, 89.

Shakespeare, quotation from, 69
(note).

Shame, false, 53, 57.

Sight, the allurements of, 1 56 ; knowl-
edge received by, 201 ; faith and,
201 (note).

Silence, the highest form of praise to
God, 46 (note) ; a consoler in
grief, 127 (note).

Simplicianus, and the Platonist, 113
(note) ; Augustin consults him
about the renewing of his mind,
116, 117 ; he succeeded Ambrose
as Bishop of Milan, 117; his
skill, 117; his uncompromising-
ness, 117.

Sin, in nifancy, 47, 48 ; original, 47,
48, 84; the Alanichseans denied,
76 (note) ; guilt of, after baptism,
greater than before, 50 ; our mo-
tives to, 57, 58 ; love of, for the
sin's sake, 59 ; self-love and pride
the sources of, 65; its own pun-
ishment, 72, 79 (note), 143 (note) ;
the absence of free-will the pun-
ishment of former sin, 125; for-
giveness of, after baptism, 140
and note, 141 ; has not substance,
only weakness, 192 (note) ; Au-
gustin compares it to blindness,
192 (note).

Sinners cannot escape God, 79; in-
jure themselves, not God, 79
(notes).

Skins, Augustin makes, the emblems
of mortality, 113 and note, 195
(note).

Sodom, the sea of, 60 and note.

Solomon, the enigma of, 63.

Son, the prodigal, 53.

Song of Ambrose and Augustin, 134
(note).

Soothsayer, the, promises Augustin
victory on certain conditions
which he despises, 68.

Sorrow, why sent to us, 72 (note) ;
effect of time and consolations
of friends on, 72 ; effect of silence
in, 127 (note).
Soul, Augustin fancied that he and
Nebridius had only one soul be-
tween them, 71 ; invocation to it
to return to God, 73; the Mani-
chaean notion concerning the, 76
(note) ; sight or eye of the, 92 ;
body, spirit, and, 1 1 1 (note) ; spec-


ulations concerning it afterdeath,
164 (note) ; Augustin on the ori-
gin of the human, 183 (note) ;
Neo-Platonic idea as to its ca-
pacity for seeing God, 19S (note).
Sozomen's account of the origin of

Monachism, 122 (note).
Spirit, the letter and the, of Scrip-
ture, 92 and note ; body, soul,
and. III (note); pen of the, 114
(note) ; leadings of the, 153; gifts
of the, 197.
Spiritual body, the, 112 (note).

Stage-plays, Augustin's love of, 60;
reprobated by the Fathers, those
who went to them being excluded
from baptism, 60 (note).

Stars, knowledge of the, etc., 80, 81 ;
Manichaean teaching as to the,
false, 82 ; the catechumen to be
content with the light of the
moon and the, 197, 198.

"ZTepeuna, the firmament, 199 (note).

Stoics, the great year of the, 202
(note).

Study, Augustin's distaste for, in boy-
hood, 50; Ambrose in his, 91.

Substance, corporeal, Augustin's idea
of God as a, 102 and note, 103;
God's substance incorruptible,
104; evil not a, no; the two
substances, iii ; Augustin thinks
of God as an incorruptible, 116;
matter not created out of God's,
177 ; sins have not, 192 (note).

Subverters, Augustin delighted in
their friendship, although he ab-
horred their acts, 61 ; the name
of a pestilent and licentious set
of persons, also termed Ever-
sores, 61 and note.

Sun, the Christian should always as-
pire to look at the, 198; when
able to do so, 198; Christ the
central, 198 (note).

Sun and moon, Manichaean belief as
to the, 63, proved false, 82, 83
and note; influence of the, 103
(note).

Sustineatia and coiitmentia, difference
between, 153 (note).

Sylvester, bishop of Rome, before
Constantine, 69 (note).

Symbols, use of, 91 (note) ; God's
goodness in conveying His truth
by, 189.

Symmachus the prefect sends Augus-
tin to Milan, 87, 88.

Sympathy, real and false, 51, 60, 61 ;
Christ's perfect human, 71 (note).

Syria, Hierius a native of, 74, 75.

Tablets, matrimonial, 136 and note.

Talmud, illustrations of God's ma-
jesty in, 46 (note) ; of His mercy
and justice in, 133 (note).

Tears, why sweet to the unhappy, 71.

TexviTTtq, or artificer, God a, 72 (note).

Te DeitfH, the song of Ambrose and
Augustin, 134 (note).

Telemachus the monk sacrificed his
life to put an end to the circus
fights, 96 (note).

Temptation, the winds and waves of,
stilled by Christ, 144 (note) ; life
a, 153; as a testing, 153 (note)}


CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 605


we should not court, 156 (note) ;
Christ's, typical, 80 (note), 153
(note).

Terence, Eunuchus of, 53.

Testament, the Old and New, 76
(note), iSo.

Thagaste, Augustin's father a poor
freeman of, 56; Augustin taught
rhetoric there, 68 ; it was there
Augustin met Nebridius, 70;
Augustin leaves to gotoCarthage,
72 ; the birthplace of Alypius, 94.

Thebes, Antony a native of; Paul the
hermit of, 122 (note).

Theft, Augustin commits, from his
parents' table, 54 ; and later, he
steals not from poverty, but the
love of wrong-doing, 57-59; in-
nocent Alypius is apprehended
for, 96.

Theophilus of Antioch's opinion con-
cerning Adam's immortality, 73
(note).

Therapulae of Philo, the, 122 (note).

Thorwaldsen, the Danish sculptor,
dream of, 153 (note).

Time, effect of, on grief, 72 ; God
speaks to us in, 166; has no re-
lation to eternity, 167; itself a
creature, therefore not before
creation, 167, 168; what is, 168,
169; present, not long, 168, 169;
cannot be measured, 169, 172, 173
and note ; nevertheless, there is
past and future, 169; motions of
the heavenly bodies not, 172, 172 ;
of what is it the protraction ? 172 ;
the impression of things on the
mind, 173; regarded as an agent,
174 (note) ; Augustin argues that
it and the world had one begin-
ning, 175 ; begins from the crea-
tion, not the creation from it,
188 (note) ; has no relation to
God and His Word, 205.

Titus, amphitheatre of, 95 (note).

Tobias, the light seen by, 157.

Toothache, Augustin suffers from,
133; De Quincey on, 133 (note).

Tradition, Rabbinical, concerning the
children of Israel, 64 (note) ; be-
lief in, 93 (note).

Tree of life, able to avert death from
Adam, 73.


Triad, man a, iii.

Trichotomy of man, doctrine of the,
III (note), 113 (note).

Triers, the monastery at, 122.

Trinity, the Manichaean notion of the,
62 (note); doctrine of the, con-
veyed in creation, 191 ; types of,
in man, 193 and note; mystery
of the doctrine of the, 193 (note) ;
illustrations of the, 193 (note).

Trouble, why sent to us, 72 (note) ;
effect of time on, 72.

Truth, Augustin's desire and longing
for, 62, 63 ; the Manichasans
abused the word truth, 62 ; God
is, 62, 72, 81, 151, 152, 186 and
note ; Augustin's despair of find-
ing the, 86; is God's alone, 109
(note); heresies confirm, 113;
Licentius' and Trygetius' notions
concerning ; the search after, and
the finding, 123 (note); joy in
the, 152; he who finds, finds
God, 152; Augustin begs that
God will lead him to the, through
the Scriptures, 163-164; wisdom
and, 166; the discovery of, diffi-
cult, 176; to be seen in Scripture,
but not by all, 183.

Trygetius' notion concerning truth,
123 (note).

Tully, Augustin at one time thought
the Holy Scriptures not to be
compared in dignity to, 62 ; his
contrary opinion, 81 (note); ora-
tions of, 83.

Types in Scripture, 92 (note); of the
Trinity in man, 193.

Universe, beauty of the, 79 (note).

Victorinus, conversion of, 117.

Wax, writing on, 133 and note.
Way, Christ the, 114 (note), 116.
Weeping, why sweet to the unhappy.

West, custom of turning to the, 113

(note).
Wife, Monica fears that a, would

prove an encumbrance to her

son, 57 ; but afterwards seeks

for one for him, 99.


Will, evil a perversion of the, 11 1;
feebleness of, 125; conflict in
the, 125, 126; of God is eternal,
I So.

Wine-bibbing, Ambrose forbids it at
oratories, 90 ; Monica's, in her
youth, 135; how cured, 136.

Wisdom, Augustin's love of, 62, 98;
the love of, called philosophy in
Greek, 62 ; God enjoins man to
behold, 81 ; Augustin stimulated
to the love of, by Cicero's Hor-
tensius, 107 (note) ; and truth,
166; of God eternal, 180, 181;
the word of, given by the Spirit,
197 and note.

Wit, 45 (note) ; Augustin's, a snare
to him, 77.

Wizards, Augustin's opinion of, 68
(note).

Woman, creation of, 206 and note.

Wood, the cross called a ship of, 52,
53 (note), 114 (note).

Word, wit and eloquence baits to
draw man to the, 45 (note) ; the
written, likened to the swaddling-
clothes of the child Jesus, 64
(note); made flesh, 107, 108 and
note, 112, 113, 162; God the,
108; Christ the, 112; God cre-
ated the world by His, 165 ; God
speaks to us eternally in His,
166; the beginning of all things,
166; happiness of the spiritual
creature to be found only in the,
190; the firmament the type of
the, 195, 196; heaven and earth
shall pass away, but not the,
196.

Word of God, eternal, 73 ; a fount of
happiness, 81 (note); incorrup-
tible, 103 and note.

Words and ideas, 49.

World, the things of this, are fleeting,
73; love of the, 79; the sea
likened to the wicked, 196 and
notes ; the Manichasan and Gnos-
tic opinion as to the origin of
the, 205 ; the, was created out of
nothing, 206.

Zeno and Aristotle prepared the way
for Neo-Platouism, 86 (note).


THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE 1

PAGE

PAGE

PACK

Gen. i. I 33 i

Gen. XXV. 34 ... .

155

Ps. iv. 8

133

Ps. xxvi. 8 . . . .

116

i. I . .

72

xxvii. I . . .

157

iv. 8, Vulg. . . .

"^37

xxvi. 8 . . . .

181

i. I . .

164

xxvii. 28 . . .

176

iv. 9, Vulg. . . .

133

xxvi. 12, Vulg.

47

i. I . .

165

xlviii. 13-19 . .

157

v-3

195

xxvii. I . . . .

151

i. I . .

182

Ex. iii. 14 . . . .

109

v. 12

142

xxvii. 4 . . . .

170

i. 2 . .

176

iii. 21, 22 . . .

109

vi. 2

156

xxvii. 4 . . . .

174

i. 2 . .

178

vi. 12

164

vi-3

127

xxvii. 4 . . . .

179

i. 2 . .

179

xii. 35, 36 . . .

109

vi. 5 . . . . .

104

xxvii. 8 . . . .

53

i. 2 . .

190

XVI. 3

108

vii. 9

195

xxvii. 8 . . . .

131

i. 2 . .

191

xvi. 15 ... .

48

vii. 15

58

xxvii. 12 . . . .

^5

i. 3 . .

191

xxxii. 1-6 . . .

109

viii

153

xxviii. I . . . ,

181

i. 3 . .

194

xxxiii. 20 . . .

46

viii. 2

195

xxix. 5 . . . ,

118

i. 4 . .

199

Lev. xi.x. 18 ... .

160

viii. 3

195

xxix. 5 . . . .

131

i. 5 .

195

Num. xi

155

viii. 7, 8 . . . .

So

xxix. 9 . . . .

164

i. 6 . .

195

xi. 5 . . . .

108

viii. 8

186

XXX. II . . .

128

i. 6-8 .

178

xi. 25 . . . .

191

viii. and xi. . • .

80

XXX. 12 . . .

195

i. 7 . .

199

xvi. 2, 19. . .

120

ix. 9

49

xxxi. 6, 14, 18 .

118

i. 9 . .

184

Deut. iv. 24 . . . .

80

ix. 13

193

xxxi. 10 . . .

166

i. 9 . .

196

vi. 5 . . . .

65

X. 3, Vul. and LX:

>C.i59

xxxi. 10 . . .

174

i. II . .

196

xxix. 5 . . .

64

xvi. 2

no

xxxi. 20 . . .

192

i. II, 30

198

xxxii. 39 . . .

55

xviii. 7 . . .

159

xxxi. 22 . . .

^4

i. 12.

197

xxxii. 49 . . .

"5

xviii. 28 . • .

76

xxxi. 22 . . .

161

i. 14.

171

Josh. X. 12-14 • • •

171

xviii. 28 . . .

172

xxxii. I . . .

143

i. 14.

197

2 Sam. xxiii. 15-17 .

155

xviii. 28 . . .

192

xxxii. 5 . . .

47

i 15.

198

I Kings xvii. . . .

204

xviii. 31 . . .

. 46

xxxii. 9 . . .

^P

i. 17.

176

xvii. 6 . . .

155

xviii. 35 . . .

117

xxxiii. 9 . . .

165

i. 20.

199

xviii. 40 . .

64

xix

. 198

xxxiii. II . .

100

i. 26.

201

I Chron. xxi. i . .

120

xix. 3, 4 . . .

• 199

xxxiv. 5 . . .

125

i. 26, 27

91

Job i. 10

116

xix. 4 . . . .

■ 203

xxxiv. 18 . .

80

i. 27 .

64

ii. 13 . . . .

127

xix. 5 . . . .

74

XXXV. 3 . . .

46

i. 27.

201

vii. I . . . .

153

xix. 6 . . . .

79

XXXV. 10 . . .

79

i.28.

202

vii. I, Old Ver.

156

xix. 6 . . . .

132

XXXV. 10 . . .

116

i. 29.

203

ix. 3 . . . .

47

xix. 7 . . . .

195

xxxvi. . . .

162

i. 31.

IIO

xi. 7 . . . .

201

xix. 8 . . . .

195

xxxvi. 2 . . .

. 123

i. 31-

157

xiv. I ...

64

xix. 9 . . . .

69

xxxvi. 5 . . .

. 196

1.31.

204

xiv. 13 . . .

• 195

xix. 12 ...

59

xxxvi. 6 . . .

70

i. 31.

206

XV. 26 . . .

. 107

xix. 12 ...

159

xxxvi. 6 . . .

191

ii. 2 .

33

xxiii. 8 . . .

. 152

xix. 12, 13 . .

47

xxxvi. 6 . . .

194

ii. 7 .

• 199

xxviii. 28, LXX.

81

xix. 14 . . .

121

xxxvi. 7 . . .

• 78

iii. 8

. 200

xxviii. 28 . .

117

xix. 14 . . .

129

xxxvi. 9 . . .

137

iii. 16

. 206

xxxviii. II, 12

196

xxii. 2, Vulg. .

49

xxxvi. 9 . . .

191

iii. 19

• 77

Ps. ii. 7 . . . .

168

xxii. 25 . . .

185

xxxvi. 9 . . .

196

iii. 19

• 15s

ii. II . . . .

. 114

xxii. 26 . . .

• 45

x.xxvii. 9-11, Vulg

. 106

iii. 21

. 112

ii. II . . . .

• 143

xxii. 26 . . .

. 162

xxxvii. 23 . .

• l^

iii. 21, Vul

g-

• 195

ii. II . . . .

. 154

xxiii. 5 . . .

. 200

xxxviii. . . .

. 8x

ix. 3 . .

• 155

iv. I . . . .

• 13-

XXV. 9 . . .

. 108

xxxix. 5 . . .

. 170

xiv. 3, 10

. 60

iv. I . . . .

. 204

XXV. II . . .

• 143

xxxix. II . .

• 55

xvi. 13, 14

• 79

iv. 2 . . . .

. 68

XXV. 15 . . .

• 71

xxxix. II, Vulg.

. 109

xviii. 27

• 47

iv. 5 . . . .

• 132

XXV. 15 . . .

• 157

xxxix. II . .

. 194

xviii. 27

• 144

iv. 6 . . . .

• 132

xxvi. 3 . . .

• 157

xli. 4 . . . .

• 69

xxii. I .

• 153

iv. 7 . . . .

. 88

xxvi. 7 . . .

. 164

xli. 4 . . . .

• 74

XXV. 33, 34

iv. 7 . . . .

• 133

xxvi. 7 . . .

• 174

xli. 4 . . . .

• 85

6

06

CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF TEXTS. 607


PAGE


Ps. xli. 8 . .

... 194

xlii. I, 2 .

... 194

xlii. 2 . .

... 194

xlii. 2, 3,

10 . . 179

xlii. 3, 4,

and 5 . 195

xlii. 5 . .

... 71

xlii. 6. .

... 194

xlii. 7 . .

... 194

xlii. II .

... 15'

xliii. 5

... 195

xlv. 2 . .

... 58

xlvi. I

... 49

xlvi. 4 .

... 194

xlvi. 10

... 130

xlviii. 3 .

... 49

xlix. 20 .

. . . 201

1.3. . .

• ' ■ 33

li. I . .

... 143

li. 5 . .

... 49

li. 6 .

... 142

li. 8, Vul£

V. . . . 77

li. 17 .

... 69

li. 17 . .

... IIS

li. 19 .

... 85

IV.7 .

... 162

Iv. 22 .

... 162

Iviii. 10, ^

^ulg.. . 157

lix. 9 . .

... 77

Ixii. I, 2 .

... 115

Ixiii. I

. . . 196

Ixiii. 3

... 174

Ixiii. 8

... 174

Ixiii. 27

... 157

Ixiv. 10 .

... 57

Ixv. II

... 197

Ixviii. 2 .

... 125

Ixviii. 5

... 139

Ixviii. 6

• • • 135

Ixviii. 16,

OldVer. 130

Ixix. 3

... 63

Ixix. 32

. . . 200

Ixxi. 5

... 89

Ixxiii. 7

• . • . 57

Ixxiii. 9

• • . . 74

Ixxiii. 16

. ... 170

Ixxiii. 27

. . . . 79

Ixxiii. 28

. . . . no

Ixxiii. 28

. ... 181

Ixxiii. 28

. . . . 190

Ixxiv. 16

. ... 164

Ixxiv. 21

. . . . 68

Ixxvi. 7

. . . . 5S

Ixxvii. 10

... 156

Ixxviii. 3(

? • • . 51

Ixxviii. 3(

3 . . . 76

Ixxix. 5,

3 ... 127

Ixxx. 5 .

• • . 137

Ixxx. 17

. ... 164

Ixxx. 19

• . . . 73

Ixxxiv. 5

• ... 193

Ixxxiv. 6

• . . . 74

Ixxxiv. 6

. . . . 129

Ixxxv. 5

. ... 162

Ixxxv. II

... 197

Ixxxvi. I

. ... 163

Ixxxvi. I

5 • • . 53

Ixxxviii.

I . . . 67

Ixxxviii.

5 ... 162

Ixxxix. I

I, Vulg. . 107

xci. II

. ... 156

xci. 13

. ... 141

xcii. I

. . . . 48

xciii. 20,

Vulg. . 56

xciv. I

. . . . 70

xcv. 5.

. ... 196

Ps. xcvi. 4
c. 3 .
c. 3 .
ci. I .
cii. . .
cii. 12.
cii. 20.
cii. 27.
cii. 27.
cii. 27 .
ciii. .
ciii. 3.
ciii. 3.
ciii. 3.
ciii. 3 .

ciii. 3-5

cm. 3-S

ciii. 14

civ. 2 .

civ. 2 .

civ. 9 .

civ. 15

civ. 24

civ. 24

cvi. 2 .

cvi. 20

cvii. 8, Vulg

cix. 22

cxi. 10

cxii. 10

cxv. 16, Vulg., etc

cxv. 16

cxvi. .

cxvi. 10

cxvi. 10

cxvi. 10

cxvi. II

cxvi. 12

cxvi. 13

cxvi. 15

cxvi. 16

cxvi. 16, 17

cxvi. 16, 17

cxvi. 17

cxviii. I

cxviii. I

cxix. 18

cxix. 37

cxix. 85, Old Ver

cxix. 85

cxix. 105

cxix. 108

cxix. 122, OldVer

cxix. 142

cxix. 155

cxix. 176

cxx. 3, 4, Old Ver,

cxxi. 4

cxxii. I

cxxiv. 5, Old Ver

CXXV. 2

cxxix. and cxl
cxxx. .
cxxx. I
cxxx. I
cxxx. 3
cxxxvi. 4
cxxxvi.6, Old Ver,
cxxxviii. 6
cxxxix. 2, 4
cxxxix. 6
cxxxix. 7
cxxxix. 7, 8
cxxxix. 8
cxxxix. 12


PAGE
163

48
172

139
139
107

65

48
168

197
81

73
142

154
162

159
167

15s
192

195

196

88

167

183

70

109

105

160

123

118

176

1 78

139

47

142

170

203

59

"5

134

56

116

129

68

85

163

162

III

127
164

195
141
162

72

88

181

129

157

193
192

130
164
204

56
164

47

75
199

80
136
170

79

58

46

192


Ps. cxxxix. 16
cxxxix. 21
cxxxix. 22
cxli. 3
cxli. 3, 4, Old Ver
cxli. 5,Vul.,LXX
cxlii. 5 .
cxliii. 2 .
cxliii. 6 .
cxliii. 10 .
cxliv. 5 .
cxliv. 7 .
cxliv. 9 .
cxliv. II .
cxlv. 3 .
cxlv. 15 .
cxlv. 15, 16
cxlv. 18 .
cxlvi. . .
cxlvi. 8 .
cxlvii. 5 .
cxlvii. 5 .
cxlviii. 1-12
cxlviii. 4.
cxlviii. 6.
cxlix. 6 .
Prov. iii. 7 •

viii. 22

viii. 22

ix. 8 .

ix. 9 .

ix. 13 .

ix. 14, 17

ix. 18 .

x. 6 .

X. 19 .

xvii. 6, LXX

xxi. 20

xxi. 31

xxii. 15

xxvii. 8

xxvii. 21
Eccles. i. 9

v-3
Cant. i. 3 .

i-3. 4

i. 4.

ii. 9

ii. 17
Isa. i. 16, 19
i. 18 .
vi. 2 .
vii. 9 in the LXX
X. 26 .
xiv. 13
xiv. 13,
xxvi. 20
xxvi. 20
xxviii. 15
xxxii. 13
xxxiii. 5 .
xxxiv. 4.
xxxiv. 4 .
xxxvii. 16
xl. 6-8 .
xlii. 3 .
xlvi. 4 .
xlviii. 10
xlviii. 22
Iii. 7 .
Ivi. 8.
Iviii. 7
Iviii. 8
Iviii. 10
Ixiv. 4


PAGE

155

I So

87

74

86

160

84

141

196

189

117

66

65
M3
45
97
100
80
62

175

45

80

no

181

180

180

117

114

"5

95

21

63
63
63
197
12
81

91

47

94

187

159

3-

153

196

135

120

196

195
198
198
184

7

55
80

159

124

181

99

77

53

195

196

184

196

68

78

159

151
198

74
197
197

144

137


Jer. ii. 13 . .

ii. 27 . .

iv. 25 .

xii. 15 .

XV. 19 .

xxiii. 24.

xxiii. 24.

xxxi. 34 .

li. 6 . .

Lam. iii. 48 .

Dan. ix. 21 .

xii. 3 .

Hos. ii. 8 . .

V. II .

xii. I .
Joel ii. 26
Amos V. 4 .
Jonah i. and iv.
Mai. iii. 6

iii. 10 .

Tobit iv. . .

Wisd. ii. 26 .

vii. 27

vii. 27

viii. 2, Vulg

viii. 21

viii. 21

ix. 1 5 .

X. 21 .

xi. 20 .

xiii. I .

xiii. 9 .

Ecclus. i. 4 .

1.4 .

iii. 17, etc.

iii. 27

X. 9 .

X. 13

xviii. 30

xix. I

xxiii. 6

xxxix. :

Matt. iii. 2 .

iii. 4 .

iv. I .

iv. 3 .

v-3 •
V- 3-9 •
V. 3-1 1

V. 7. .
V. 14 .

V. 22 ,

V. 48 .
vi. 2, 5
vi. 6 .
vi.8 .
vi. 12 .
vi. 13 .
vi. 14 .
vi. 21 .

vi- 33 •

VI. 34 .

vii. 7 .
vii. 7 .
vii. 7 .
vii. 7 .
vii. 7, 8
vii. II .
vii. 13 .
vii. 13.
viii. 20
ix. 2 .
ix. 38 .
X. 16 .

X. 20 •


6o8 CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Matt. X. 29, 30 . .

• 75

Luke xxi. 34 ... 154

Rom. i. 20 . . . . 144

I Cor. i. 31 . . . . 155

X. 30 . . .

• 51

xxiii. 43 .

131

i. 20 .

145

ii. 6 .

197

X. 41, 42 . .

. 204

xxiv. 25 .

• 74

i. 20 .

200

ii. 9 .

• 137

xi. 12 . . .

124

xxiv. 49 .

132

i. 21 .

53

ii. II .

112

xi. 25 . . .

. 108

John i. I . . .

. 166

i. 21 .

81

ii. II .

142

xi. 25 . . .

"5

'• 1-5

. 108

i. 21 .

117

ii. II .

144

xi. 25 . . .

117

i- 1-5

"3

i. 21, 22

108

ii. 12 .

205

xi. 28, 29 . .

"5

1-3 •

. 80

i. 22 .

81

ii. 14 .

201

xi. 29 . . .

108

>-3 •

. 164

i. 22 .

. "7

ii. 15 .

. 201

xi. 30 . . .

120

1. 6-9

. 112

i. 23 .

. 81

iii. I .

• 194

xi. 30 . . .

129

i. 9 .

. 76

1. 24-29

• ^5

iii. I .

. 197

xi. 30 . . .

159

i. 9 .

loS

i. 25 .

. 81

iii. 2 .

. 114

xii. 20 . . .

68

1. 9 .

125

1.25 .

. 109

iii. 2 .

. 197

xii. 29 . . .

120

1.9 .

132

11. 5 .

. 132

iv. 3 .

. 64

xii. 36. • .

12

1.9 .

193

ii. 6 .

. 69

IV. 3 .

. 143

xii. 36 . . .

140

i. ro

74

iii. 4 .

. 203

IV. 4 .

• 143

xiii. 7, 22. .

198

i. 12

120

iv. 5 .

. 142

iv. 6 .

. 186

xiii. 39 . .

197

i. 14

112

IV. 5 .

. 206

iv. 7 .

. 114

xiii. 46 . . .

117

i. 14

"3

V. 5 .

• 70

iv. 7 .

• 19s

xvi. 27 . .

69

i. 14

162

V- 5 •

. 192

iv. 15

• "7

xvii. 5 . . .

165

i. 16

76

v-5 •

. 205

iv. 15

. 2CI

xvii. 17 . .

55

i. 16

108

V. 6 .

. 108

V. 7 .

. 116

xvii. 27 , .

80

i. 17

183

v.8,9.

. 162

V. 8 .

. 198

xviii. 10 . .

196

ii. 4.

21

Vi. 17 .

• 194

V. 12 .

. 201

xviii. 35 . .

140

iii. 5

21

vi. 21 .

• 59

vii. I .

• 55

xix. 8 . . .

64

111.5

199

vi. 23 .

. 161

vii. 7 .

. 116

xix. 12 . .

55

iii. 20

142

vii. 17 .

. 125

vii. 28

• 55

xix. 12 . .

116

iii. 29

77

vii. 20.

. 121

vii. 32, 3

3

• 55

xix. 14 . .

• 54

iii. 29

166

vii. 22 .

. 114

viii. I

. 114

xix. 16 . .

. 198

iii. 29

194

vii. 22-24

. 121

viii. 6

. 183

xix. 16-19 .

. 198

iv. 14

!9

vii. 24, 25

. 114

viii. 8

• 155

xix. 21 . .

• 127

iv. 24

64

viii. 6 (inarg

in)

, 79

viii. 8

. 200

xix. 22 . .

. 198

iv. 48

199

viii. 7 . .

. 140

ix. 27

. 154

xix. 29

• ?5

V. 4-6

164

viii. 10

. 195

X. 4 .

. 92

xxii. 37-39 •

^5

v. 14

69

viii. II

■ 19s

x. 13 .

• 144

xxii. 40 . .

183

vi. 27

68

viii. 16

112

xi. I .

. 200

xxiii. 10 . .

134

vii. 39

132

viii. 23

. 137

xi. 19

• "3

xxiv. 35 . .

196

viii. 23

187

viii. 23

194

xi. 31

12

XXV. 21 . .

59

viii. 25, old \

''er

166

viii. 24

. 194

xii. I, 31

. 192

XXV. 21 . .

138

viii. 25

166

viii. 24

195

xii. 7 .

• 197

XXV. 27 . .

46

viii. 40

152

viii. 24, 2

5

167

xii. 8 .

. 197

xxvi. 38 . .

III

viii. 44

186

viii. 26

181

xii. 8-1 1

• 197

xxviii. 19. .

194

viii. 44 . .

203

viii. 31

176

xii. 22

• 155

Mark xii. 30, 31

186

X. 18 . .

162

viii. 32

108

xiii. 2

197

xvi. 16 . .

21

xii. 35

151

viii. 34

132

xiii. 7

. 142

Luke ii. 14, Vulg. .

193

xiv. 6

72

viii. 34

140

xiii. II

87

ii. 19 . . .

85

xiv. 6

112

viii. 34

155

xiii. 12

. 88

ii. 46 . . .

82

xiv. 6

116

viii. 34

162

xiii. 12

. 116

iii. 5 . . .

131

xiv. 6 .

151

viii. 34

. 164

xiii. 12

142

IV. 23 . . .

59

xiv. 8

71

ix. 5 .

112

xiii. 12

144

V. 8. . . .

155

xiv. 16, 17

132

ix. 12 .

109

xiii. 12

180

vii. 12-15. •

89

xiv. 30 .

141

ix. 15 .

141

xiii. 12

196

viii. 15 . .

141

XV. 2 . .

48

ix. 15 .

144

xiv. 20 (n

lar

gin

) 194

ix. 26 . . .

118

xvi. 12, 13

81

ix. 21 .

195

xiv. 22

199

xi. 22, 25 . .

120

xvi. 33. .

15s

x. 12 .

163

XV. 9 .

"5

xii. 32 . . .

159

xvii. 17 . .

72

X. 14 .

45

XV. 9 .

120

xiv. 14 . .

130

xvii. 21 . .

162

X. 18 .

199

XV. 22

84

xiv. 23 . .

17

xviii. 38 ,

115

xi- 33 •

70

XV. 22

140

xiv. 23 . .

21

xxi. 22. .

158

xi. 36 .

46

XV. 22

150

xiv. 26-35 •

123

Acts ii. 1-4

132

xii. I .

203

XV. 22

162

XV. 4-10 . ,

119

ii. 3 .

198

xii. 2 .

194

XV. 44

112

XV. 5 . . .

181

ii. 18

46

xii. 2 .

200

XV. 51

138

XV. 8 . . .

149

ii. 19 .

194

xii. 2 .

201

XV. 54 .

133

XV. 11-32. .

53

ii. 27

162

xii. II

90

XV. 54

154

XV. 12 . . .

11

iv. 26

136

xiii. II, 12

197

2 Cor. i. II .

143

XV. 13 . . .

11

vii. 22

109

xiii. 13, 14

127

i. 22 .

195

XV. 16 . . .

63

ix. 5

65

xiii. 14 . .

4

ii. 16 .

61

XV. 18 . . .

62

xiii. 10

120

xiii. 23 .

155

iii. 6 .

88

XV. 24 . . .

27

xiii. 12

120

xiv. I . .

128

iii. 6 . .

93

XV. 32 . . .

119

xvii. 28

109

xiv. 16 .

130

V. I .

181

XV. 32 . . .

155

Rom. i. 3 . .

87

xiv. 20

155

V. 2 . ,

156

xvi. 10 . .

97

i. 20

109

xvi. 18 .

203

V. 2 . .

194

xvi. II, 12 .

97

i. 20

III

I Cor. i. 27 . .

198

V. 2, 4 .

194

xvi. 23 . .

131

i. 20 .

112

i. 27, 28 .

120

V. 5 . .

IIS

XX. 36 . . .

192

i. 20 .

114

i. 30 . .

80

V. 6 . .

144

CONFESSIONS OF ST

AUGUSTIN: INDEX OF TEXTS

.

609

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

2 Cor. V. 7 .... 194

Eph. V. 8 132

2 Thess. ii. 1-7 . . . 164

Jas. iv. 6 76

V. 7 .

201

v. 8 . .

191

I Tim. i. 5 . .

139

iv. 6 .

107

V. 15.

162

V. 8. .

193

i. 8 . .

182

iv. 6 .

159

V. 17 .

197

V. 8 . .

194

i. 8 . .

1S6

iv. II

201

V. 21 .

181

V. 8. .

195

i. 8 . .

188

iv. 14

51

vi. 10

81

V. 14 .

121

i. 15 . .

74

I Pet. i. 23

73

X. 17 .

140

V. 27 .

142

11. s . .

112

ii. I, 2

xi. 3 .

194

Phil. ii. 6, 7 .

74

ii. 5 . .

162

ii. 2

68

xi. 9 .

203

ii. 6, 8 .

162

11. 5 . .

174

ii. 2

203

xi. 14

161

ii. 6-1 1

ig8

IV. 4 .

155

ii-5

127

xii. I .

176

ii. 15 .

197

iv. 8 .

75

ii:9„

198

xii. 9 .

• 143

11. 27 .

130

V. 4, 9, I(

5,1

4

^V

ill. 18-

21

164

xii. 10

143

iii. 13 .

U7

V. 6 .

200

v-5

45

Gal. i. 17 . .

131

iii. 13 .

174

V. 10. .

85

v-5

69

iii. I . .

194

iii. 13 .

194

vi. 16

178

V- 5

76

iii. 28 .

201

iii. 14 .

174

vi. 20

200

V- 5

107

iv. 4 . .

64

iii. 19 .

203

2 Tim. i. 16 .

203

v. 8

IIS

iv. 12 .

200

iv. 11-14

155

2 Tim. ii. 14 .

182

I John i. I

198

iv. 19 .

SO

iv. 13 .

155

ii. 15.

91

i- 5

109

iv. 19 .

137

IV. 14 .

204

11. 21 .

120

i. 8

140

iv. 24 .

92

IV. 15, 16

204

iii. 13

121

i. 8

160

iv. 26 .

iSi

iv. 18 .

203

iv. 16

203

ii. 4

. 62

V. 17 .

121

Col. i. 16 . .

184

Titus i. 10 .

125

ii. 16

f 32

V. 17 .

15'

i. 20, etc.

85

i. 15 .

155

ii. 16

80

vi. 3 . .

160

ii. 3 . .

162

Heb. i. I . .

64

ii. 16

153

Eph. i. 20

132

164

iv. 13 .

142

ii. 16

156

i. 20, etc.

179

ii. 8 . .

"7

v. 5. .

168

ii. 16

157

ii. 2 . .

161

ii. 8,9 .

62

v. 12 .

197

ii. 16

. 159

ii. 3. .

195

ii. 14 .

"5

vi. I, 2

118

iii. 2

. 196

ii. 10 .

201

ii. 14 .

141

vi. 4 .

194

iii. 2

. 198

ii. 15 .

85

ii. 16 .

15s

xi. 8-40

. 64

iii. 3

' 194

iii. 14-19

192

iii. 5 . .

127

xii. I . .

161

3 John 2 .

133

iii. 20 .

128

111. 10 .

91

Jas. i. 17 . .

• H

Rev. iii. 5

59

iii. 20 .

154

iii. 10 .

201

i. 17 . .

. 76

vi. 14

• 195

iv. 8 .

194

I Thess. ii. 7

201

ii. 13 . .

. 141

viii. 3

143

iv. 13, 14

82

iv. 14

137

IV. 4 . .

• 51

xii. 3

• ''s

iv. 14 .

75

v-5

195

iv. 6 . .

• 55

xii. 4

. 80

iv. 26 .

132

V. 23

III

iv. 6 . .

. 69

xxi. 2

• 113

v. 8. .

125

LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Academic philosophy, 40T-407, 444.

Acclamations in ecclesiastical meet-
ings, 569.

Ambrose, conversation of Monica
with, 270, 300.

Anaxagoras refuted, 446.

Anaximenes refuted, 446.

Anecdote of Vendicianus, 482.

Anecdote of Gennadius, 514.

Anecdote, humorous, 533.

Anecdote of Dioscorus, 576.

Anger, remarks on, 271.

Apuleius of Madaura, 4S7.

Astrology, absurdities of, 588, 589.

Baptism not to be repeated, 243.
Baptism of infants, 409, 410, 526-

530> 53--
Bishop, the office of — its nature,
277 ; motives to resign or accept

it, 3-5, 326.
Bodily infirmities, reference to Au-
gustin's, 271, 452, 509, 593.

Catholic Church, the, 388-390.
Catholic faith, restoration of Lepo-

rius to, 572.
Christ commended to Licentius, 248 ;

to Dioscorus, 445; to Volusianus,

478.
Christ, name of, known throughout

the world, 586.
'Christ preaching to the spirits in

prison, 515-521.
Christian churches, social influence

of, 377, 484 ; resorted to in time

of trouble and distress, 579.
Christian Dispensation, epoch of,

416-418.
Christian Dispensation, peculiarities

of, 41S-420.
Christian meekness, 483-486.
'Christian excellence, a fine example

of, 507.
'Christianity, evidences of, 478-480.
Christianity favourable to national

prosperity, 485-487.
Conciliation, endeavours after, with

Donatists, 242, 244, 262, etc. ;

with Jerome, 329, 331 ; with un-
known bishop, 498.
Conscience, cases of, resolved, 290,

294.

610


Consolation to a bereaved sister, 591-

593-

Conversion of Dioscorus, marvel-
lous, 576.

Councils, authority of, 282.

Cross, symbolical significance of the,

3"-
Cutzupits or mountain men, 298.

Danger, bishops should not desert

their sees in time of, 577-581.
Death-bed, a triumphant, 509-512.
Debate between Fortunius and Au-

gustin, 285-290.
Deliverance of Christian captive,

remarkable, 436.
Democritus refuted, 448-450.
Disinterestedness of Augustin, 362.
Dispensations, unity of Old and New

Testament, 481-483.
Donatists, controversy with, 276-285.
Dove, the form of a, symbol of the

Holy Ghost, 541, 542.
Dreams, marvellous, 510, 512, 513,

514-
Dreams, phenomena inexplicable,

513. 514. ^ ^„
Dress of women, 588.

Easter, observance of, 308-312.
Ecclesiastical cases, — Timotheus,

319, 320; Quintianus, 321, 332;

Abundantius, 322 ; Boniface and

Spes, 345-348; Pinianus, 459;

Antonius of Fussala, 560-562.
Election of Augustin's successor,

record of proceedings at, 568-

570.
Epicureans refuted, 443.
Epicureans extinct in fifth century,

. 442, 445-
Epicurus refuted, 448.
Eternity of punishment, 420, 422.
Eucharist to be taken fasting, 301.
Excommunication, example of rash,
5S9, 590.

Faith, perfect understanding not

essential to, 425, 426, 539, 540.
Falsehood in no case excusable, 251,

273. 351. 357, 547, 548.
Fasting before taking the Eucharist,

302, 3°3-


Feasts in honour of martyrs, censured,
239-241 ; abolished at Hippo,

253-256-
Forbearance, duty of mutual, 562-

563-

Ghostly apparitions, 511, 512.

God not seen with the bodily eyes,

498, 499.
Grace, human dependence on, 496,

497, 549-551. 571-
Greek, Augustin's imperfect knowl-
edge of, 251, 275.

Heavenly-mindedness, 451, 459-462.
Hebrew, Augustin's ignorance of,

3°3, 327-
Humility of Augustin, 236, 237, 241,

250, 270, 491, 494.

Humility commended, 454.

Hymn of Priscillianists, 457.

Incarnation, nature of, 474-477, 541,

542.

Infantile protest against idolatry,
marvellous, 40S.

Infants, sufferings of, difficult to ac-
count for, 526, 52S-531.

Irony, 234, 235, 267, 295, 298, 377,
378, 5S8.

Jonah's gourd, discussion as to, 327,

342, 361-

Jonah's history defended and alle-
gorized, 422, 423.

Jupiter, Apollonius more respectable
than, 4S9.

Latin clerks scarce in Palestine, 544.

Lent, observance of, 312.

Letter to Jerome, tedious journey of,

328.
Loaf exchanged between Christian

friends, 246, 260.
Love of God, 309, 553.
Love, brotherly, 556.

Manuscripts stolen from Jerome, 544.

Martyrs of Suffectum, 295.

Maundy Thursday, how observed,

302, 303.
Mercy to man recompensed with

mercy from God, 538.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 6ii


Monks, counsels to, 294, 318, 362.
Moon, the, a symbol of the Church,

305. 306.
Murder, judicial, of Marcellinus,

505-50S.
Music, symbolical value of, 413, 527.

Numbers, significance of, 308-309,

312-314.
Nun, on Demetrias becoming a, 504.
Nuns rebuked for unseemly strife,

563- 564-
Nunneries, rule of Augustmian, 564-

56S.

Oath, binding nature of an, 453-455,

458, 459-

Occupations of Augustin, multifari-
ous, 223, 414, 489, 539, 543, 570.

Ordination of Augustin, reference to,
238, 570.

Pagan objections to Christianity, 233,

234,422,423, 472, 473.
Paganism, arguments against, 234,

235. 295. 377> 378, 406, 585-587-
Paper scarce, 232.
Patience of Augustin, 271.
Patience recommended, 450, 451, 469.
Pelagianism, warnings against, 549-

552.
Pelagianism, measures against, 554-

556-
Persecution, earlier views of Augus-
tin on, 289; later views of Au-
gustin on, 367, 375, 3S2-386, 388-

390. 543. 545. 547-
Peter, successors of St., 298.

Piety of Augustin, 222, 228, 294,


Praise should not be vehemently de-
sired, 5S3.

Prayer, subjects of, 462-464, 466.

Prayer, continuance in, 464, 465.

Prayer, use of, 465.

Preaching, exam]jle of Augustin's
power in, 253-255.

Preaching of presbyters, 275.

Presents received by Augustin, 504,

572, 591-
Pride censured, 240, 241.
Punic language, preaching in, 364.

Reading of Scripture in churches,

327-
Rebuke of worldliness in a priest,

364. 365-

Relics of St. Stephen, 568.

Remorse, pangs of, 508.

Resurrection of Christ and of Laza-
rus compared, 414-417.

Riot at Calama, 378.

Riotous election of Pinianus at Hip-

po, 455. 456-
Rites and ceremonies of the Church,

300-315.
Rome, sieges of, referred to, 410.
Rome, Bishop of, appealed to, 560-

562.

Sabbath, law of the, typical, 310.
Saints, miracles wrought at tombs

of, 346.
Sanctuary, churches used as a, by

offenders, 436, 437, 589.
Scandals in the Church no reason for

forsaking it, 283, 284, 345, 558-

560.
Scriptures, Augustin's study of the,

238, 313-


Scriptures superior to all other writ-
ings, 413, 470, 480.

Scriptures, authority of, 490.

Septuagint version, Augustin's undue
reverence for, 341.

Sin, essential nature of, 537-538.

Sin, true hatred of, 496, 497.

Soldier, advices to a, 553, 554, 581, 582.

Soul, nature of the, 523-525.

Souls, origin of, 491-494.

Souls, condition of disembodied, 512-

. 514-
Spirits in prison, who were the, 519-

521.
Stoics, doctrines of, refuted, 443, 444,

. 534-537-
Stoics extinct in fifth century, 442,

445. 446-
Sympathy, Christian, 410, 411.

Torture, examination by, 470.
Trinity, mystery of the, 229-230, 540,
541-

Violence of barbarians, 433-437.
Violence of Donatists, 264, 371, 372,

433' 470.
Virtue, degrees of, 354, 355.

Ward of the Church, concerning

marriage of, 591.
Widows especially called to pray,

468.
World, vanity of this, 558.
Worldliness, warnings against, 573-

576-
Worship, public, 256, 315.

Zeal, an example of Christian, in
Orosius, 523.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Gen. i. 3, 4 .

. . 271

Num. xvi. 31-35 .

366

Ps. xi. 3 . . . .

306

Ps. xlix. 6, LXX. .

571

i. 14 .

• • 307

xxi. 5 . . .

301

xii. I .

394

xli.x. 12, LXX.

242

i. 31 .

• • 309

xxii. 28 . .

40S

xii. 6 .

• 314

1. I

389

11. 2 . .

• • 309

Deut. V. 6-21 . .

310

xii. 7 .

260

1. 1

400

ii. 2 . .

• . 5-6

V. II . . .

309

xii. 7 .

• 394

1. I, 2 . . . .

343

ii. 3 . .

. . . 309

V. 21 . . .

356

XV. 4 .

454

1-9

483

ii. 7 . .

■ • • 493

vii. 25, 26 .

293

xvi. 2 .

419

I. 20 . . . .

3S9

iv. 3. 4 •

. . 418

vii. 26. . .

291

xvi. 2 .

. 4S2

1. 20 . . . .

• 390

ix. 27 .

. . . 348

xii. 3 . . .

468

xvi. 3 .

483

Ii. ic . . . .

531

xii. . .

. . 479

xvii. II . .

294

xvi. 10

516

}i: \3 ■ ^ ■ ■

431

xii., xxvi.

xlii.,

xxix. 29 . .

347

xvi. 10

517

Hi. 6 ....

241

and xliii

• • • 3S3

xxxii. 7 . .

290

xviii. .

314

Iv. 5-8, LXX. .

. 402

xvi. 5 .

• • 3^4

xxxii. 39 . .

572

xviii. I

571

Iv. 6 ....

• 403

xvi. 12 .

. . 522

Josh. vi. 19 . . .

291

xix. 4 .

390

Iv. 14, 15. . .

• 392

xviii. 2-9

. . 404

xxii. 9-12

391

xix. 9 .

496

Iv. 18 ... .

• 398

xviii. 6.

• . 511

Judg. vi. 26 . . .

291

xxii. .

424

Ivi. 12 . . . .

• 550

xix. 1-3

. . 404

I Sam. i

468

xxii. 7, 8

425

Ivii. I . . . .

295

xxi. 10 .

• . 348

viii. 6, 7 .

467

xxii. 16, 17, 18 .

343

Ivii. 7, 8 . . .

334

xxii. 12

. . 548

xvii. 40-51

333

xxii. 16-18 . .

425

lix. I . . . .

466

xxii. 14

• • 393

xxiv. 7 . .

471

xxii. 26 . . .

462

Ixi. 2 . . . .

392

xxii. 18

• • 343

xxviii. 14 .

511

xxii. 27 . . .

297

Ixii. 10 . . .

461

xxii. 18

• • 373

2 Sam. xi. 4, 17

35'

xxii. 27, 28 . .

343

Ixiii. I . . .

461

xxii. 18

. . 400

xiii. 14 . .

348

xxii. 27, 28 . .

425

Ixvii. I, 2 . .

395

xxvi. 4 .

• • 389

xxi. 17 . .

580

xxiii. 5,6, LXX.

509

Ixviii. 6 . . .

414

xxvi. 4 .

• • 495

xxii. 2-51 .

3M

xxiv. I . . .

293

Ixviii. II, LXX.

334

xxvi. 31

. . 291

I Kings xvii. 22 .

478

XXV. 9.

294

l.wiii. 13 . . .

408

xxxi. 53

. . 291

xviii. 4, 40

384

XXV. 10

431

Ixviii. 18 . . .

549

xlvi. 27

. . 404

xviii. 40 .

288

XXV. 15

295

Ixviii. 28 . . .

569

xlix. 4 .

• . 348

xix. 8 . .

3'^

XXV. 17

575

Ixviii. 29. . .

582

Ex. iv. 24, 25

• • 243

2 Kings iv. 35 . .

47S

xxvii. 4

464

Ixix. 12 . . .

347

v. 9 . .

• • 384

I Ciiron. xii. 17, 18

334

xxvii. 4

467

Ixix. 26 . . .

347

vii., viii.

• . 478

2 Chron. xvi. 19 .

-7 -> ->

xxvii. 14

321

Ixxii. 7 . . .

306

viii. 19 .

• • 313

Job i. 12 . . . .

467

XXX. 7, LXX. .

550

Ix.xii. 8 . . .

3S9

xii. 13, 27

• • 304

ii. 6 . . . .

467

xxxi. 3, LXX. .

577

Ixxii. II . . .

368

xii., xix., XX

,xxxi. 313

vii. I, LXX. .

332

xxxiii. 15 (LXX.)

531

Ixxii. II . . .

547

xiii. 21 .

• • 541

vii. I . . . .

402

xxxiv. I . . .

469

Ixxii. 17-19 . .

3S9

xviii. 14-25

. . 526

vii. I, LXX. .

554

xxxiv. 2 . . .

295

l.xxii. 18 . . .

494

xix. 10, II

• • 3^3

xiv. 4, 5, LXX.

525

xxxiv. 2 . . .

551

l.xxvii. 2 (LXX.)

467

xix. 18 .

■ ■ 541

xxviii. 28 . .

535

xxxiv. 5 . . .

3S0

Ixxix. II . . .

294

XX. 1-17

• . 310

xxviii. 28 . .

536

XXXV. 12 . , .

369

Ixxx. 7, 19 . .

466

XX. 7 . . ^

• • 309

xxix. 14 . . .

536

XXXV. 13 . , .

270

Ixxxi. 10. . .

334

XX. 17

• • 356

Ps. ii. 7, 8 ...

284

xxxvi. . . .

285

lx.xxiv. 2, LXX.

509

xxiii. 15.

• • 305

ii. 7,8 ...

343

xxxvi. 8, 9 . .

497

l.x.xxiv. 5 . . .

313

xxxii. 6 .

• • 254

ii. 8 ....

367

xxxvi. 8-10 . .

468

Ixxxvi. II . .

431

xxxii. 27

• • 384

ii. 10, II, I, 2 .

385

xxxvi. 10. . . .

250

Ixxxviii. 5 . .

5'6

xxxii. 27, 2i

5 . . 284

iii.3 ....

551

xxxvii. 4 . . , .

309

Ix.xxix. 30-33 .

255

x,xxiv. 28

• • 312

iv. 2 . . . .

343

xxxvii. 5, 6 . . .

571

Ixxxix. 39 . .

306

Num. xi. . .

• • 467

iv. 7, LXX. .

334

xxxvii. 23 . . .

571

xc. 12 . . . .

392

XV. 35

. . 266

V. 6 ....

357

xii. 8, LXX. . .

592

ex. 14, 15, LXX.

461

xvi. 31-3

3 • ■ 299

vi. 3 . . . .

590

xlv. 11-16 . . .

393

xci. I . . . .

414

xvi. 31-3

3 • • 344

vi. 8, LXX. .

590

xlv. 13 , . .

270

xciv. 8, 9 . . .

502

xvi. 31-3

3 . . 400

vii. 3, 4 . . .

466

xlv. 13, 14 . ,

270

xciv. 12, 13 . .

348

XVI. 31, 3

5 . . 284

X. 3 . . . .

306

xlvi. II . . .

310

xciv. 15 . . .

295

xvi. 31-3

5 . . 296

xi. 2 . . . .

393

xlviii. 2 . . .

391

xciv. 19 ... .

275

6]

2

LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


613


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Ps. xciv. 19 ... .

3'i

Isa. xxvi. 20 . .

. . 270

Baruch iii. 37 . . . 520

Matt. ix. 1 5 . . . .

26(;

xciv. 19 ... .

401

xxviii. 16 .

• • 520

Song of the Three

ix. 15

267

xcvi. 5 . . .

419

xl. 26 . .

• . 527

Holy Children, vs.

X. 16

307

c. 3

5S4

li.7,8 . .

• . 347

3-14

434

X. 16

534

ci. I

53S

Ii. 7,8 . .

. . 424

Song of the 1 hree

X. 23

577

ci. 5

3S4

liii. 7 . . .

• • 3'3

Holv Children, vs.

X. 29

512

cii. 26, 27 . . .

483

Ivii. 1 8, 19,

LXX. 460

I5-2'2 .....

436

xi. II

55:

ciii. 5

551

Ixvi. 5 . .

• • 372

2 Mace. vu. I .

274

xi. 13

33<.

ciii. 10 . . . .

401

Jer. ii. 28, LXX

• • . 538

vii. I .

340

xi. 19

26S

civ. 4

404

ii. 30 . . .

• . 383

vii. 18,

19

435

xi. 28, 29 .

3'^

cvii. 14 ... .

5-0

ix. 24 . .

• • 305

Matt. i. 20 . .

5'2

xi. 2S-30 .

24S

cviii. 5 . . . .

382

ix. 24 . .

• • 497

i. 22 .

479

xi. 30 .

25^

ex. 3, LXX. . .

542

xvii. 5 . .

• • 375

ii. 16 .

246

xi. 30 .

30c

cxiii. 1-3 . . .

400

xvii. 5 .

• • 571

iii. 12 .

394

xi. 30 .

571

cxv. 5, 6 . . . .

419

xx.\i. 31 .

• • 355

iii. 12 .

399

xii. 8-12

26e

cxvi. 8 . . . .

461

x.\xi. 31, 32

• • 339

iii. 12 .

559

xii. 28 .

31:

cxvi. 9 . . . .

461

xxxi. 32 . .

• . 483

iv. 2 .

312

xii. 30 .

55^

cxviii. 22 ... .

520

xxxvi. 23 .

. . 296

iv. 4 .

373

xii. 39, 40 . .

42.

cxix. 53, 158 . .

392

XXXV i. 23, 3

3 • • 344

V. 7 .

^f

xiii. 24-30 . .

38;

cxix. 71, LXX. .

469

Ezek. xiv. 14, iJ:

), 20 . 434

V. 8 .

381

xiii. 24-39 . .

39^

cxix. 120 . . .

311

xviii. 4 .

. . 289

V. 8

461

xiii. 29 . .

28.

cxix. 133 . . .

466

xviii. 4 .

. . 406

V. 8 .

501

xiii. 30

29c

cxx. 6, 7 . . . .

369

xviii. 14

• • 589

V. 8 .

539

xiii. 30-3C

1 •

34;

cxxii. I . . . .

275

XX. 25

• • 339

V. 9 .

276

xiii. 43

34

cxxiv. 8 . . . .

411

XX. 25

• • 353

V. 9

554

xvi. 18

29;:

cxxvi. I . . . .

275

xxviii. 3

• • 434

V. 9

^ll

xvi. 19

58c

cxxxii. I, LXX. .

466

xxxiv. 4

• • 545

V. 10

286

xvi. 24

31

cxxxii. 8 . . . .

3^3

xxxviii.-x

xxix. . 522

V. 10

367

xvi. 26

57

cxli. 5 . . . .

250

xl.-xliii.

. . 522

V. 10

384

xvii. 3 .

51

cxli. 5 . . . .

253

xliii. 19

• . 307

V. 14

392

xvii. 5.

54

cxli. 5 . . .

261

Dan. ii. 34, 45

• • 520

V. 14, I

5.

16

559

xvii. 26, 2

7 •

36

cxlii. 7 . . .

519

iii. 28 .

• . 545

V. 16

259

xviii. 7

33

cxliii. 2 . . .

536

vi. 23, 24

. . . 389

V. 16

275

xviii. 7

34

cxliii. 2 . . .

537

ix. 3-20

• • • 435

V. 16

471

xviii. 7

55'

cxliii. 2 . . .

538

Joel ii. 32 . .

. . . 496

V. 16

497

xviii. 10

5o<

cxliv. 15 . . .

467

Jonah iv. 6 .

■ • ■ 327

V. 21

. 267

xvni. 15

40

Prov. i. 4 . . . .

534

Hab. ii. 4 . .

. . . 304

V- 34, 2

6

. 292

xviii. 16

• 56

iii. 12 . . .

435

ii. 4. .

. . . 311

V. 37

• 357

xviii. 18

iv. 27, LXX.

571

ii. 4. .

. . . 536

V.39

291

xix. II

• 55

viii. 25 . . .

422

Zech. v. 4

. . . 454

V.39

• 293

xix. 2I-2(

. 46

viii. 35, LXX. .

571

xii. I .

• • • 531

v.39

• 484

xix. 27

• 25

ix. 8 . . .

563

Mai. i. 2 . .

. . . 348

V. 39-41

• "^l^

XX. 9, 10

• 31

ix. 8 . . .

576

i. II . .

. . . 389

V. 39-41

■ 483

xxi. 12

• 25

ix. 9 . . .

388

Tob. xii. 8 .

. . . 469

V. 40 .

. 386

xxi. 25

• 39

xiii. 22 . . .

400

xii. 12 .

. . . 465

V. 41

• 294

xxi. 44

• 52

xviii. 18 . .

580

xii. 16 .

. . . 511

V. 41

• 489

xxii. 9.

• 55

xix. 12. . .

371

Wisd. iii. 6 .

• • • 554

V. 44

. 412

xxii. 10

• 30

xix. 21 . . .

430

iv. 9 .

• . ■ 571

V. 44

• 575

xxii. 29

• 59

xxiii. 14 . .

545

V. 3. 4

. . . 306

V- 45

• 305

xxii. 37-39 •

. 48

xxvi. 27 . .

• 371

v. 6 .

• • • 305

V. 45

• 383

xxii. 37-40 .

• 55

x.xvi. 27 . .

• 3S9

vi. 17 .

. . . 413

V. 45

. 562

xxii. 40 . .

• 31

xxvii. 6 . .

• 360

vii. 22

. . . 541

VI. 6

. . 271

xxii. 40 . .

• 53

xxvii. 6 . .

. 383

viii. I .

. . . 477

vi. 7, 8

• 464

xxiii. 2, 3

• 55

xxvii. 20, LXX.

566

viii. 20

. . . 571

vi. 12

• 537

xxiii. 3 . .

• 29

xxix. 19 . .

. 388

viii. 21

. , . 494

vi. 12

• 554

xxiii. 3 . .

■ 34

xxx. 3, 4 . .

. 422

viii. 21

• • • 551

vi. 13

• 497

xxiii. 8 . .

• 52

XXX. 8 . . .

. 466

viii. 21

• • • 552

vi. 21

• 554

xxiv. 12 . .

■ 33

xxx. 8, 9 . .

• 463

ix. 15 .

. . . 469

vii. I

. 402

xxiv. 12, 13 .

■ 34

xxx. 12 . .

■ 395

ix. 15 .

. . . 492

vii. 2

• 345

xxiv. 12, 13 .

• 34

Eccles. iii. 4 . . .

. 266

x. I, 2

. . . 5'6

vii. 2

. 420

xxiv. 12, 13 .

• 39

V. 7 . . .

• 537

xiii. 9.

. • • 305

vii. 3

• 567

xxiv. 12, 13 .

• 55

xi. 2 . . .

• 310

xvi. 21

. . . 301

vii. 4

. 364

xxiv. 14 , .

• 29

xii. 7 . .

• 492

Ecclus. iii. I •

...268

vii. 6

• ^P

xxiv. 14 . .

• 39

xii. 7 . .

• 531

iv. 21

. . . 400

vii. 7-1

I

. 464

xxiv. 31 . .

• 39

xxx. 12 . .

• 544

V. 8 .

• • • 574

vii. II

• 571

xxiv. 41 . .

• 49

Cant. i. 7 . . . .

• 391

vi. 18

• . • 571

vii. 12

• 359

xxvi. 2 . .

. 26

i. 7 . . . .

• 392

xi. 7 .

. . . 279

vii. 14

• 393

xxvi. 3, 4 .

. 26

i.8. . . .

• 392

xviii. 6

■ • • 474

vii. 15,

'16

. 286

xxvi. 17 . .

• 27

ii. 2 ...

• 392

xxii. 6

. . . 324

vii. 16

. 254

x.xvi. 20-28 .

. 28

Song of Sol. viii. 6

■ 536

xxiii. 6

. . . 466

viii. 8

. 301

xxvi. 39 . .

. 46

Isa. ii. 2 . . . .

• 392

xxvii. I

2 . . 305

viii. 8-IO

• 553

xxvi. 42 . .

• ^l

iii. 12, LXX. .

. 261

xxvii. 2

9 • • 371

viii. II

• 393

xxvi. 52 . .

■ 38

vi. 3 . . . .

• 313

xxxiv. 2

5 • • 546

viii. 22

. 521

xxvi. 53 . .

• 5»

viii. 14 . . .

. 520

xxxvi. 4

, 18 . 466

viii. 22

• 523

xxvi. 75 • .

• ^^

ix. 2 . . . .

. 520

xxxviii.

16-18, 592

ix. 12,

13

• 497

xxviii.

I

• •

. 26

6i4


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Mark i. 44 . . . . 356

John V. 24 ... . 304

Acts xxi. 24 ... . 352

Rom. X. 3 .... 496

xiii. 32

■ 547

v. 25 .

• 521

xxi. 26 .

• 352

X. 4

• 339

xiv. 38

• 571

v. 29 .

531

xxiii. 3-5

• 485

X. 14

496

xvi. 2 .

. 269

vi. 44 .

2^Z

xxiii. 17-2

4

294

X. 18

39c

xvi. 12, I

\

404

vi. 67 .

546

xxiii. 23

• 337

xi. 23

319

Luke ii. 36, 2>7

46S

vii. ID .

356

xxvu. 33

. 269

XI. 23

368

iii. 14 .

486

vii. 37 .

248

xxviii. 14,

30

337

xii. 3

552

iii. 14 .

553

vii. 39 .

313

Rom. i. 3 . .

314

xii. 1 1

295

iii. 22 ,

540

viii. 36.

413

i. 14

365

xii. 12

• 304

V. 32 .

424

viii. 36.

496

i. 17

552

xii. 12

311

vi. 12 .

465

viii. 38.

413

i. 20

415

xii. 12

321

vi. 29 .

485

viii. 44.

38 1

i. 21-2

5

413

xii. 15

411

vi. 37, 38

53^

X. I, 2 .

520

i. 24

493

xii. 15

46c

vii. 9 .

476

X. 12, 13

578

i. 25

3°7

xii. 16

497

viii. 32

467

X. 16 .

389

11. I

279

xii. 17

473

X. 37 .

409

X. 16 .

393

ii. 6, 7

• 311

xii. 17

483

^\- 3 •

550

xi- 19-35

592

iii. 21

312

xiii. I

411

XI. 5-8

464

xiii. I .

304

iv. 25

• 303

xiii. I

• 573

xi. 9-13

464

xiii. 2 .

384

V. 3-5

. 411

xiii. 1-3

• 38c

xi. 20 . .

313

xiii. 10.

2S8

v-3-5

• 497

xiii. 2-4

• 367

xii. 47, 48

433

xiii. 36.

3S3

v-5

• 309

xiii. 8 .

• 556

xiii. 11-13 .

469

xiv. 6 .

261

V- 5

35^^

xiii. 9, 10

537

xiii. 27 . .

539

xiv. 6 .

341

V.5

380

xiii. 10

3'^

xiv. 21-23 •

547

xiv. 6 .

416

V- 5

• 496

xiii. ID

• 35^

xiv. 23 .

3S3

xiv. 6 .

431

v-5

497

xiii. 10

- 49^

xiv. 23

559

xiv. 16, 17

500

V- 5

• 549

xiii. ID

y,^

xvi. 1 6

339

xiv. 27 .

261

V- 5

553

xiii. 10

552

xvi. 16 . .

355

xiv. 27 .

332

V- 5

571

xiii. 10

553

xvi. 21-23 .

347

xiv. 30.

520

v. 12

. 410

xiii. 13

. 24c

xvi. 22, 23 .

532

XV. 2 .

396

v. 12

. 520

xiii. 13, I

4

• 235

xvi. 26 . .

517

XV. 13 .

536

V. 18

. 530

xiii. 14

462

xvii. 26, 27 .

520

xvi. 12 .

363

V. 19

• 467

xiv. 3 .

. 268

xviii. 1-8 . .

464

xvi. 12 . .

532

V. 20

• 356

xiv. 4 .

■ 367

xviii. 8

390

xvi. 33.

272

V. 20

• 540

xiv. 4 .

. 402

xviii. ^ .

399

xvii. 12

540

vi. 3, 4

311

xiv. 5 .

• 543

xviii. II, 12

267

xviii. 23

485

vi. 4

• 304

xiv. 20

. 26S

xviii. 22, 23 .

259

xix. 24 .

243

vi. 4

- 3^^

xiv. 23

552

xix. 6 . .

301

XX. I

269

vi. 4

. 410

XV. I .

• 31S

xix. g . .

460

XX. 14-29

404

vi. 6

• 304

XV. 4 .

34i

xix. 10

550

XX. 26 .

476

vi. 6

• 3"

I Cor. i. 4-7 .

• 39-1

XX. 17 .

520

xxi. 6, II

314

vi.9

• 414

i. 12, 13

• 555

XX. 36 . .

312

xxi. 17 .

393

vi. 9

■ 52S

i. 14 .

• 398

XX. 36 . .

500

Acts i. 8 . .

422

vi. 9

• 573

i. 21, 25

• 54c

xxi. 18

592

i. 15,8.

390

vi. 19

• 496

i- 23-25

• 587

xxii. 20

302

ii. . .

390

vii. 13

• 356

i. 24 .

• 477

xxii. 43 .

465

ii.2, 3 .

542

vii. 13

496

i- 30, 31

■ 497

xxiii. 34

485

ii. 24, 27

5>6

vii. 18

571

i. 31 .

• 34S

xxiv. I

269

ii. 28 .

517

vii. 24, 25

413

ii. 8

541

xxiv. 15-43

404

iii. 7 .

245

vii. 24, 25

525

ii. 9

465

xxiv. 44, 47

343

iv. II .

520

viii. 3 . .

491

ii. II

• 38c

XXIV. 44-47

3S9

iv. 22 .

245

viii. 3 . .

521

ii. II

. 462

xxiv. 46 .

390

iv. 32, 35

564

viii. 10, II

• 304

ii. 14

381

xxiv. 47

391

IX. 4 .

314

viii. 13 .

311

ii. 14

• 39^

John i. I . .

478

X. 4 . .

553

viii. 18

434

ii. 15

• 53S

i. I, 14.

572

X. 13-48

22,^^

viii. 20 .

309

iii. 2

• 39c

i. 16, 17

339

X. 25-48

526

viii. 23, 24

• 304

Hi- 3

394

i. 16, 17

355

xi. 1-18

336

viii. 23, 25

311

111. 6

39S

i. 18 .

501

xiv. 27 .

336

viii. 24 .

309

iii. 7

494

i. 29 .

307

XV. 1-12

336

viii. 24 .

464

iv. 2

357

i-33 •

297

XV. 9

372

viii. 24, 25

304

iv. 5

347

1- Z2, ■

375

XV. 41 .

237

viii. 24, 25

3;'

iv. 5

38c

iii. 2

553

xvi. 1-3

Z37

viii. 25-27

46S

IV. 5

402

iii. s .

407

xvi. 3 .

352

viii. 26 . .

462

IV. 5

461

iii. 10 .

526

xvi. 22, 23

384

viii. 26

467

'y-s

462

iii. 18 .

420

xvii. 18

373

viii. 28 .

418

IV. 6

403

iii. 29 .

2S8

xviii. 17

3S4

viii. 28 .

469

iv. 7

550

iv. I, 2.

2S8

xviii. 18

337

viii. 32 .

384

iv. 7

571

iv. 14 .

. 245

xviii. 18

35s

viii- 35-3S

)

497

iv. 15

559

iv. 22 .

243

xix. 5 .

398

viii. 37 .

510

V. 5

3S4

iv. 24 .

• 346

XX. 7 .

268

ix. II, 12

418

v. 6

563

iv. 24 .

. 381

XX. II .

268

ix. 14 .

547

v. 7

304

V. 17 .

• 522

xxi. 17-26

337

ix. 2,3^ etc

520

V. II

240

V. 17 .

. 526

xxi. 20-25

352

X. 2, 3.

3S5

v. II .

254

V. 18 .

• 339

xxi. 21 . .

352

X.3 .

273

V. 12 .

347

V. 18 .

• 355

xxi. 23, 24

. 384

X. 3 .

339

V. 12,

13-

402

LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


615


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGI

I

Cor. vi. 9-1 1 . .

254

I Cor. XV. 53 . . . 310

Gal. V. 2 356

Col. iii. I, 2 . . . . 30.

vi. 13. . .

256

XV. 53

492

V. 2, 4, 18

339

iii. 3. .

42:

vii. 7 . . .

553

XV. 54

312

V.4 . .

356

111. 3, 4 .

30'

vii. 10-16 .

252

XV. 54

462

V. 6 .

304

iii. 3, 4 .

461

vii. 32-34 .

588

2 Cor. i. 23 .

563

V. 6 .

340

iii. 4 . .

3o(

viii. I . . .

316

ii. 7, II ■

362

V. 6 . .

SOI

iii. 5. .

38;

viii. I . . . .

332

ii. 7, II

402

V. 6 .

552

iii. 9, 10

30^

viii. I . . .

536

i!i-3 •

254

V. 6 .

553

iii. 10 .

3Sc

viii. I . . . .

552

111.6 .

496

V. 7,8

563

iii. 13 .

49?

viii. 8 . . . .

26S

iii. 18

500

V. 13

242

I Thess. ii. 5

455

viii. 9, II . .

578

iv. 6 .

380

V. 15

403

ii. 12

52:

viii. II . . .

332

iv. 7 .

550

V. 17

492

ii. 13

54f

viii. II . . .

390

iv. 16

304

V. 18

356

iii. 12

27(

ix. 13 . . .

275

iv. 16

509

V. 19-21 .

254

iv. 12

59;

i.x. 15 . . .

316

V. 4 . .

492

V. 19-21

399

V. 14

5«

ix. 19-22 . .

359

V. 4-8

502

V. 22, 23

254

v. 14

57:

ix. 20 . . . .

V3

V. 6, 7

312

vi. I . .

240

V. 17

46

ix. 20 . . .

338

V. 6, 7

461

vi. I, 3

572

V. 17,

[8

55^

ix. 22 . . . .

274

vi.7 .

■^ -> -^

vi. 4 .

^y

V. 19

40;

ix. 27 . . . .

295

vi. 13, 14

464

vi. 5.

. 3^7

2 Thess. i. 11

41J

ix. 27 . . . .

34S

vi. 14 .

347

VI. 14

311

I Tim. i. 5 .

3'<

ix. 27 . . . .

364

■VI. 15 .

588

vi. 14

559

i. 5 .

35?

X. 4 ... .

307

vii. 5 . ,

348

vi. 15

340

i. 5 .

• 46:

X. 4 ... .

541

ix. 7 .

538

vii. 2

359

i. 5 .

• 53(

X. 19, 20 . . .

419

xi. 2, 3

550

Eph. ii. 6 .

304

i. 8 .

49(

X. 20 . . . .

5S8

xi. 12 .

347

iii. 17,

's

3"

i. 17 .

• 50

X. 25, 26 . .

293

xi. 13-15

300

iii. 20

469

i. 20 .

. 38^

X. 28 . . . .

290

XI. 26

348

iv. 2, 3

289

ii. 2 .

• 57.

X.3I . . .

295

xi. 29

274

iv. 2, 3

562

ii. 2 .

. 58^

X.33 . . . .

579

xi. 29

347

iv. 3

284

ii. 5 .

47:

X.33 • • •

583

xi. 29

452

iv. 3

318

iv. 1-5

31.

XI. I . . .

•1^2

xi. 29

558

IV. 7

549

iv. 3 .

. 25:

xi. 5-13 . .

588

xi. 29

579

iv. 10

. 422

iv. 4 .

29:

XI. 20 . .

302

xi. 33 ■

577

iv. 20, 2

:i

348

iv. 4 .

35?

xi. 20-22

254

xii. 7 . .

402

iv. 26

. 272

iv. 12

24

xi. 26 . .

55S

xii. 7-9

383

iv. 32

295

V. 5 •

. 46c

xi. 29 . .

301

xii. 7-9

467

V. I, 2

• 499

V. 5 ;

. 46J

xi. 31 . .

562

xii. 14

oj4

V. 14

521

V. 5, 6

46

xi. 31, 32 .

435

Gal. i. 8 . .

298

V. 19

• 295

V. 20.

. 40:

xi; 33' 34 •

303

i. 8 . .

390

V. 27

394

V. 23.

46:

xii. 6 . . .

295

i.9 . .

391

V. 39

462

vi. 6-10

• 46:

xii. 9, 10, 30

346-

i. 10 . .

241

vi. 12

. 576

vi. 16

. 38c

xii. 26 . .

294

i. 10 . .

. 583

vi. 13-17

• 333

vi. 16

• 49:

xii. 26 . .

411

i. 18 . .

336

vi. 16 .

• 295

vi. 16

50

xii. 26 . .

495

i. 20 . .

273

Phil. i. 15, 17

• 398

vi. 16

• 52;

xiii. 3 . .

362

i. 20 . .

358

i. 15, 18

. 387

vi. 17-IC

46c

xiii. 3 . .

396

i. 20 . .

548

i. 23 .

• 509

2 Tim. i. 9 . '

4if

xiii. 3 . .

545

i. 23, 24

401

1. 23, 24

• 3"

ii. 17.

30^

xiii. 4, 8 . .

316

ii. I, 2, 14

336

i. 23, 24

• 579

ii. 17.

34?

xiii. 5 . .

313

ii.3-5 •

353

i. 27 .

■ 451

ii. 20, 21

36c

xiii. 5 . .

567

ii. 8 . .

335

ii. 9. .

• 519

ii. 24-26

30c

xiii. 5 . .

579

ii. 11-14

251

ii. 12, 13

571

ii. 25, 26

27(

xiii. 12 . .

250

ii. 11-14

252

ii. 13 .

309

iii. 2 .

54?

xiii. 12 . .

380

ii. 11-21

393

11. 13 .

• 551

iii. 6 .

55.

xiii. 12 . .

3S1

ii. 11-21

526

ii. 20, 21

. 348

iii. 8 .

31:

xiii. 12 . .

498

ii. 14

273

ii. 21 .

. 362

iv. 2 .

26^

xiii. 12 . .

500

ii. 14

334

ii. 21 .

558

Tit. i. 9-1 1 .

26.

xiv. 33 . .

539

ii. 14

351

ii. 21 .

579

i. 9-13 .

26-

xiv. 38 . .

539

ii. 14

548

iii. 2 .

349

i. 13 . .

46:

XV. 12 . .

394

ii. 18

400

iii. 8 .

274

i. IS . .

31.

XV. 14, 15 .

252

ii. 20

384

iii. 8 .

340

ii. 7 . .

S6i

XV. 16 . .

404

ii. 21

356

iii. 12, 13

312

ii. 14 . .

39:

XV. 21, 22 .

530

iii. 1, 3

393

iii. 15, 16

395

iii. 2 . .

471

XV. 22 . .

543

iii. 16

298

iii. 15, 16

499

iii. 10, II

27(

XV. 24 . .

563

iii. 16

343

iii. 19 .

256

Heb. i. 7 . .

40-

XV. 26 . .

312

iii. 19

356

i^-5 ,

471

xi. 6 .

55-

XV. 26, S3, 54

306

iii. 24

496

IV. 5, 6

451

xi. 40 .

515

XV. 28 . .

503

iii. 27

422

iv. 6

465

xii. 6 .

43.

XV. 28 . .

563

iv. 4 .

339

iv. 7 .

468

xii. 14 .

5°:

XV. 33, 34 .

347

iv. II

307

iv. 8-9

583

Jas. i. 17 . .

55c

XV. 33, 34 .

394

iv. 19

• 351

iv. 9

295

i. 17 . . .

554

XV. 34 . .

403

iv. 19

• 393

Col. i. 6 .

559

i. 20 . .

59c

XV. 51 . .

• 312

iv. 19

. 548

i. 18.

304

ii. 1-6 .

53:

XV. 52 . .

■ 415

iv, 27 ,

. 392

ii. 12

304

ii. 6-9 . .

53'

XV. 53 . .

• 304

iv. 29

384

ii. 17

424

ii.8, 9 . .

53^

6i6


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Jas. ii. 10 523

I Pet. iv. I, 6 . . . 518

I John ii. 15-17 . . 574

I John iv. 16 . . . 332

ii. 10

532

iv. 6

521

ii. 15-17

575

iv. 16

499

ii. 10

535

iv. 8

372

ii. 16

495

iv. 18

496

ii. 13

538

iv. 8

396

ii. 19

393

iv. 18

571

iii. 2

332

iv. 17

521

iii. 2 .

321

v. 19.

394

iii. 2

535

V. 3

562

iii. 2 . ,

380

v. 21

419

iii. 2

537

V. 8

347

iii. 2 .

461

Rev. i. 5 .

517

309

2 Pet. i. 19

461

iii. 2 .

501

ii. 1-3

283

iv. 6

399

X , "■■ '9

496

iii. 15

567

11. 4, 5

283

V. 12

357

I John 1. 5

380

iii. 16

577

V- 5 •

307

1 Pet. ii. 4

307

i. 8

535

iv. 8 .

503

vii. 9

393

iii. 1S-21

5'5

i. 8

537

iv. 8, i6

572

xxii. II

348

iv.

f-3

256

ii. 2

394

iv. 12

• 500

LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


INDEX OF AUTHORS QUOTED.


Ambrose, 500-502.
Augustin (other works of), 219, 220,
249, 275, 2S5, 301, 369, 371, 498,

509. 523. 525. 529. 543. 568, 591-

Cicero, 447, 449, 462, 475, 484, 522.
Codex Justinianus, 2S0, 471.
Codex Theodosianus, 257.
Cyprian, 358, 395, 407, 531, 54S.

Dupin, 360.

Ennius, 583.


Gibbon, 473, 552.
Horace, 583.

Jerome, 342, 500, 502, 525, 52S, 534,

549-
Juvenal, 4S6.

Livy, 328.
Lucan, 235.

Persius, 325, 439, 582.
Pliny, 476.
Possidius, 23S.


Quintilian, 471.

Riddle, 554.

Sallust, 483, 486, 534.

Terence, 377.
Tillemont, 410.
Tychonius, 387.

Virgil, 233, 235, 325, 328, 472, 478,

C22,


INDEX

EXHIBITING THE ORDER ACCORDING TO WHICH THE LETTERS TRANSLATED IN THESE VOLUMES ARE QUOTED
WHEN REFERRED TO BY ANY AUTHOR {e.^': TILLEMONT, PAREUS, ETC.) PRIOR TO THE GENERAL RECEPTION
OF THE BENEDICTINE AS THE STANDARD EDITION IN THE BEGINNING OF LAST CENTURY. THE NUMBER
IN THE BENEDICTINE EDITION IS PLACED OPPOSITE THE EARLIER NUMBER OF EACH LETTER.


1 132

ii i3'5

iii 137

iv 136

V 138

vi 92

vii. 143

viii 28

ix 40

X 71

xi 75

xii 67

xiii 68

xiv 72

XV. 73

xvi 74

xvii. ...... 39

xviii 81

xi.x 82

xxiii 98

xxiv 102

XXV. 195

xxvi 123

xxvii 165

xxviii 166

xxix 167

XXX 172

xxxi 25

xxxii 27

xxxiii 30

xxxiv 31

xxxix in 26

xli in 26

xlii 232

xliii 16

xliv 17

xlviii 93

xlix 102

1 185

Iv 117


Ivi.. . .
Ix. . ,

118
86

Ixii.
Ixiii. .

192
18

Ixiv. . .

22

Ixvii. .
Ixviii. .

227
88

Ixx.
Ixxi. .

220
6

Ixxii. .

7

Ixxiii. .
Ixxv. .
Ixxvi. .

245

250

60

Ixxvi i.

Ixxxi. .

Ixxxii.

Ixxxiv.

Ixxxvi.

Ixxxvii.

41

48
203

19

36

210

xcvni. .
xcix. .

163
164

c. . .

cii. . .
ciii.

159
169
211

civ.

191

cix.

211

ex. . .
cxi. . .

213

148

CXlll. .

15

cxiv. .

5

cxv. a .

9

cxv. d .

14

cxvi. .

10

cxvu. .

4

CXVIH. .

54

CXLX. .

cxxi. .
cxxii. .
cxxiv. .

55

• 130
III

. 96

CXXVl. .

cxxvii.
cxxix. .
cxxx. .
c.xxxi. .
cxxxiii.
cxxxiv.
cxxxvi.
cxxxvii.
cxxxviii.
cxliii. .
cxliv. .
cxlvii. .
cxlviii.
cxlix. .
cli. . .
cliii. .
cliv. .
clvi. .
clviii. .
clix. .
clxi. .
clxii. .
clxiii. .
clxiv. .
clxv. .
clxvii. .
clxviii.
clxix. .
clxxi. .
cl.xxii. .
clxxiii.
clxxix.
clx.x.x. .
cxcviii.
cci. . .
ccii.
cciii. .
cciv. .


20
1 00

97
144

lOI

99
58
77
78

1 22

188

145

33

21

38
3

46

47

131

139

^33

49

43

44

87

53
89

34

35
76

51
66

150

228

148

90

91

23

173


ccv 189

ccvii 70

ccviii 218

ccix 208

ccxiii 1

ccxiv 2

ccxvi 85

ccxvii 59

ccxviii 13

ccxxiii 61

ccxxiv 125

ccxxv 126

ccxxvii 124

ccxxx 115

ccxxxi no

cc.xxxiii. .
ccxxxv. . . .
ccxxxvi. . . .
ccxxx viii. . .
ccxxxix. . . .

ccxl

ccxli

ccxliv. . . .

ccxlv

ccxlviii 263

ccxli.x 94

ccl 95

ccli 279

ccliii. a . . . . 237

ccliii. i> . . . . 103

ccliv 104

cclviii 158

cclix

cclx


254
64

65
69

83
63
62

79
8


.... 151
. . . . iSo
cclxi 209


cclxu. .
cclxiv.
cclxvii.
cclxviii.

617


229
231

5°
II


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


INDEX OF THE PERSONS WHOSE CORRESPONDENCE WITH AUGUSTIN IS PRESERVED. THE LETTERS OMITTED
IN THIS SELECTION ARE ENCLOSED IN BRACKETS. THE NUMBER OF THE LETTER IS IN ROMAN NUMERALS.


Albina (Pinianus and Melania), to,

cxxiv. 452.
Albina, to, c.xxvi. 455.
Alypius, to, from Paulinus and The-

rasia, [xxiv.].
Alypius, to, xxix. 253; Ixxxiii. 361;

cxxv. 453; ccxxvii. 576.
Anapsychia (and Marcellinus), from

Jerome, clxv. 522.
Anastasius, to, cxlv. 495.
Anon, to Augustin, [cclxx.].
Antoninus, to, xx. 236.
Apringius, to, [cxxxiv.].
Armentarius (and Paulina), to,

[cxxvii.].
Asellicus, to, [cxcvi.].
Audax, from, [cclx.].
Audax, to, [cclxi.].
Aurelius, to, xxii. 239; xli. 275; Ix.

317; [clxxiv.].
Auxilius, to, ccl. 589.

Benenatus, to, [ccliii.] ; ccliv. 591.
Boniface, to Bishop, xcviii. 406.
Boniface, to Count, clxxxv. — see

Anti-Donatist, vol. i. 479-520;

clxxxix. 552 ; ccxx. 573.

Caecilianus, to, Ixxxvi. 365 ; cli. 504.

Caslestine, to, cxcii. 555; ccix. 560.

Carthage, to Council of, from Inno-
cent, [clxxxi.].

Castorius, to, from Alypius and Au-
gustin, Ixix. 325.

Casulanus, to, xxxvi. 265.

Celer, to, [ivi.], [Ivii.].

Ceretius, to, ccxxxvii. 587.

Chrisimus, to, [ccxliv.].

Christinus, to, [cclvi.].

Cirta, to the people of, cxliv. 494.

Claudius, to, [ccvii.].

Coelestinus, to, xviii. 235.

Consentius, from, [cxix.].

Consentius, to, [cxx.], [ccv.].

Cornelius, to, [cclix.].

Cresconius, to, [cxiii.].

Crispinus of Calama, to, li. 296; Ixvi.

Cylinus (and Proculus), to, ccxix.
572.

Dardanus, to, [clxxxvii.].
Darius, to Count, ccxxix. 581 ccxxxi.
582.

618


Darius, from, [ccxxx.].
Deogratias, to, cii. 414.
Deuterius, [ccxxxvi.].
Dioscorus, from, cxvii. 437.
Dioscorus, to, cxviii. 43S.
Donatus, to (Proconsul], c. 41 r ; [cxii.].
Donatus, to (Donatist presbyter),

clxxiii. 544.
Donatists, to the, Ixxvi. 343 ; [cv.].
Donatists, to the [from Council of

Zerta], [cxli.].
Dulcitius, to, [cciv.].

Ecdicia, to, [cclxii.].

Eleusius (Glorius, etc.), to, xliii. 285.

Eleusius (Glorius and the Felixes),

to, xliv. 285.
Elpidius, to, [ccxlii.].
Emeritus, to, Ixxxvii. 365.
Eraclius, designation of, as Augus-

tin's colleague and successor,

ccxiii. 568.
Eudoxius, to, xlviii. 294.
Eufrates (and Saturninus), [cxlii.].
Evodius, from, clviii. 509; [clx.],

[clxi.] ; clxiii. 515.
Evodius, to, clix. 513; [clxii.] ; clxiv.

515; cLxix. 539.
Eusebius, to, xxxiv. 262 ; xxxv. 263.

Fabiola, to, [cclxvii.].
Felicia, to, ccviii. 558.
Felicitas, to, ccx. 562.
Felix, to the brothers, xliii. 276; xliv.

276.
Felix (and Hilarinus), to, Ixxvii. 344.
Felix, to, [cclii.].
Festus, to, Ixxxix. 373.
Florentina, to, [cclxvii.].
Florentinus, to, [cxiv.].
Fortunatus, to, cxv. 436.
Fortunatianus, to, cxlviii. 498.

Gaius, to, xix. 236.

Generosus, to, liii. 298.

Generosus, to (magistrate in Numid-

ia), cxvi. 437.
Glorius (and others), to, xliii. 276;

xliv. 285.
Grammaticus (and others), to, xliii.

276; xliv. 2S5.

Hermogenianus, to, i. 219.
Hesychius, to, [cxcvii.], [cxcix.].


Hesychius, from, [cxcviii.].
Hilarinus (and Felix), to, Ixxvii. 344.
Hilary of Gaul, to, [ccxxvi.].
Hilary of Syracuse, from, [clvi.],
Hilary of Syracuse, to, [clvii.].
Hilary, to Bishop, [clxxviii.].
Hippo, to congregation at, Ixxviii.

345; cxxii. 450; [cclxviii.].
Honoratus, to (Donatist), [xlix.|.
Honoratus, to (catechumen), [cxl.].
Honoratus, to Bishop, ccxxviii. 577.
Honorius (and Theodosius), from,

cci. 556.

Innocentius, to, [clxxv.], [clxxvi.],

[clxxvii.].
Innocentius, from, [clxxxi.], [clxxxii.j.

[clxxxiii.], [clxxxiv.].
Italica, to, xcii. 380; xcix. 410.

Jacobus and Timasius, from,[clxviii.].
Januarius, to, liv. 300; Iv. 303.
Januarius, to (Donatist bishop),

Ixxxviii. 369.
Jerome, to, xxviii. 251; xl. 272;

Ixvii. 324 ; lxxi.326; Ixxiii. 329;

Ixxxii. 361 ; clxvi. 523 ; clxvii.

532-
Jerome, from, xxxix. 272 ; Ixvni. 324 ;

Ixxii. 32S ; lx.xv. 333 ; Ixxxi. 349 ;

c.xxiii. 451 ; clxxii. 543 ; cxcv. 556;

ccii. 557.
Joannes, to Bishop, [clxxix.].
Juliana (and Proba), to, cl. 503.
Juliana, to, cLx.xxviii. 548.

Lastus, to, [ccxliii.].
Lampadius, to, ccxlvi. 588.
Largus, to, cciii. 557.
Licentius, to, xxvi. 246.
Longinianus, to, [ccxxxiii.], [ccxxxv.].
Longinianus, from, [ccxxxiv.].

Macedonius, from, [clii.], [cliv.].
Macedonius, to, [cliii.], [civ.].
Macrobius, [cvi.], [cviii.].
Madaura, to the people of, ccxxxii.

585- ^ , .

Manichaean presbyter, to a, Ixxix.

349-
Marcellinus, to, [cxxviii.], [cxxix.] ;

cxxxiii. 470 ; c.xxxviii. 481 ; cxxxix.

4S8; cxliii. 490.
Marcellinus, from, cxxxvi. 472.


LETTERS OF ST. AUGUSTIN : INDEX OF PERSONS.


619


Marcellinus, to, from Jerome, clxv.

522.
Martianus, to, [cclviii.].
Maxima, to, [cclxiv.].
Maximin, to, xxiii. 242.
Maximus of Madaura, from, xvi. 233.
Maximus, to, xvii. 234.
Maximus (a physician), to, [clxx.].
Maximus (and Theodorus), from,

[cvii.].
Melania (Pinianus and Albina), to,

cxxiv. 452.
Memor, to, ci. 412.
Mercator, to, [cxciii.].

Naucelio, to, [Ixx.] 326.

Nebridius, to, iii. 220; iv. 222; vii.

224; ix. 227; X. 228; xi. 228;

[xii.] ; xiii. 230; xiv, 231.
Nebridius, from, v. 223 ; vi. 223 ; viii.

226.
Nectarius, from, xc. 376; ciii. 425.
Nectarius, to, xci. 376; civ. 427.
Nobilius, to, cclxix. 593.
Novatus, to, Ixxxiv. 363.
Nuns, to tlie, ccxi. 563.

Oceanus, to, clxxx. 547.
Olympius, to, xcvi. 404; xcvii. 405.
Optatus, [cxc], [ccii. bis\.
Orontius, to, [cclvii.].

Palatinus, to, ccxviii. 571.
Pammachius, to, Iviii. 316.
Pancarius, to, [ccli.].
Pascentius, to, [ccxxxviii.], [ccxxxix.],

[ccxli.].
Pascentius, from, [ccxl.].
Paulina, to, [cxlvii.].
Paulinus (and Therasia), from, to

Alypius, [xxiv.].


Augus-
[xciv.].


xxvii. 24S ; [cxlix.],

Therasia), to, xxxi.
275; [xlv.], [Ixxx.];


Paulinus (and Therasia) to

tin, XXV. 245; XXX. 257

[cxxi.].
Paulinus, to,

[clxxxvi.].
Paulinus (and

258; xlii.

xcv. 401.
Paulinus (and Therasia), 'from, to

Romanianus, [xxxii.].
Paulina (and Armentarius), to,

[cxxvii.].
Paul us, to, Ixxxv. 364.
Pelagius, to, cxlvi. 498.
Peregrinus, to, [clxxi.].
Peter (and Abraham), to, [clxxxiv.

bis].
Pinianus (Melania and Albina), to,

cxxiv. 452.
Possidius, to, ccxlv. 587.
Prsesidius, to, Ixxiv. 2i33-
Proba, to, cxxx. 459; cxxxi. 469.
Proba (and Juliana), to, cl. 503.
Proculeianus, to, xxxiii. 260.
Proculus (and Cylinus), to, ccxix.

Profuturus, to, xxxviii. 271.
Prosper, to, [ccxxv.].
Publicola, from, xlvi. 290.
Publicola, to, xlvii. 292.

Quintianus, to, Ixiv. 321.
Quintilianus, to, ccxii. 568.
Quodvultdeus, from, [ccx.xi.],

[ccxxiii.].
Quodvultdeus, to, [ccxxii.], [ccxxiv.].

Restitutus, to, [ccxlix.].
Romanianus, to, xv. 232.
Romanianus, to, from Paulinus and
Therasia, [xxxii.]


Romulus, to, [ccxlvii.].
Rusticus, to, [cclv.], 591.
Rusticus (and Felicitas)
562.


to, OCX.


Sapida, to, cclxiii. 591.

.Saturninus (and Eutrates), to, [cxlii.].

Sebastianus, to, [ccxlviii.].

.Seleuciana, to, [cclxv.].

Severinus, to, [Hi.].

Severus, from, [cix.].

Severus, to, Ixii. 319; Ixiii. 319;

[ex.].
Simplicianus, to, xxxvii. 270.
Si.xtus, to, cxci. 554; [cxciv.].
Suffectum, to the magistrates of, 1.

295.

Theodorus, to, Ixi. 318.

Theodorus (and Maximus), from,

[cvii.].
Therasia. See Paulinus.
Timasius (and Jacobus), from,

[clxviii.].

Valentinus, to, [ccxiv.], [ccxv.].
Valentinus, from, [ccxvi.].
Valerius, to Bishop, xxi. 237.
Valerius, to Count, [cc], [ccvi.].
Victorianus, to, cxi. 433.
Victorinus, to, lix. 317.
Vincentius, to, .xciii. 382.
Vitalis, to, [ccxvii.].
Volusianus, to, cxxxii. 470; cx.xxvii.

473-
Volusianus, from, c.xxxv. 471.

Xantippus, to, Ixv. 322.

Zenobius, ii. 220.


VOLUME ONK NOW READY.


PROSPECTUS


>I< >J^ ♦


A


OF THE


I^icene and Post-Ilicene Fattiers

•J- of the Gl^pisltian Ghurc^ -t*


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH PROLEGOMENA AND EXPLANATORY NOTES '


EDITED

BY

PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D.

PROFESSOR OP SACRED LITERATtrRB IN THE UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, NEW YORK

IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PA TRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE AND AMERICA.

(See List on Page 1.)


Sold by Subscripiion Only.


BUFFALO, NEW YORK :

The Christian Literature Company.


Buffalo, N. y., October ist, 1886.
n~HE PUBLISHERS take great pleasure in presenting this prospectus to those
interested in the writings of the Early Church Fathers. The list of contributors
herewith presented is the best evidence that the proposed series will be prepared under the
Tnost scholarly and competent editorial care.

With this brief introduction, the publishers beg to submit the following plan of pub-
lication :

1. This series will be the most complete and satisfactory collection of the Christian writers of the Nicene
and Post-Nicene age ever translated into English. It is properly a continuation of the Ante-Nicene Fathers
published by The Christian Literature Company, edited by Bishop Coxe. Many of the works appearing
will be translated into English for the first time.

2. It will embrace, in two series of thirteen volumes each, of from five to seven hundred pages each
volume, the most important works of the Greek and Latin Fathers, from A. D. 325 to A. D. 900. The subscrip-
tion price will be $3 for each volume.

3. The works selected will be given in full, with introductions and explanatory foot-notes.

4. The object of the Library is historical, without any sectarian or partisan aim. It will put the
English reader in possession of the chief sources and authorities of the faith, practice, worship, and discipline
of the Greek and Latin Churches, down to the time of their separation.

5. The first series will be made up of the most important writings of St. Augttstin and St. Chrysostom,
the greatest and most influential of the Christian fathers.

Commencing October 1st, i8S5, volume one will appear, and thereafter one volume every three months,
as per the following hst :

FIRST SERIES.

AUGUSTIN : Life and Work— Confessions— Letters.— Editor, Dr. Philip Schaff.

A UGUbi. IN : City of God — Christian Doctrine. — Editor, Dr. Marcus Dods.

AUGUSTIN: Enchiridion— On Catechizing— Faith and Creed— On the Trinity.

Short Treatises on Moral Subjects.

AUGUSTIN: Anti-Pelagian Writings.— Editor, Prof. L. L. Paine, D. D.,

AUGUSTIN: Anti-Manichaean Writings— Anti-Donatist Writings.

O. AUGLollN : Sermon on the Mount — Harmony ol the Evangelists.

AUljUoiiiN: Commentary on St. John — Select Homilies on the New Testament.

AUGUSTIN : On the Psalms— Editor, Bishop A. Cleveland Co.xe, D. D.

CHRYSOSTOM : On the Priesthood— Select Letters. Editor, Rev. W. R. Stephens,

M. A., with Prologomena, by Dr. Schaff.

CHKYbUoiUM: Homilies on the Statues — Paneg>'rical Homilies — Editor, Dr.

Schaff.

CHRYSOSTOM : Comentaries on Matthew and John— Editor, Prof. RL B. Riddle,

D. D.

CHR 1 bOSTOM : Commentaries on Romans and Corinthians. — Editors, Prof. M. B.

Riddle and T. W. Chambers, D. D.

CHRibOSIOM: Commentaries on ISIinor Pauline Epistles, and Hebrews. — Editor,

Prof. W. T. Dickson. D, D., LL. D.

The translations must be based on the best critical editions of the originals. In some cases older trans-
lations from the Oxford Library of the Fathers, edited by Drs. Pusey, Keble and Newman, and from Clark's
edition of St. Augustin, edited by Dr. Marcus Dods, may be used as a basis, by special arrangement of the
American publishers -with the English publishers. The Oxford Library, begun in 1837, and extending to 48
volumes has never been completed, and omits some of the most important and interesting works, which will
certainly, appear in this collection.

( See third page of cover.)


VOL.

I.

VOL.

2.

VOL.

3-

VOL.

4-

VOL.

5-

VOL.

6.

VOL.

7-

VOL.

8.

VOL.

9-

VOL.

10.

VOL.

II.

VOL.

12.

VOL.

13-

CONTRIBUTORS.

PHILIP SCHAFF, D. D., Editor-in-Chief.


Names of Translators and Editors. Works.

^,^^^J^?ERS,Rev.TALBOTW.DD. New York . . Chkvsostom, Commentary o„ Corinthians.

Sf PnVTP ?'rS'\^-^-'?; ^•^■'^.f'°I'^ w°'V^- ; C-ons of the Seven Oecumenical Councils (in connection wlTh
DE ROMEsTIN, Rev. Henry, M. A., Warden's Bishop Seymour.)

Lodge, Great Maplestead, Ilalstead, England . . ^^ , tt , r, .

DICKSON, Rev. William T., D. D., LL. D., Professor Ci' Ax^^Clmrch'kktTrT'''' °" '^^ ^°^^ ^^'"' ^'" ^^"^ '

of Divinity in the University of Glasgow . . . . „
DONALDSON, Professor James, LL. D., Principal of ^"'''■^°'™'''* ^''""■' ^^'"''"^ Epistles.

the University of St. Andrews, Scotland ....
FELTRE, Rev. C. Lett, Fellow of Clare College, ^'"'^"'^^'"^ """"^ ^"^•■"'"s Skverus.

Cambridge; Prof, of Latin in St. David's College,

Lampeter ttc-.t-

FREMANTLE, Hon. and Rev. William hexry, ' ^''''' ^P"'^"' ^"'^ ^"'"°°"-

Canon of Canterbury and Fellow Tutor of Balliol
„,,^5^'^T^^' Oxford ......... Jerome and RuPiNUS (in part).

FULTON, Rev. John, D. D., LL. D., St. Louis, Mo . ^ f >
GIBSON, Rev. Edgar C. S., Principal of the Theolo-
gical College, Wells, Somerset, England Pacc^x, r iw e ,-w r .1,

r-\\r^r\T T> T-. T> r r i-x- • • . '. . Lassian, Collation of the Fathers.

GWYN, Rev. Dr., Professor of Divmity in Trinity

College, Dublin Ephrem Lyons, Select Commentaries, Homilies and Hymns.

HARRIS, Rendall, Fellow Clare College, Cambridge,
Professor of Biblical Languages in Haverlbrd Col-
ege, Pennsylvania Macarius, Select Homilies.

HARTRANFT, Rev. C. D., D. D., Professor in Theo-
logical Seminary at Hartford, Conn John OP Damascus, Orations and Hymns.

McGlFFERT, Arthur C, M. A., Berlin, Germany . Eusedius, Church History.

MOORE, Edward C, M. A., Gottingen, Germany . . Gregory I, Epistles.

MOORE, Rev. William, late Fellow of Magdalene Col-
lege, Oxford (in connection with Rev. H. Chalonek Ogle,
Fellow of Magdalene College, and Head Master of Magda-
lene College School, Oxford, and with Mr. Maurice Day,

Ireland Scholar. Oxford, and late Head Master of the Wor- Gregory of Nyssa, Against Eunomius ; Catechetical Oration;
cester Cathedral School) On the Soul and the Resurrection ; On Virginity ; Against

PAINE, Rev. L. L., D. D., Professor in Theological Eunomius; On the Koly Trinity ; Letters.

Seminary, Bangor, Maine Augustin, Anti-Pelagian Writings.

RAINY, Rev. Robert, D. D., Principal of the Free

Church College, Edinburgh Salvianus, on the Government of God.

REYNOLDS, Rev. H. R., D. D., Principal of Cheshunt
College, Waltham Cross, England

RICHARDSON, Rev. E. C, M. A., Librarian of Theo-
logical Seminary at Hartford, Conn Eusebius, Life of Constantine. Jerome, Catalogue of Illustrious

RIDDLE, Rev. M.-vtthew B., D. D., Professor in ^en.

Theological Seminary, Hartford, Conn Chrysostom, Commentaries on Gospels and Romans.

ROBERTS, Rev. Ale.x., D. D., Professor of Latin in

the University of St. Andrews, Scotland Sulpitius Severus, or Jerome (in part).

ROBERTSON, Rev. A., Fellow of Trinity College,

Oxford,and Principal of Bp. Hatfield's Hall, Durliam. Athanasius, ^^a?«j/ the Heathen; On the Incarnation; On

SALMON, Rev. George, D. D., Professor in Trinity the Sentence of Dionysiu,,^x.c.

College, Dublin

SALMOND, Rev. Stewart D. F., M. A., D. D., Pro-
fessor of Sy.stematic Theology and New Testament
Exegesis, Free College, Aberdeen John of Damascus, Exposition of the Orthodox Faith.

SANDAY, Rev. Prof. William, D. D., Oxford . . . Hilary of Poitiers, and Lucifer of Cagliari.

SEYMOUR, Rt. Rev. G., F., D. D., Springfield, 111. . Canons of the Seven Oecumenical Councils (in connection with the

SMITH, Rev. Richard Travers, D. D., Canon of St. R=^- f- ^- Davenport).

Patrick's, Dublin, sometime scholar and Senior
Moderator in Trinity College, Dublin Basil M., Letters, Homilies and Ascetic Tracts

STEPHENS, Rev. W. R. W., M. A., Woolbeding Rec-
tory, Midhurst, Sussex. (Author of Life of St.
Chrysostom) Chrysostom, on the Priesthood, Selection of Letters.

STOKES, Rev. G. T., B. D., Professor in Trinity Col-
lege, Dublin Photius, Library and Letters.

SWETE, Rev. Henry Barclay, D. D., Ashdon Rec-
tory, Linton, Cambridge; Professor of Pastoral

Theology in King's Coflege, London, in connection Theodore of Mopsuestia, and other writers of the Antiochian
• .■ . , J r • J School. Gkegoky of Nazianzum, J heological Orations

With two learned friends ^„j Select Homilies.

VENABLES, Rev. Edmund, M. A., Canon of Lincoln^p^j^^j^^^^.^.^ Church History, Dialogues and Letters. Gregory
Cathedral and Chaplain to the Bishop of London ... of Naz., Letters.

[This list does not include the translators of works in the Clark and Oxford Series, some of whom have been requested and
are expected to revise their translations for the American Edition. Their names will appear in connection with their translations.]


The second series will be selected from the writings of the other Greek and Latin Fathers as follows ;


SECOND SERIES.— I. GREEK FATHERS.

EUSEBIUS [d. 340] : Church History— Life of Constantine.

SOCRATES, SOZOMENUS, and the other Greek

Church Historians : Church Histories in continuation of Eusebius.

ATHANASIUS [d. 373] '• Orations against the Arians, and other Doctrinal and Historical

Treatises — Festal Letters.
BASIL THE GREAT [d. 379] : Against Eunomms— On the Holy Spirit— Ascetic Tracts— Letters.

GREGORY OF NAZIANZUM [d. 391] : Orations in the Defenseof the Divinity of Christ— Letters— Poems.

GREGORY OF NYSSA [d. 395] : Catechetical Oration— Dogmatic and Ascetic Treatises— Dialogue

on the boul and on Immortality — On Virginity.
EPHRAEM SYRUS [d. 379] : Commentaries-Homilies-Hymns.

CYRIL OF JERUSALEM [d. 388] : Catechetical Discourses.

MACARIUS MAGNUS [d. 391] : Sermons.

EPIPHANIUS [d. 403] : The Anchor— Against 80 Heresies.

THEODORE OF MOPSUESTIA [d. 428] : . . . . Exegetical and Dogmatical Fragments.

CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA [d. 444] : Against Nestorius— Commentary on St. John— Against Julian the

Apostate — -Select Homilies — Letters.
ISIDORUS PELUSIOTA [d. C. 450] : Selected Letters.

THEODORET [d. 457] : Church History— Religious History— Compendium of Heresies-
Dialogues — Letters.

MAXIMUS CONFESSOR [d. 662] : On the two Natures and two Wills of Christ— Questions on Diffi-

cult Scripture Passages.

JOHN OF DAMASCUS [d. 750] : Summary ot the Orthodox Faith— Worship of Images.

PHOTIUS [d. 891] : Library (Myriobiblion)— Encyclical Letter against the Latins-
Letters.


II. LATIN FATHERS.

HILARY OF POITIERS [d ';6S1 : On the Trinity— On Synods — Com. on Matthew— Letter to his

'-■'' -I Daughter Abra — Hymns.

AMBROSE [d. 397] : On the Offices of Clergymen— Homilies— Letters— Hymns.

TFROME Fd ^.toT • Catalogue of Illustrious Men — Commentaries — Polemic Treatises

RUFINUS [d. 410] : Exposition of the Apostles' Creed— History of Monks.

PROSIUS [d. after 417] History against the Pagans.

SULPITIUS SEVERUS [d. after 420] : Sacred History— Life of St. Martin— Dialogues— Letters.

VINCENTIUS OF LERFNS [d. 450] : Commonitory ; or. The Rule of Faith.

LEO THE GREAT [d. 461]: Sermons-Letters.

CASSIAN [d. C. 490] : Collations of the Fathers.

SALVIAN [d. after 4S0] : On the Government of God.

GENNADIUS [d. 496] : Catalogue of Illustrious Men— On Ecclesiastical Dogmas.

GREGORY OF TOURS [d. 594] : Ecclesiastical History of the Franks.

GREGORY THE GREAT [d. 604]: Pastoral Theology— Dialogues— Letters.

Due announcement of the selections, division into volumes, and Editors, for the Second Series will be
made as soon as the details are fully arranged.

It being necessary to reserve this liberty, the publishers will receive subscriptions covering only the first
series of thirteen volumes from those who do not feel disposed to order the two series now. Those wishing to
take advantage of this offer will please clearly indicate their intention, crossing out the words " twenty -five or
twenty-six,'' on the order blank, and substituting therefor the word " thirteen:' No order can be received for
single volumes, or for less t' an the first thirteen volumes.


Seisms of Subsgi^iption.


The volumes will correspond in style, price and size to the volumes of our edition of The Ante-Nicene
Fathers, which have given universal satisfaction.

Each Volume of this Series will Contain Three Volumes of

the Foreign Series,

OR

THEIR EQCIflLENTS IN NEW HITTER.


THUS REDUCING THE COST OF


Standard Theological Works


-TO-


Ofl^-Jl^ll^D Ej\E USUjW^ p^\^^


It is proposed to issue one volume of this series every three months, and to send the same to subscribers I
ANYWHERE in the United States or Canada, '■

I

GXPI^ESSAGE 01^ I^GSTAGB I^I^EPAID.

Please note that the enclosed order blank for the series is subject to countermand, as to balance of volumes, i
within TEN days after the delivery of Volume I, in case the same is NOT AS represented. !

Ro f^emiffaace (sKx^ftei. LlafiF Sooftx*) are ©ePl^^ereE.

Please Fill Out and Return Enclosed Order Blank at Once.


THIS COMPANY is organized for the purpose of furnishing the best books at the minimum price, and it can
hope for success in its present and future ventures only through the hearty co-operation and support of
the clergy. The educated Laity, however, will find these books essential to their libraries. It is proposed
to lessen the price of standard works by lessening the cost of manufacture; thus:

1. Procuring orders by mail, dealing directly with book-buyers, and saving the usual discounts made to
booksellers and middlemen.

2. Printing octavo volumes — double columns — type and style of page being the same as in the Century
Magazine See sample pages herewith.

The series will be bound in elegant, durable form, the best of English cloth being used.

Can you plot ^et £side One Dollar a JVIontli to Secure this JYIost "Valuable Series 7


)


I


I


/


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY


BR

60

S46

1886

v.l


A Select library of the Nicene
and post-Nicene fathers of
the Christian church
