Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, Vol. 8: Basil: Letters and Select Works
Philip Schaff & Henry Wace (eds.), various translators (1890)
Source: Internet Archive
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

oh aSerin as


τῶν NA ees τς


Ἢ ae
Ds Cate a wb a
: EERIE PA AE UI ENE


-


apa δ +=)


SARTO at


BSS
Lect th


LIBRARY
Brigham Young University


ἐς ' .
i 4 2 pam 4
> ᾿ " A
ΠΣ ἢ iii
ib j Ὶ
ἣ i | + ᾿ rs ; 1 ι .
Lao Ἂν ' 4
AO" Tay ra i ily ᾿
>) ae aS
ἂ Ἰὼ, d ‘ al opl. Π ὟΝ
ΔΊ ewe ine, 7 : ᾿
ἂν eer Ti ‘ FP ν, ᾿ ᾿
‘ foe be i 4 a Pn ἵν Y
ite Ἂ \ ᾿ Ὡς
4 ι 74 bees 7
απ a 4 ea 7
‘ er ᾿ , Ν
‘i aM af 15
a / ; “ £9, { ) A ᾿
j [ 4
f A Wa ft '
-? ¥ + Os Rayy
4 ua) ; } ΐ
fs Le A fi
ξ } ϊ ‘ ' ] ᾿
᾿ ὶ ἢ iN
, ἢ ur β εἰν ΡΝ Ὁ ‘
ὶ . 7 J
᾽ * Ἶ Ye ὶ
-- Pad ae Ἵ i
‘ Ὶ νυν
ἱ ᾿ξ Ι tal ἔπ “ie ie ἵ
ὶ 1} ᾿ + wie we a
f. Ἢ > Lb’ T
; ᾿ . | 7 ae A 9
" » oii ae Ἂ t
᾿ ᾿ Ms ay νυ ἐὰν
9 Π
“ iy P = i
vy


‘ie ἃ } :
τς ᾿ % "ϑ μ᾿ i ay \
‘% ‘ 4 wwe ‘ J
Ἂν ἊΝ 7 ἀπ᾿ ee } Π Ἶ
" , 4 ’ als vs x Εν ; «
Π 4 i] re t
ἦν } 1 ss! \ Na, i) a) εὖ i e Thay a hy
5 J rt aoe ἢ Ἶ ὌΝ 4 Phat Ν ἡ ᾿
hey a7 ῃ ον ie Pt) f 5 rf PaaS oe
PON oa Ry hme Li PLAGE Sage PAO τὴ
τ 4 wt ν ᾿
Am i) ν᾿ Ν Ae ' ὧν "ἢ i i a ay " nt ᾿ id Ἶ
Lhe AF αὐτὰ ἊΝ if Τὴ ΡΩΝ ΤῊ τ 4 ar f af
ἐδ Τα τήνω" Wantie) . wa ’ Wane PY, Ve pile ie
> ὶ VW oy ν ἢ ᾿ γ y Og ᾿ ᾿ ᾿ ν᾿ at r eile ὶ i oe 5 ͵ ὲ MN
Pe We Rn A Teen! Wh as) one Viens,
γὶ ; al ἊΝ ΟΜ Ι eof ΤᾺ ἐν ἔπ νὰ vue 4 5 c oe Ae
\ ΜΝ ey ὅν ολι ‘ δ) γε a ἐδ
᾿ ee. ᾿ ἣν ΗΝ Ny 5 εἰ δι ies wt he . ὟΝ tye δ᾽ = ᾿ oh,
ἢ ue A ee! ‘> ἵ Η aig ἐμὰ Ϊ ἣν iy
ον iw ue ROTA ie belts ‘ Panes ie oar
: see Magness ii a) ΦΥΔῚΝ 4 ᾿ Ἤν" ᾿ ᾿ ray ih : _
see ae pe. Ha? WAL Vaart ; wa ἈΠ Δ bist:
Whelan ὙΥΥ ΜΝ, ne ey ἡ i


a=


ine
ἌΝ


ue
Λ


~ Brigham Young University


tai A SEA DP LIBRARY


OF


νὸ!. 6 :
NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS


OF


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.


Second SHerics.


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH PROLEGOMENA AND EXPLANATORY NOTES.


VOLUMES I.-VII.
UNDER THE EDITORIAL SUPERVISION OF


PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LLD., ee HENRY WACE, D.D.,


Professor of Church History in the Principal of King’s College,
Union Theological Seminary, New York. London.


IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE
AND AMERICA.


VOLUME VIII.


Si. BASIL :


LETTERS AND SELECT WORKS.


Waihi,


NEW YORK:
THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.
OXFORD AND LONDON:
PARKER & COMPANY.


1895.


COPYRIGHT, 1895,


By THE CHRISTIAN


LITERATURE COMPANY.


fe ft ReEATISE DE SPIRIT U SANG TO


THE NINE HOMILIES OF THE HEXAEMERON AND THE LETTERS


OF


ΓΑΙ BASIL THE GREAT


Archbishop of Ccesarea


Translated with Notes


BY


THE REV. BLOMFIELD JACKSON, M.A.
Vicar of Saint Bartholomew's, Moor Lane, and Fellow of King’s College, London


{81}


7 dd i'é
ΔΗ...


‘We


(
cay
a Ree Se


ὟΝ
Δ


yr «


ase


Fe ce Ey


Tuis translation of a portion of the works of St. Basil was originally begun under the
editorial supervision of Dr. Wace. It was first announced that the translation would
comprise the De Spiritu Sancto and Select Letters, but it was ultimately arranged with Dr.
Wace that a volume of the series should be devoted to St. Basil, containing, as well as the
De Spiritu Sancto, the whole of the ZLe¢ters, and the Hexaemeron. The De Spiritu Sancto
has already appeared in an English form, as have portions of the Zeffers, but I am not
aware of an English translation of the Hfexaemeron, or of all the Letters. The De Spiritu
Sancto was presumably selected for publication as being at once the most famous, as it is
among the most valuable, of the extant works of this Father. The Ze/ters comprise short
theological treatises and contain passages of historical and varied biographical interest, as
well as valuable specimens of spiritual and consolatory exhortation. The Hexaemeron was
added as being the most noted and popular of St. Basil’s compositions in older days, and
as illustrating his exegetic method and skill, and his power as an extempore preacher.

The edition used has been that of the Benedictine editors as issued by Migne, with
the aid, in the case of the De Spiritu Sancto, of that published by Rev. C. F. H. Johnston.

The editorship of Dr. Wace terminated during the progress of the work, but I am
indebted to him, and very gratefully acknowledge the obligation, for valuable counsel and
suggestions. I also desire to record my thanks to the Rev. C. Hole, Lecturer in Ecclesias-
tical History at King’s College, London, and to Mr. Reginald Geare, Head Master of the
Grammar School, Bishop’s Stortford, to the former for help in the revision of proof-sheets
and important suggestions, and to the latter for aid in the translation of several of the
Letters.

The works consulted in the process of translation and attempted illustration are


sufficiently indicated in the notes.


LonpDon, December, 1894.


QV)


ryt Ao
ΜΝ i tS.


Chats oi
᾿ ᾿ ΝΥ et) i
NA ᾿: 7 4 te ae
ἀλλα Sa εὐ ἘΜῊ Κα ΜΝ
<> or 77] J


bi
ἐδ


ὍΝ
in


Σ P ιν Σ f A an ae “2. ᾿
ει uns ΜΉ Mela

πω, j } I , ν. Li.) 4) : ἐ δὰ
Sammie Yr Δ ἐφ Mey meee


ay
ἀκ ἘΠ 2 |
1 ae “ik


fj y


Ee


ἜΗΝ Ce kT aye
si ΚΟΥ ΜΕΝ


ΟΣ ἘΠῚ 128;


PAGE
PROLEGOMENA.
GENEALOGICAL TABLES Ξ é : Ξ 2 : ‘ : Ξ Ξ ΙΧ
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE F : : : : p 3 F : : ΧΙ
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH . ᾿ 3 ‘ ᾿ Σ < : ἃ : 5 Xiil
NoTICE OF EXTANT WorKS. : ᾿ , 5 ‘ ‘ é ὲ ξ
ime De Srrriru SANCTO ’. ? ; : Ἶ : : p : A I
Tue HExAEMERON ᾿ ‘ ‘ ; : ‘ ‘ : : : : : 51
Tue LETTERS : : ; - : : . : - : : : a


( vii )


GENEALOGICAL TABLES.


Ι.


THE FAMILY .OF Sr. BASIL,


? = Macrina.
| |
Gregorius, bp. Basilius == Emmelia.
| fe ee
| | | | | | | | | |
St. Macrina. A son St. Basil. Naucratius Gregory, bp. Four daughters. Petrus,
died in died zt.27. of Nyssa. bp. of Sebasteia.
infancy.
i 11.


THE FAMILY OF St. GREGORY OF NAZIANZUS, AND OF Sr. AMPHILOCHIUS,
Philtatius = Gorgonia.


Amphilochius = Livia. Nonna = Gregorius, bp. of Nazianzus,


Theodosia Gregorius Ceesarius. Gorgonia.


| |
Amphilochius, Euphemius. :
bp. of Iconium. the Divine.


(ix)


Tas


᾿ yh ΐ


cian
7


Me Yr: " ᾿
ΠΝ


ἰ υ ;
᾿ Tih ; \


i, ns oe
ite
γ ΠῚ
ΤῊ Oe τ
ἡ
‘Ue


a4.


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE TO ACCOMPANY THE LIFE OF ST. BASIL.


A.D.
329 60 430, 9ST. BASIL BORN.
S255) ouncilof “Tyre.
336. Death of Arius.
337. Death of Constantine.
340. Death of Constantine 77.
341. Dedication creed at Antioch.
343. julian and Gallus relegated to Macellum.
BAsiIL PROBABLY SENT FROM ANNEN TO SCHOOL AT CSAREA.
344. Macrostich, and Council of Sardica.
346. BastL GOES TO CONSTANTINOPLE.
350. Death of Constans.
351. BasiL GoEs To ATHENS.
181 Creed of Sirmium.
353. Death of Magnentius.
255. Fulian goes to Athens (latter part of year).
356. BasIL RETURNS TO C&SAREA.
2:7. The 2d Creed of Sirmium, or Blasphemy, subscribed by Hosius and Liberius.
BASIL BAPTIZED, AND SHORTLY AFTERWARDS ORDAINED READER.
358. BasIL VISITS MONASTIC ESTABLISHMENTS IN EcGypT, SyRiA, PALESTINE, AND
MESOPOTAMIA, AND RETIRES TO THE MONASTERY ON THE Iris.
359. The 3d Creed of Sirmium. Dated May 22. Councils of Seleucia and Ariminum.
360. Acacian synod of Constantinople.
BASIL, NOW ORDAINED DEACON, DISPUTES WITH ABETIUS.
Dianius subscribes the Creed of Ariminum, and
BASIL IN CONSEQUENCE LEAVES CiSAREA.
He visirs Grecory AT NAZIANZUS.
361. Death of Constantius and accession of Fulian.
BASIL WRITES THE ““ MORALIA.”
362. BasiL RETURNS TO CAiSAREA.
Dianius dies. Eusebius baptized, elected, and consecrated bishop.
Lucifer consecrates Paulinus at Antioch.
Fultan at Cesarea. Martyrdom of Eupsychius.
363. Sultan dies (Fune 27). Accession of Fovian.
364. Fovian dies. Accession of Valentinian and Valens.
BASIL ORDAINED PRIEST By EUSEBIUS.
BASIL WRITES AGAINST EUNOMIUS.
Semiarian Council of Lampsacus.
365. Levolt of Procopius.
Valens at Cesarea.
366. Semiarian deputation to Rome satisfy Liberius of their orthodoxy.
Death of Liberius. Damasus bp. of Rome.
Procopius defeated.
367. Gratian Augustus.
Valens favours the Arians.
Council of Tyana.
368. Semiarian Council in Caria. Famine in Cappadocia.
369. DEATH OF EMMELIA. Basi visits SAMOSATA.
370. Death of Eusebius of Cesarea.
ELECTION AND CONSECRATION OF BASIL TO THE SEE OF C4iSAREA.


( xi )


ΧΙΙ


BASIL.


371.


372.


273:


274:


275:


276.
378.
379>


BASIL MAKES VISITATION TOUR.

BASIL THREATENED BY ARIAN BISHOPS AND BY MOopDESTUS.

Valens, travelling slowly from Nicomedia to Cesarea, arrives at the end of
the year.

Valens attends great service at Cesarea on the Epiphany, Fan. 6.

INTERVIEWS BETWEEN BASIL AND VALENS.

Death of Galates.

Valens endows Ptochotrophium and quits Cesarea.

BASIL Visits EusEBIUS AT SAMOSATA.

Claim of Anthimus to metropolitan dignity at Tyana.

BASIL RESISTS ANTHIMUS.

BASIL FORCES GREGORY OF NAZIANZUS TO BE CONSECRATED BISHOP OF SASIMA,
AND CONSECRATES HIS BROTHER GREGORY TO Nyssa. CONSEQUENT ES-—
“TRANGEMENT OF BASIL AND GREGORY OF NAZIANZUS.

BASIL IN ARMENIA. CREED SIGNED BY EUSTATHIUS.

St. Epiphanius writes the ** Ancoratus.”

Death of Athanasius.

BASIL VISITED BY JOVINUS OF PERRHA, AND BY SANCTISSIMUS OF ANTIOCH.

Death of Auxentius and consecration of Ambrose at Milan.

BASIL WRITES THE “ὁ Dr Spiritu SANCTO.”

Eusebius of Samosata banished to Thrace.

Death of Gregory, bp. of Nazianzus, the elder.

Death of Valentinian. Gratan and Valentinian 77. emperors.

Synod of Illyria, and Letter to the Orientals.

Semiarian Council of Cyzicus.

Demosthenes harasses the Catholics.

Gregory of Nyssa deposed.

Synod of Iconium.

OPEN DENUNCIATION OF EUSTATHIUS BY BASIL.

Death of Valens, Aug. 9.

Eusebius of Samosata and Meletius return from exile.

Deatu oF Basi, JAN. I.

Theodosius Augustus.


PROLEGOMENA.


SKETCH OF THE LIFE AND WORKS OF SAINT BASIL.


Th 5 ἐν


1.-- PARENTAGE AnD Bint.


UnpEr the persecution of the second Maximinus,’ a Christian gentleman of good
position and fair estate in Pontus,” and Macrina his wife, suffered severe hardships.°
They escaped with their lives, and appear to have retained, or recovered, some of their
property.* Of their children the names of two only have survived: Gregory® and Basil.®
The former became bishop of one of the sees of Cappadocia. The latter acquired a high
reputation in Pontus and the neighbouring districts as an advocate of eminence,’ and as a
teacher of rhetoric. His character in the Church for probity and piety stood very high.*
He married an orphaned gentlewoman named Emmelia, whose father had suftered
impoverishment and death for Christ’s sake, and who was herself a conspicuous example
of high-minded and gentle Christian womanhood. Of this happy union were born ten
children,’ five boys and five girls. One of the boys appears to have died in infancy, for
on the death of the elder Basil four sons and five daughters were left to shure the
considerable wealth which he left behind him.’® Of the nine survivors the eldest was a
daughter, named, after her grandmother, Macrina. The eldest of the sons was Basil, the
second Naucratius, and the third Gregory. Peter, the youngest of the whole family, was born
shortly before his father’s death. Of this remarkable group the eldest is commemorated as
Saint Macrina in the biography written by her brother Gregory. Naucratius died in
early manhood,” about the time of the ordination of Basil as reader. The three remaining
brothers occupied respectively the sees of Czsarea, Nyssa, and Sebasteia.

As to the date of St. Basil's birth opinions have varied between 316 and 330. The
later, which is supported by Garnier, Tillemont, Maran,’ Fessler,’ and Béhringer, may
probably be accepted as approximately correct.'* It is true that Basil calls himself an old
man in 374,'° but he was prematurely worn out with work and bad health, and to his friends
wrote freely and without concealment of his infirmities. There appears no reason to
question the date 329 or 330. ‘

Two cities, Casarea in Cappadocia and Neocesarea in Pontus, have both been named
as his birthplace. There must be some amount of uncertainty on this point, from the fact
that no direct statement exists to clear it up, and that the word πατρίς was loosely employed


1 Of sufferers in this supreme struggle of heathenism to delay the official recognition of the victory of the Gospel over
the empire, the Reformed Kalendar of the English Church preserves the memory of St. Blaise (Blasius), bishop of Sebasteia
in Armenia, St. George, St. Agnes, St. Lucy, St. Margaret of Antioch, St. Katharine of Alexandria.

2 Greg. Naz., Or, xliii. (xx.). N.B. The reff. to the orations and letters of Greg. Naz. are to the Ordo novus in Migne.

3 Id. * Greg. Nyss., Vit. Mac. 178, 191.

5 Bishop of an unknown see. Of the foolish duplicity of Gregory of Nyssa in fabricating a letter from him, see the
mention in £/p. Iviii., lix., Ix.

6 Βασίλειος, Basilius = royal or kingly. The name was acommon one, Fabricius catalogues * alii Basilti ultra xxx.,”
all of some fame. The derivation of Βασιλεύς is uncertain, and the connexion of the last syllable with λεύς = λέως = λαός,
people, almost certainly wrong. The root may be V BA, with the idea that the leader makes the followers march. With the
type of name, cf. Melchi and the compounds of Melech (e.g. Abimelech) in Scripture, and King, LeRoy, Koenig, among
modern names.

7 Greg. Nyss., Vit. Mac. 392. 9 Greg. Nyss., Vit. Mac. 186. 11 Greg. Nyss., Vit. Mac. 1S2.

8 Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. (xx.). 10 70. 181, 1091.

12329. Prudent Maran, the Ben. Ed. of Basil, was a Benedictine exiled for opposing the Bull Unigenitus. { 1762.

13 “ Natus. c. 330.”

14 Gregory of Nazianzus, so called, was born during the episcopate of his father, Gregory, bishop of Nazianzus.
Gregory the elder died in 373, after holding the see forty-five years. The birth of Gregory the younger cannot therefore be
put before 328, and Basil was a little younger than his friend. (Greg. Naz., £p. xxxiii.) But the birth of Gregory in his
father’s episcopate has naturally been contested. Vide D.C.B. ii. p. 748, and L. Montaut, Revue Critique on Greg. of N. 1878.


1 Ep. clxii. )
( xiii


XiVv BASIL,


to mean not only place of birth, but place of residence and occupation.’ JBasil’s parents
had property and interests both in Pontus and Cappadocia, and were as likely to be in the
one as inthe other. The early statement of Gregory of Nazianzus has been. held to have
weight, inasmuch as he speaks of Basil as a Cappadocian like himself before there was any
other reason but that of birth for associating him with this province.*? Assenting, then, tothe
considerations which have been held to afford reasonable ground for assigning Caesarea as
the birthplace, we may adopt the popular estimation of Basil as one of ‘*The Three
Cappadocians,” * and congratulate Cappadocia on the Christian associations which have
rescued her fair fame from the slur of the epigram which described her as constituting with
Crete and Cilicia a trinity of unsatisfactoriness.* Basil’s birth nearly synchronizes with the
transference of the chief seat of empire from Rome to Byzantium. He is born into a
world where the victory already achieved by the Church has been now for sixteen years
officially recognized. He is born into a Church in which the first great Council has
already given official expression to those cardinal doctrines of the faith, of which the final
and formal vindication is not to be assured till after the struggles of the next six score of
years. Rome, reduced, civilly, to the subordinate rank of a provincial city, is pausing
before she realises all her loss, and waits for the crowning outrage of the barbarian in-
vasions, ere she begins to make serious efforts to grasp, ecclesiastically, something of her
lost imperial prestige. For a time the centre of ecclesiastical and theological interest is to
be rather in the East than in the West.


II. — EpUCATION.


The place most closely connected with St. Basil’s early years is neither Cesarea nor
Neocesarea, but an insignificant village not far from the latter place, where he was brought
up by his admirable grandmother, Macrina.® In this neighbourhood his family had con-
siderable property, and here he afterwards resided. The estate was at Annesi, on the river
Iris (Jekil-Irmak),’ and lay in the neighbourhood of scenery of romantic beauty. Basil’s
own description * of his retreat on the opposite side of the Iris matches the reference of
Gregory of Nazianzus*to the narrow glen among lofty mountains, which keep it always
in shadow and darkness, while far below the river foams and roars in its narrow precipi-
tous bed. |

There is some little difficulty in understanding the statement of Basil in Letter
CCXVI., that the house of his brother Peter, which he visited in 375, and which we may
assume to have been on the family property (cf. Letter CX. 8 1) was ‘** not far from Neo-
cesarea.” Asa matter of fact, the Iris nowhere winds nearer to Neocesarea than ata distance
of about twenty miles, and Turkhal is not at the nearest point. But it isalla question of
degree. Relatively to Caesarea, Basil’s usual place of residence, Annesi is near Neocesarea.
An analogy would be found in the statement of a writer usually residing in London, that if
he came to Sheffield he would be not far from Doncaster.’°

At Annesi his mother Emmelia erected a chapel in honour of the Forty Martyrs of
Sebaste, to which their relics were translated. It is possible that Basil was present at the


1 Gregory of Nazianzus calls Basil a Cappadocian in Ef. vi., and speaks of their both belonging to the same πατρίς.
In his Homily /z Gord‘um martyrem, Basil mentions the adornment of Czsarea as being his own adornment. In Eff. Ixxvi.
and xcvi. he calls Cappadocia his πατρίς. In Ep, Ixxiv., Caesarea. In Ep. li. it is doubtful whether it is Pontus, whence he
writes, which is his πατρίς, or Caesarea, of which he is writing. In Zp. |xxxvii. it is apparently Pontus. Gregory of Nyssa
(Orat. 7. in xl, Mart.) calls Sebaste the πατρίς of his forefathers, possibly because Sebaste had at one time been under the
jurisdiction of Cappadocia, So in the N.T. πατρίς is the place of the early life and education of our Lord.

2 Maran, Vit. Bas.i. 3’ Bohringer.

4 Καππάδοκες, Ἱζρῆτες, Κίλικες, τρία κάππα κάκιστα. On Basil’s own estimate of the Cappadocian character, cf. p. 153, n.
. ff. also Isidore of Pelusium, i. Epp. 351, 352, 281.

5 The edict of Milan was issued in 313. 6 Epp, Cciv,, COx., CEXximL.

_ Epp. iii., cexxiii, The researches of Prof. W. M. Ramsay enable the exact spot to be identified with approximate cer-
tainty, and, with his guidance, a pilgrim to the scenes of Basil’s boyhood and earlier monastic labours might feel himself on
fairly sure ground. He refers to the description of St. Basil’s hermitage given by Gregory of Nazianzus in his . 2. iv.,a
description which may be compared with that. of Basil himself in Ep. xiv., aS one which ‘‘can hardly reter to any other spot
than the rocky glen below Turkhal. Ibora,’’ in which diocese Annesi was situated, ‘‘ cannot be placed further down, because
it is the frontier bishopric of Pontus towards Sebasteia, and further up there is no rocky glen until the territory of Comana is
reached, Gregory Nyssenus, in his treatise on baptism ” (Migne, iii. 423 c.) ‘speaks of Comana as a neighbouring citv.
Tillemont, thinking that the treatise was written at Nyssa, infers that Nyssa and Comana were near each other. The truth is
that Gregory must have written his treatise at Annesi. We may therefore infer that the territory of Ibora adjoined that of
Comana on the east and that of Sebasteia on the south, and touched the Iris from the boundary of Comana down to the point
below Turkhal. The boundary was probably near Tokat, and Ibora itself may have been actually situated near Turkhal.”
Prof. W. M. Ramsay, ///st. Geog. of Asia Minor, p. 326. 8 Kp. xiv. 9 Greg. Naz., Ep. iv.

10 On the visits to Peter, Prof. W. M. Ramsay writes: ‘The first and more natural interpretation is that Peter lived at a
place further up the Iris than Dazimon, in the direction of Neocesarea. But on more careful consideration it is obvious that,
after the troubles in Dazimon, Basil went to take a holiday with his brother Peter, and therefore he did not necessarily
continue his journey onward from Dazimon. The expression of neighbourhood to the district of Neoczsarea is doubtless
only comparative. Basil’s usual residence was at Czsarea, Moreover, as Lbora has now been placed, its territory probably
touched that of Neocesarea.”” Hist. Geog. of A.M. p. 328.


PROLEGOMENA. XV


dedication services, lasting all night long, which are related to have sent his brother
Gregory to sleep." Here, then, Basil was taught the rudiments of religion by his grand-
mother,’ and by his father,* in accordance with the teaching of the great Gregory the
Wonder-worker.* Here he learned the Catholic faith.

At an early age he seems to have been sent to school at Cesarea,*® and there to have
formed the acquaintance of an Eusebius, otherwise unknown,°® Hesychius,’” and Gregory
of Nazianzus,° and to have conceived a boyish admiration for Dianius the archbishop.®

From Cesarea Basil went to Constantinople, and there studied rhetoric and philosophy
with success. Socrates” and Sozomen™ say that he worked at Antioch under Libanius.
It may be that both these writers have confounded Basil of Czsarea with the Basil to
whom Chrysostom dedicated his De Sacerdotio, and who was perhaps the bishop of
Raphanea, who signed the creed of Constantinople.”

There is no corroboration of a sojourn of Basil of Caesarea at Antioch. Libanius was
at Constantinople in 347,” and there Basil may have attended his lectures." |

From Constantinople the young Cappadocian student proceeded in 351 to Athens. Of
an university town of the 4th century we have a lively picture in the writings of his friend,’°
and are reminded that the rough horse-play of the modern undergraduate is a survival of a
very ancient barbarism. The lads were affiliated to certain fraternities, and looked out
for the arrival of every new student at the city, with the object of attaching him to the
classes of this or that teacher. Kinsmen were on the watch for kinsmen and acquaintances
for acquaintances; sometimes it was mere good-humoured violence which secured the
person of the freshman. The first step in this grotesque matriculation was an entertain-
ment; then the guest of the day was conducted with ceremonial procession through the
agora to the entrance of the baths. There they leaped round him with wild cries, and
refused him admission. At last an entry was forced with mock fury, and the neophyte
was made free of the mysteries of the baths and of the lecture halls. Gregory of Nazianzus,
a student a little senior to Basil, succeeded in sparing him the ordeal of this initiation,
and his dignity and sweetness of character seem to have secured him immunity from rough
usage without loss of popularity.” At Athens the two young Cappadocians were noted
among their contemporaries for three things: their diligence and success in work; their
stainless and devout life; and their close mutual affection. Everything was common to
them. They were as one soul. What formed the closest bond of union was their faith.
God and their love of what is best made them one.’® Himerius, a pagan, and Proheresius,
an Armenian Christian, are mentioned among the well-known professors whose classes
Basil attended.” Among early friendships, formed possibly during his university career,
Basil’s own letters name those with Terentius Ὁ and Sophronius.”!

If the Libanian correspondence be accepted as genuine, we may add Celsus, a pupil
of Libanius, to the group.” But if we except Basil’s affection for Gregory of Nazianzus,
of none of these intimacies is the interest so great as of that which is recorded to have
been formed between Basil and the young prince Julian.”* One incident of the Athenian
sojourn, which led to bitter consequences in after days, was the brief communication with
Apollinarius, and the letter written ‘‘from layman to layman,” ** which his opponents made
a handle for much malevolence, and perhaps for forgery. Julian arrived at Athens after the
middle of the year 255. JBasil’s departure thence and return to Cesarea may therefore


1 Greg. Nyss., Orat. in xl. Mart. 8 Greg. Naz., Or. xliii.

2 Ep, ccxxiii. 4 See Ep. cciv. and note on p. 250.

7.6, the Cappadocian Cesarea. The theory of Tillemont that Czsarea of Palesttne was the scene of Basil’s early
school life seems hardly to deserve the careful refutation of Maran ( Vit. Bas.i.5). of. Ep. xiv. p. 148, and p. 145, n. of. also
note on p. 141 on a possible intercourse between the boy Basil and the young princes Gallus and Julian in their seclusion at
Macellum. The park and palace of Macellum (Amm. Mare. “ fuzdus”) was near Mt. Argzus (Soz. v. 2) and close to
Cesarea, If Basil and Julian did ever study the Bible together, it seems more probable that they should do so at Macellum,
while the prince was still being educated as a Christian, than afterwards at Athens, when the residence at Nicomedia had
resulted in the apostasy. cf. Maran, Vit. Bas. ii. 4.

6 ns eclxxi. 7 Ep. Ixiv. 8 Greg. Naz. Or. xliii. 9 Ep. hi. 10 Ecc. Hist. iv. 26.

MN Ecc. Hist. vi. 17. 12 Maran, Vit, Bas. ii., Fabrictus, Ed. Harles. vol. ix.

13 He does not seem to have been at Antioch until 353. D.C.B. iii. 710, when Basil was at Athens.
14 cf. the correspondence with Libanius, of which the genuineness has been questioned, in Letters cccxxxv.-ccclix. Letter
᾿ €CCXxxix. Suggests a possibility of somg study of Hebrew. But Basil always uses the LXX.
16 Greg. Naz., Or. xliii., and poem Vita Sua. 16 Φράτριαι, Greg., De Vita Sua, 215.
17 A somewhat similar exemption is corded of Dean Stanley at Rugby.
38 Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. 20, 21; Car#z}xi. 221-235:
““Ὅ δ᾽ εἰς Ev ἡμᾶς διαφερόντως ἤγαγε
Τοῦτ᾽ ἣν θεός τε καὶ πόθος τῶν κρεισσόνων.
Ullman (Life of Greg.) quotes Cic., De Amicitia, xxv.:“ Amicitia vis est in eo ut unus quast animus fiat ex pluribus.”
19 Soc. iv. 26 and Soz. vi. 17. 20 Fp. Ixiv. 2. EP. cclxxii. 22 Ep. cccvi.
23 Greg. Naz., Or. iv., Epp. xxxix., xl., xli., on the first of which see note. at Ep. ccxxiv. 2.
35 Amm, Mar. xv. 2,8. "" Permissus’’ is no doubt an euphemism for ‘‘ coactus.””


Xvi BASIL.


be approximately fixed early in 356.’ Basil starts for his life’s work with the equipment
of the most liberal education which the age could supply. He has studied Greek litera-
ture, rhetoric, and philosophy, under the most famous teachers. He has been brought
into contact with every class of mind. His training has been no narrow hothouse forcing
of theological opinion and ecclesiastical sentiment. The world which he is to renounce,
to confront, to influence, is not a world unknown to him.? He has seen heathenism in
all the autumn grace of its decline, and comes away victorious from seductions which
were fatal to some young men of early Christian associations. Athens no doubt contri-
buted its share ot influence to the apostasy of Julian. Basil, happity, was found to be
rooted more firmly in the faith.*


Ill. — Lire at CasarEA; Baptism; AND ADOPTION oF Monastic LIFE.


When Basil overcame the efforts of his companions to detain him at Athens, Gregory
was prevailed on to remain for a while longer. Basil therefore made his* rapid journey
homeward alone. His Letter to Eustathius* alleges as the chief reason for his hurried
departure the desire to profit by the instruction of that teacher. This may be the language
of compliment. In the same letter he speaks of his fortitude in resisting all temptation to
stop at the city on the Hellespont. This city I hesitate to recognise, with Maran, as
Constantinople. ‘There may have been inducements to Basil to stop at Lampsacus, and it
is more probably Lampsacus that he avoided.? At Caesarea he was welcomed as one of
the most distinguished of her sons,° and there for a time taught rhetoric with conspicuous
success.’ A deputation came from Neocesarea to request him to undertake educational
work at that city,* and in vain endeavoured to detain® him by lavish promises. Accord-
ing to his friend Gregory, Basil had already determined to renounce the world, in the
sense of devoting himself to an ascetic and philosophic life.'° His brother Gregory, how-
ever,'' represents him as at this period still under more mundane influences, and as shew-
ing something of the self-confidence and conceit which are occasionally to be observed in
young men who have just successfully completed an university career, and as being-largely
indebted to the persuasion and example of his sister Macrina for the resolution, with which
he now carried out the determination to devote himself to a life of self-denial. To the
same period may probably be referred Basil’s baptism. The sacrament was administered
by Dianius.” It would be quite consonant with the feelings of the times that pious parents
like the elder Basil and Emmelia should shrink from admitting their boy to holy baptism
before his encountering the temptations of school and university life.% The assigned date,


1“ Non enim citius contigrt anno 355 exeunte aut ineunte 355, st quidem fbi vidit Basilius Fulianum, qui in hanc urbem
venit jam meita parte annt 355 elapsa: neque etiam sertus, quia spatia inter studia Litterarum et sacerdotium nimis contrahi
non patitur rerum Bastlit gestarum multitudo.” Maran.

2On the education of Basil, Eug. Fialon remarks (Etude Historique et Litteratre, Ὁ. 15): “ Saint Grégoire, sur le
trone patriarcal de Constantinople, déclaraitt ne pas savoir la languede Rome. Il en fut de méme de Saint Basile. Du
moins, Cest vatnement qu'on chercherait dans ses ouvrages quelque trace des portes ou des prosateurs Latins. Si des
passages del’ Hexaméron semblent tirés de Cicéron ou de Pline, il ne faut pas s’y méprendre, C’étaint de sortes de lieux
cammuns qui se retrouvent dans Plutarque et dans Elien-ceux-ci les avaient empruntés ἃ quelque vieil auteur, Aristotle, par
exemple, et cest ἃ cette source premitére qu’avaient puisé Grecs et Latins. Les Grecs poussaient méme si loin Vignorance du
Latin qwun deleurs grammairiens ne semble pas se douter qu'il y ait des langues sans article, et que Grégoire de Nysse,
ayant ἃ dire comment le mot ciel s’exprime en Latin, écrit a peu pres comme tl devatt Ng gh τε Stein gi aux Romains,
Κέλουμ, sans se préoccuper de la quantité ni de V’etymologie ... La littérature Grecque était donc le fonds unique des
études en Ortent, et certes elle pouvait, ἃ elle seule, satisfaire de nobles intelligences ... C'est dans Homére que les jeunes
Grecs apprenatent ἃ lire. Pendant tout le cours de leurs études, tls expliquaient ses poémes . . . Ses vers remplissent la cor-
respontances des pores de l'Fglise, et plus @une comparaison profane passe de ses poemes dans leurs homélies. Aprés
Homeére, venatent Heésiode et les tragiques Hérodote et Thacydie. Démosthéne, Isocrate, et Lysias. Atnst poctes, historiens,
orateurs, formaient esprit, dirigeaient le ceur, élevatent Vame des enfants. Mats ces auteurs étaient les coryphées du
paganisme, et plus dune passage de leur livres blessait la morale sévére du christianisme. Nul doute qu'un maitre religieux,
un saint, comme le pore de Basile, ἃ propos des dienx d’ Homere,. .. dat plus dune fois déplorer Paveuglement d’un si beau
gente... . Fusgu'ici, les études de Basile repondent ἃ peu prés ἃ notre instruction secondaire. Alors, comme aujourd'hui
ces premisre études n'etatent qu'un acheminement ἃ des travaux plus serieux. Muni de ce premier bagage littératre, un jeune
homme riche, et que voulatt brilier dans le monde, allait dans les grands centres, ἃ yest a Alexandrie, ἃ Constantinople,
et surtout a Athénes, étudier @’éloquence et la philosophic.”

; 8 ο΄. C. Ullman, Life of Gregory of Naz. chap. ii., and Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. 21. βλαβεραὶ μὲν τοῖς ἄλλοις Αθῆναι at
εἰς ψυχήν. 4 ED. ἃς 5 What these inducements can have been it seems vain to conjecture. cf. Ep. i. and note.

ὃ Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. 7 Rufinus xi. 9.

8 Ep.ccx.§2. The time assigned by Maran for the incident here narrated is no doubt the right one. But the depu-
tation need have travelled no farther than to Annesi, if, as is tolerably certain, Basil on his return from Athens visited his
relatives and the family estate.

® The word κατασχεῖν would be natural if they sought to keep him in Pontus; hardly, if their object was to bring him
from Cesarea. 10 Or. x\iii. 11 Vit. Mac.

12 cf. De. Sp. Scto. xxix., where the description of the bishop who both baptized and ordained Basil, and spent a long life
in the ministry, can apply only to Dianius. cf. Maran, Vit. Bas. iii.

13 According to the legendary life of St. Basil, attributed to St. Amphilochius, he was baptized at Jerusalem. Nor is it
right to omit to notice the argument of Wall (Jnfant pt) dnd ch. x.) founded on a coincidence between two passages in the
writings of Greg. Naz. In Or. x). ad init. he speaks of baptisin as a γένεσις ἡμερινὴ καὶ ἐλευθέρα καὶ λυτικὴ παθὼν, πᾶν TO ἀπὺ
γενέσεως κάλυμμα περιτέμνουσα, καὶ πρὸς THY ἄνω ζωὴν ἐπανάγουσα. In Or. xliii., he says of Basil that τὰ πρῶτα τῆς ἡλικίας ὑπὸ
τῷ πατρὶ . .. σπαργανοῦται καὶ διαπλάττεται πλάσιν τὴν ἀρίστην τε καὶ καθαρωτάτην, ἣν ἡμερινὴν ὁ θεῖος Δαβιδ καλῶς ὀνομάζει
καὶ τῆς νυκτερινῆς ἀντίθετον. As they stand alone, there is something to be said for the conclusion Wall deduces from these


PROLEGOMENA. 3 xvii


357, may be reasonably accepted, and shortly after his baptism he was ordained Reader.'
It was about this time that he visited monastic settlements in Palestine, Mesopotamia,
Ceele Syria, and Egypt,’ though he was not so fortunate as to encounter the great pope
Athanasius.* Probably during this tour he began the friendship with Eusebius of Samo-
sata which lasted so long.

To the same period we may also refer his renunciation of his share of the family
property.* Maran would appear to date this before the Syrian and Egyptian tour, a journey
which can hardly have been accomplished without considerable expense. But, in truth, with
every desire to do justice to the self-denial and unworldliness of St. Basil and of other like-
minded and like-lived champions of the Faith, it cannot but be observed that, at all events
in Basil’s case, the renunciation must be understood with some reasonable reservation.
The great archbishop has been claimed as a ** socialist,” whatever may be meant in these
days by the term.’ But St. Basil did not renounce all property himself, and had a keen
sense of its rights in the case of his friends. From his letter on behalf of his foster-
brother, placed by Maran during his presbyterate,’ it would appear that this foster-brother,
Dorotheus, was allowed a life tenancy of a house and farm on the family estate, with a
certain number of slaves, on condition that Basil should be supported out of the profits.
Here we have landlord, tenant, rent, and unearned increment. St. Basil can scarcely be
fairly cited as a practical apostle of some of the chapters of the socialist evangel of the end
of the nineteenth century. But ancient eulogists of the great archbishop, anxious to re-
present him as a good monk, have not failed to foresee that this might be urged in objection
to the completeness of his renunciation of the world, in their sense, and, to counterbalance
it, have cited an anecdote related by Cassian.* One day a senator named Syncletius came
to Basil to be admitted to his monastery, with the statement that he had renounced his
property, excepting only a pittance to save him from manual labour, ‘* You have spoilt
a senator,” said Basil, “" without making a monk.” Basil’s own letter represents him as
practically following the example of, or setting an example to, Syncletius.

Stimulated to carry out his purpose of embracing the ascetic life by what he saw
of the monks and solitaries during his travels, Basil first of all thought of establishing a
monastery in the district of Tiberina.° Here he would have been in the near neigh-
bourhood of Arianzus, the home of his friend Gregory. But the attractions of Tiberina
were ultimately postponed to those of Ibora, and Basil’s place of retreat was fixed in the
glen not far from the old home, and only separated from Annesi by the Iris, of which we
have Basil’s own picturesque description.” Gregory declined to do more tnan pay a visit to
Pontus, and so is said to have caused Basil much disappointment." It is a little characteristic
of the imperious nature of the man of stronger will, that while he would not give up the
society of his own mother and sister in order to be near his friend, he complained of his
friend’s not making a similar sacrifice in order to be near him.” Gregory ® good-humouredly
replies to Basil’s depreciation of Tiberina by a counter attack on Cesarea and Annesi.

At the Pontic retreat Basil now began that system of hard ascetic discipline which
eventually contributed to the enfeeblement of his health and the shortening of his life. He
complains again and again in his letters of the deplorable physical condition to which he
is reduced, and he died at the age of fifty. It is a question whether a constitution better
capable of sustaining the fatigue of long journeys, and a life prolonged beyond the Council
of Constantinople, would or would not have left a larger mark upon the history of the
Church. There can be no doubt, that in Basil’s personal conflict with the decadent empire
represented’ by Valens, his own cause was strengthened by his obvious superiority to the
hopes and fears of vulgar ambitions. He ate no more than was actually necessary for
daily sustenance, and his fare was of the poorest. Even when he was archbishop, no
flesh meat was dressed in his kitchens. His wardrobe consisted of one under and one


passages. Against it there is the tradition of the later baptism, with the indication of Dianius as having performed the rite in
the De i Scto. 29. On the o:her hand τὰ πρῶτα τῆς ἡλικιας Might possibly refer not to infancy, but to boyhood.

1 De S, Scto.xxiv. On his growing seriousness of character, cf. Ep. ccxxiii.

2 Epp. i. and ccxxiii. ὃ 2. 5 Ep. ixxx. 4 ο΄. Ep. ccxxiii. § 2. Greg. Naz., Or. xliii.

5e.g¢. The New Party, 1894, pp. 82 and 83, quoting Bas., 7,2 Isa.i., Hom. in tllud Luca Destruam horrea, §'7,and Hom.
in Divites. 6 Epp. iii., xxxvi. cf. Dr. Travers Smith, Basi, p. 33. 7 Ep. xxxvii.

8 Inst. vii. το. cf. note on Cassian, vol. xi. p. 254 of this series.

9 Ep. xiv.ad fin. WED. RAV: 41 Greg. Naz., £p. i. or xliii. § 25.

12 On the later difference between the triends at the time of Basil’s consecration, De Broglie remarks: * A/nusi se trahissatt
& chaque he cette proforas diversité de caractére qui devatt parfots troubler, mais plus sonnent ranimer et resserrer l’union de
ces deux belles dmes: Basile, né pour le gouvernement des hommes et pour la lutte, prompt et précis dans ses resolutions,
embrassant ἃ coup dail le but ἃ poursutvre et y marchant drott sans s’inqutéter des difficultés et du jugement des spectateurs ;
Grégoire, atteint de cette délicatesse un peu maladive, gui est, chez les esprits d’élite, la source de l'inspiration poétique,
sensible ἃ la moindre renonce d’approbation ou de blame, surtout ἃ la moindre blessure de l’amitié, plus τῆνος averti des
obstacles, mats ausst plus aisément décourags, melant a la poursuite des plus grands intéréts un soin peut tre cxcessif de sa
dignité et toutes les inguictudes d’un ceur souffrant.” L Eglise εἰ l’Empire Romain au IVme Siécle, v. ps 80.

13 Greg. Naz., £9. ii. 1. Fp. xii.


XViil | BASIL.


over garment. By night he wore haircloth; not by day, lest he should seem ostentatious.
He treated his body, says his brother, with a possible reference to St. Paul,’ as an angry
owner treats a runaway slave.” A consistent celibate, he was yet almost morbidly con-
scious of his unchastity, mindful of the Lord’s words as to the adultery of the impure
thought.* St. Basil relates in strong terms his admiration for the ascetic character cf
Eustathius of Sebaste,‘ and at this time was closely associated with him. Indeed, Eus-
tathius was probably the first to introduce the monastic system into Pontus, his part in the
work being comparatively ignored in later days when his tergiversation had brought him
into disrepute. Thus the credit of introducing monasticism into Asia Minor was given to
Basil alone.® A novel feature of this monasticism was the Ccenobium,? for hitherto ascetics
had lived in absolute solitude, or in groups of only two or three.’ Thus it was partly
relieved from the discredit of selfish isolation and unprofitable idleness.°

The example set by Basil and his companions spread. Companies of hard-working
ascetics of both sexes were established in every part of Pontus, every one of them an
active centre for the preaching of the Nicene doctrines, and their defence against Arian
opposition and misconstruction.? Probably about this time, in conjunction with his friend
Gregory, Basil compiled the collection of the beauties of Origen which was entitled
Philocalia. Origen’s authority stood high, and both of the main divisions of Christian
thought, the Nicene and the Arian, endeavoured to support their respective views from his
writings. Basil and Gregory were successful in vindicating his orthodoxy and using his
aid in strengthening the Catholic position.”


IV.— BAsIL AND THE COUNCILS, TO THE ACCESSION OF VALENS.


Up to this time St. Basil is not seen to have publicly taken an active part in the
personal theological discussions of the age; but the ecclesiastical world was eagerly dis-
puting while he was working in Pontus. Aetius, the uncompromising Arian, was openly
favoured by Eudoxius of Germanicia, who had appropriated the see of Antioch in 357.
This provoked the Semiarians to hold their council at Ancyra in 358, when the Sirmian
‘¢Blasphemy” of 357 was condemned. The Acacians were alarmed, and manceuvred for
the division of the general council which Constantius was desirous of summoning. ‘Then
came Ariminum, Nike, and Seleucia, in 359, and ** the world groaned to find itself Arian.”
Deputations from each of the great parties were sent to a council held under the personal
presidency of Constantius at Constantinople, and to one of these the young deacon was
attached. The date of the ordination to this grade is unknown. On the authority of
Gregory of Nyssa™ and Philostorgius,” it appears that Basil accompanied his namesake of
Ancyra and Eustathius of Sebaste to the court, and supported Basil the bishop. Philostor-
gius would indeed represent the younger Basil as championing the Semiarian cause, though
with some cowardice.” It may be concluded, with Maran, that he probably stood forward
stoutly for the truth, not only at the capital itself, but also in the neighbouring cities of
Chalcedon and Heraclea.“ But his official position was a humble one, and his part in the
discussions and amid the intrigues of the council was only too likely to be misrepresented
by those with whom he did not agree, and even: misunderstood by his own friends. In
360 Dianius signed the creed of Ariminum, brought to Caesarea by George of Laodicea;
and thereby Basil was so much distressed as henceforward to shun communion with his
bishop.” He left Caesarea and betook himself to Nazianzus to seek consolation in the
society of his friend. But his feelings towards Dianius were always affectionate, and he
indignantly repudiated a calumnious assertion that he had gone so far as to anathematize
him. Two years later Dianius fell sick unto death and sent for Basil, protesting that at
heart he had always been true to the Catholic creed. Basil acceded to the appeal, and in
362 once again communicated with his bishop and old friend.“ In the interval between the


11 Cor. ix. 27. _ _ ?Greg. Nyss., In Bas. 314 ς. Cassian, Just. vi. 19. 4 Ep. ccxxiii. ὃ 3.

5 cf. Tillemont ix. passim, Walch iii. 552, Schréckh xiii. 25, quoted by Robertson, i. 366.

6 κοινόβιον. 7 Maran, Vit. Bas. vi.
4 δ cf. Bas., Reg. Fus. Resp. vii., quoted by Robertson, i. 366. His rule has been compared to that of St. Benedict. D.C.B.
i. 284. On the life in the Retreat, cf. Epp. ii. and ccvii. 9 Soz. vi. 17.


_ ., of. Soc., Ecc. Hist. iv. 26. Of this work Gregory says, in sending it to a friend: ἵνα δέ τι καὶ ὑπόμνημα παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ἔχης,

τὸ δ᾽ αὐτὸ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Βασιλείου πυκτίον ἀπεστάλκαμέν σοι τῆς Apryevous Φιλοκαλίας, ἐκλογὰς ἔχων τῶν χρησίμων τοῖς φιλολό-

you. Ep. lxxxvii. 111, Eunom. 12 iv, 12.

_., Bois Βασίλειος ἕτερος παρὴν συνασπίζων διακόνων ἔτι τάξιν ἔχων, δυνάμει μὲν τοῦ λέγειν πολλῶν προφέρων, τῷ δὲ τῆς γνώμης

ἀθάρσει πρὸς τοὺς κοινοὺς ὑποστελλομένους ἀγῶνας. This is unlike Basil. ‘ This may be the Arian way of saying that St. Basil

withdrew from the Seleucian deputies when they yielded to the Acacians.” Rev. (ὦ. F. H. Johnston, De S. Scto. Int, xxxvi.
14 Ep. ccxxiii. ὃ 5. 16. FD. li. 16 Epp. viii. and li.


PROLEGOMENA. ΧΙΧ


visit to Constantinople and this death-bed reconciliation, that form of error arose which
was long known by the name of Macedonianism, and which St. Basil was in later years to
combat with such signal success in the treatise Of the Spirzt. It combined disloyalty to
the Spirit and to the Son. But countervailing events were the acceptance of the Homio-
ousion by the Council of Paris,! and the publication of Athanasius’ letters to Serapion on
the divinity of the two Persons assailed. To this period is referred the compilation by
Basil of the AZoralza.’

The brief reign of Julian would affect Basil, in common with the whole Church, in two
ways: in the relief he would feel at the comparative toleration shewn to Catholics, and the
consequent return of orthodox bishops to their sees; * in the distress with which he would
witness his old friend’s attempts to ridicule and undermine the Faith. Sorrow more per-
sonal and immediate must have been caused by the harsh treatment of Caesarea * and the
cruel imposts laid on Cappadocia. What conduct on the part of the Casareans may have
led Gregory of Nazianzus*® to speak of Julian as justly offended, we can only conjecture.
It may have been the somewhat disorderly proceedings in connexion wiih the appoint-
ment of Eusebius to succeed Dianius. But there can be no doubt about the sufferings of
Cesarea, nor of the martyrdom of Eupsychius and Damas for their part in the destruction
of the Temple of Fortune.°®

The precise part taken by Basil in the election of Eusebius can only be conjectured.
Eusebius, like Ambrose of Milan, a layman of rank and influence, was elevated fer sa/-
tum to the episcopate. Efforts were made by Julian and by some Christian objectors to
get the appointment annulled by means of Gregory, Bishop of Nazianzus, on the ground
of its having been brought about by violence. Bishop Gregory refused to take any retro-
gressive steps, and thought the scandal of accepting the tumultuary appointment would be
less than that of cancelling the consecration. Gregory the younger presumably supported
his father, and he associates Basil with him as probable sufferers from the imperial ven-
geance.’ But he was at Nazianzus at the time of the election, and Basil is more likely to
have been an active agent.®

To this period may be referred Basil’s receipt of the letter from Athanasius, men-
tioned in Letter CCIV., § 6.5 On the accession of Jovian, in June, 363, Athanasius wrote to
him asserting the Nicene Faith, but he was greeted also by a Semiarian manifesto from
Antioch,” of which the first signatory was Meletius.

Valentinian and Valens, on their accession in the following year, thus found the
Church still divided on its cardinal doctrines, and the lists were marked in which Basil was
henceforward to be a more conspicuous combatant.


VY «== THe . PREESEYTERATE,


Not long after the accession of Valens, Basil was ordained presbyter by Eusebius.”
An earlier date has been suggested, but the year 364 is accepted as fitting in better with
the words of Gregory” on the free speech conceded to heretics. And from the same
Letter it may be concluded that the ordination of Basil, like that of Gregory himself, was
not wholly voluntary, and that he was forced against his inclinations to accept duties when
he hesitated as to his liking and fitness for them. It was about this time that he wrote his
Books against Eunomius ;* and it may possibly have been this work which specially com-


1360. Mansi, iii. 357-9.

2 ἠθικά. ““ Capita moralia christiana, ex meris Novt Testamenti dictis contexta et regulis \xxx.comprehensa.”’ Fab.
Closely connected with these are the /tegule fustus tractat@ (ὅροι κατὰ πλάτος) lv., and the /tegule brevius tractate (ὅροι κατ᾽
ἐπιτόμην) cccexiii. (Migne, xxxi. pp. 890-1306) on which see later.

3 The most important instance being that of Athanasius, who, on his return to Alexandria after his third exile, held a
synod which condemned Macedonians as well as Arians. cf. Newman’s Arians, v.1.

4 Soz. v. 4. 5 Or. iv. § 92.

6 Fe c., cclii. Soz.v.11. cf. also Epp. xxxix., xl., and xli., with the notes on pp. 141, 142, for the argument for and
against the genuineness of the correspondence. Two Eupsychii of Caesarea are named in the Acta Sanctorum and by the
Petits Bollandistes, — one celebrated on April 9, said to have been martyred in the reign of Hadrian, the other the victim
of Julian in 362, commemorated on Sept. 7. Tillemont identifies them. Baronius thinks them distinct. J.S. Stilting (Act.
Sanct. ed. 1868) is inclined to distinguish them mainly on the ground that between 362 and the time of Basil’s describing
the festival as an established yearly commemoration there is not sufficient interval for the cultus to have arisen. This alone
seems hardly convincing. The local interest in the victim of Julian’s severity would naturally be great. Becket was murdered
in 1170 and canonized in 1173, Dec. 29 being fixed for his feast; Lewis VII. of France was among the pilgrims in 1179.
Bernadette Soubirous announced her vision at Lourdes in 1858; the church was begun there in 1862.

7 Or. v. 39. 8 cf. Greg. Naz. Ep. viii. 9 Maran, Vit. Bas. viii. 8. 10 Soc. iii. 25.

τι [t will have been noted that I have accepted the authority of Philostorgius that he was already deacon. The argument
employed by Tillemont against this statement is the fact of no distinct diaconate being menti»ned by Gregory of Nazianzus.
But the silence of Gregory does not conclusively outweigh the distinct ἔτι τάξιν διακόνου ἔχων of Philostorgius; and a diaconate
is supported by the mistaken statement of Socrates (H/.Z. iv. 26) that the deacon’s orders were conferred by Meletius.

12 Greg. Naz., Ep. viii. : 13 cf. Ep. xx.


XX | BASIL.


mended him to Eusebius. However this may be, there is no doubt that he was soon
actively engaged in the practical work of the diocese, and made himself very useful to
Eusebius. But Basil’s very vigour and value seem to have been the cause of some aliena-
tion between him and his bishop. His friend Gregory gives us no details, but it may be
inferred from what he says that he thought Basil ill-used.t| And allusions of Basil have
been supposed to imply his own sense of discourtesy and neglect.” The position became
serious. Bishops who had objected to the tumultuary nomination of Eusebius, and had
with difficulty been induced to maintain the lawfulness of his consecration, were ready to
consecrate Basil in his place. But Basil shewed at once his wisdom and his magnanimity.
A division of the orthodox clergy of Cappadocia would be full of danger to the cause.
He would accept no personal advancement to the damage of the Church. He retired with
his friend Gregory to his Pontic monasteries,’ and won the battle by flying from the field.
Eusebius was left unmolested, and the character of Basil was higher than ever.*

The seclusion of Basil in Pontus seemed to afford an opportunity to his opponents in
Cappadocia, and according to Sozomen;° Valens himself, in 365, was moved to threaten
Czsarea with a visit by the thought that the Catholics of Cappadocia were now deprived
of the aid of their strongest champion. Eusebius would have invoked Gregory, and left
Basil alone. Gregory, however, refused to act without his friend, and, with much tact
and good feeling, succeeded in atoning the two offended parties. Eusebius at first re-
sented Gregory’s earnest advocacy of his absent friend, and was inclined to resent what
seemed the somewhat impertinent interference of a junior. But Gregory happily appealed
to the archbishop’s sense of justice and superiority to the common unwillingness of high
dignitaries to accept counsel, and assured him that in all that he had written on the subject
he had meant to avoid all possible offence, and to keep within the bounds of spiritual and
philosophic discipline.” Basil returned to the metropolitan city, ready to codperate loyally
with Eusebius, and to employ all his eloquence and learning against the proposed Arian
aggression. To the grateful Catholics it seemed as though the mere knowledge that Basil
was in Caesarea was enough to turn Valens with his bishops to flight,* and the tidings,
brought by a furious rider, of the revolt of Procopius,? seemed a comparatively insignifi-
cant motive for the emperor’s departure.

There was now a lull in the storm. Basil, completely reconciled to Eusebius, began
to consolidate the archiepiscopal power which he afterward wielded as his own,” over the
variaus provinces in which the metropolitan of Casarea exercised exarchic authority." In
the meantime the Semiarians were beginning to share with the Catholics the hardships in-
flicted by the imperial power. At Lampsacus in 364 they had condemned the results of
Ariminum and Constantinople, and had reasserted the Antiochene Dedication Creed of 341.
In 366 they sent deputies to Liberius at Rome, who proved their orthodoxy by subscribing
the Nicene Creed. Basil had not been present at Lampsacus,” but he had met Eustathius
and other bishops on their way thither, and had no doubt influenced the decisions of the
synod. Now the deputation to the West consisted of three of those bishops with whom he
was in communication, Eustathius of Sebasteia, Silvanus of Tarsus, and Theophilus of
Castabala. To the first it was an opportunity for regaining a position among the ortho-
dox prelates. It can hardly have been without the persuasion of Basil that the deputation
went so far as they did in accepting the homoousion, but it is a little singular, and in-
dicative of the comparatively slow awakening of the Church in general to the perils of the
degradation of the Holy Ghost, that no profession of faith was demanded from the Lamp-
sacene delegates on this subject." In 367 the council of Tyana accepted the restitution of
the Semiarian bishops, and so far peace had been promoted.“ To this period may very
probably be referred the compilation of the Liturgy which formed the basis of that which
bears Basil’s name.” The claims of theology and of ecclesiastical administration in Basil’s


1 Greg. Naz., Orat. xliii. 28, Epp. xvi.-xvii. 2¢.¢. Hom. in Is.i. 57, ἀλαζονεία yap δεινὴ τὸ μηδενὸς οἴεσθαι χρήζειν.

8 Gregory has no doubt that Eusebius was in the wrong, even ridiculously in the wrong, if such be the true interpreta-
tion of his curious phrase (Or. xliii. 28), ἅπτεται yap οὐ τῶν πολλῶν μονὸν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἀρίστων, ὃ Μῶμος. The monasteries
to which Basil fled Gregory here (14. 29) calls φροντιστήρια, the word used by Aristophanes (Clouds, 94) of the house or school
of Socrates, and apparently a comic parody on δικαστήριον. It might be rendered “ reflectory.” ‘*Contemplatory’’ has been
suggested. It is to be noted that Basil in the De Sp. Scto. (see p. 49, n.) appears to allude to the Acharnians. The friends
probably read Aristonhanes together at Athens.

4 Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. Soz. vi. 15. 5 vi. 15, 6 Greg. Naz., Epp. xvi., xvii., xix., and Or. xx.

1 οὐκ ὑβριστικῶς, ἀλλὰ πνευματικῶς τε Kal φιλοσόφως. 8 80Ζ. vi. 15. 9 Amm. Marc, xxvi. 7, 2.

10 ἐντεῦθεν ἀυτῶώ περιῆν καὶ TO κράτος τῆς ἐκκλησίας, εἰ KAL τῆς καθέδρας εἶχε τὰ δεύτερα. Greg. Naz., Or. xliii.

11 cf, Maran, Vit. Bas. xiv. and D.C.A.s.v. exarch. The archbishop of Casarea was exarch of the provinces (ἐπαρχίαι)
comprised in the Pontic Diocese. Maran refers to Letters xxviii., xxx., and xxxiv., as all shewing the important functions |
discharged by Basil while yet a presbyter.

12 Ἐ ςοχχίϊ. 18 Hefele, ὃ 88. Schréckh. Kirch, xii. 211. Swete, Doctrine of the Holy Spirit, 54.

4 Epp. ccxliv. and cclxiii. 15 Greg. Naz., Or. xliii.


PROLEGOMENA. ΧΧΙ


time did not, however, prevent him from devoting much of his vast energy to works of
charity. Probably the great hospital for the housing and relief of travellers and the poor,
which he established in the suburbs of Czsarea, was planned, if not begun, in the latter
years of his presbyterate, for its size and importance were made pretexts for denouncing
him to Elias, the governor of Cappadocia, in 372,’ and at the same period Valens contrib-
uted to its endowment. It was so extensive as to go by the name of Newtown,’ and was
in later years known as the “" Basileiad.”* It was the mother of other similar institutions
in the country-districts of the province, each under a Chorepiscopus.* But whether the
Ptochotrophium ἢ was or was not actually begun before Basil’s episcopate, great demands
were made on his sympathy and energy by the great drought and consequent famine which
befell Caesarea in 368.° He describes it with eloquence in his Homily On the Famine
and Drought.’ ‘The distress was cruel and widespread. ‘The distance of Caesarea from
the coast increased the difficulty of supplying provisions. Speculators, scratching, as it
were, in their country’s wounds, hoarded grain in the hope of selling at famine prices.
These Basil moved to open their stores. He distributed lavishly at his own expense,* and
ministered in person to the wants of the sufferers. Gregory of Nazianzus® gives us a
icture of his illustrious friend standing in the midst of a great crowd of men and women
and children, some scarcely able to breathe; of servants bringing in piles of such food as’
is best suited to the weak state of the famishing sufferers; of Basil with his own hands
distributing nourishment, and with his own voice cheering and encouraging the sufferers.
About this time Basil suflered a great loss in the death of his mother,” and sought
solace in a visit to his friend Eusebius at Samosata." But the cheering effect of his jour-
ney was lessened by the news, which greeted him on his return, that the Arians had suc-
ceeded in placing one of their number in the see of Tarsus.” The loss of Silvanus was ere
long followed by a death of yet graver moment to the Church. In the middle of 370 died
Eusebius, breathing his last in the arms of Basil.®


VI.— Basit as ARCHBISHOP.


The archiepiscopal throne was now technically vacant. But the man who had prac-
tically filled it, ‘‘the keeper and tamer of the lion,” ™ was still alive in the plenitude of
his power. What course was he to follow? Was he meekly to withdraw, and perhaps be
compelled to support the candidature of another and an inferior? The indirect evidence %
has seemed to some strong enough to compel the conclusion that he determined, if possible,
to secure his election to the see.** Others, on the contrary, have thought him incapable of
scheming for the nomination.” The truth probably lies hetween the two extreme views. No
intelligent onlooker of the position at Caesarea on the death of Eusebius, least of all the highly
capable administrator of the province, could be blind to the fact that of all possible com-
petitors for the vacant throne Basil himself was the ablest and most distinguished, and the
likeliest to be capable of directing the course of events in the interests of orthodoxy. But
it does not follow that Basil’s appeal to Gregory to come to him was a deliberate step to
secure this end. He craved for the support and counsel of his friend; but no one could


1 Ep. xciv. _ 2 i καινὴ πόλις. Greg, Naz., Or. xliii. cf. Sir Thomas More’s Utopia, Bk. II. Chap. V.

8 Soz. vi. 34. 4 Epp. cxiii., cxliii.

5 πτωχοτροφεῖον, Ep. clxxvi. Professor Ramsay, in Zhe Church and the Roman Empire, p. 464, remarks that “the ‘ New
City’ of Basil seems to have caused the gradual concentration of the entire population of Cxsarea round the ecclesiastical
centre, and the abandonment of the old city. Modern Kaisari is situated between ene and two miles from the site of the
Greco-Roman city.” ᾽ 6 For the date, cf. Maran, Vit. Bas. ix. ὃ 5.

7§ 2, p.63. cf. Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. 340-342, and Greg. Nyss., Zz Eun. i. 306.

8 Greg. Nyss., Jn Eunom. i. § 10 (in this series, Ρ. 45), remarks of Basil: τὴν πατρῷαν οὐσίαν καὶ πρὸ τῆς ἱερωσύνης
ἀφειδῶς ἀναλώσας τοῖς πένησι καὶ μάλιστα ἐν τῷ τῆς σιτοδείας καιρῷ, καθ᾽ ὃν ἐπεστάτει τῆς ἐκκλησίας, ἔτι ἐν τῷ κλήρῳ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων
ἱερατεύων καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα, μηδὲ τῶν ὑπολειφθέντων φεισάμενος. Maran (Vit. Bas. xi. § 4), with the object of proving that Basil
had completely abandoned all. property whatsoever, says that this must refer to a legacy from his mother. The terms used are
far more consistent with the view already expressed (ὃ III.). Soin his Orat. iz Bas. Gregory speaks of Basil at the time as
** selling his own possessions, and buying provisions with the proceeds.”

® Or. xliii. 10 Greg. Nyss., Vit. Mac. 187, Ep. xxx. τι Ep. xxxiv. 12 7d.

13 Gree. Naz., Or. xliii. 14 Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. 33.
15 7,6. the extant reply to his urgent request that Gregory would come to him. Greg. Naz., Ep. x1.
16“ Persuadé que, s’1l échouait c’en était fait de la fot de Nicée en Cappadoce,tl deploie toutes les ressources de son Lente,
aussi souple que puissant.’ Fialon, Et. Hist. p. 85.
᾿ς ‘* Personne dans la ville, pas méme Basile, malgré son humilité, ne outa que la succession ne {πὶ fit acquise. . .
71 fit assez ouvertement ses préparatifs pour sa promotion.” De Broglie, L’Eglise etl Empire R.v.SS.

‘* Basil persuaded himself, and not altogether unwarrantably, that the cause of orthodoxy in Asia Minor was involved in
his becoming his successor.” Canon Venables in D.C.B.

‘* Erselbst, so schwer er stch anfangs zur Uebernahme des Presbyterates hatte entschliessen kinnen, jetzt, wo er sich in
seine Stellyng hinein gearbeitet hatte wiinschte er nichts sehnlicher al seine Wahl zum Bischof. Bohringer the IVthc. p. 24.

‘“Was it really from ambitious views ? Certainly the suspicion, which even his friend entertained, attaches to him.”
Ullmann, Life of Gregory of Naz., Cox’s Trans. p. 117...

11“ Ne suspicatus quidem in se oculos conjectum iri.” Maran, Vit. Bas.
“ Former une brigue pour parvenir a Vépiscopat était bien loin de sa pensée.” Ceillier, iv. 354.


Xxii BASIL.


have known better that Gregory the younger was not the man to take prompt action or
rule events. His invention of a fatal sickness, or exaggeration of a slight one, failed to
secure even Gregory’s presence at Casarea. Gregory burst into tears on receipt of the
news of his friend’s grave illness, and hastened to obey the summons to his side. But on
the road he fell in with bishops hurrying to Caesarea for the election of a successor to
Eusebius, and detected the unreality of Basil’s plea. He at once returned to Nazianzus
and wrote the oft-quoted letter,’ on the interpretation given to which depends the estimate
formed of Basil’s action at the important crisis.

Basil may or may not have taken Gregory’s advice not to put himself forward. But
Gregory and his father, the bishop, from this time strained every nerve to secure the election
of Basil. It was felt that the cause of true religion was at stake. ‘* The Holy Ghost must
win.” * Opposition had to be encountered from bishops who were in open or secret sym-
pathy with Basil’s theological opponents, from men of wealth and position with whom
Basil was unpopular on account of his practice and preaching of stern self-denial, and from
all the lewd fellows of the baser sort in Cesarea.* Letters were written in the name of
Gregory the bishop with an eloquence and literary skill which have led them to be gener-
ally regarded as the composition of Gregory the younger. To the people of Czsarea Basil
was represented as a man of saintly life and of unique capacity to stem the surging tide of
heresy. To the bishops of the province who had asked him to come to Cesarea without
saying why, in the hope perhaps that so strong a friend of Basil’s might be kept away
from the election without being afterwards able to contest it on the ground that he had
had no summons to attend, he expresses an earnest hope that their choice is not a factious
and foregone conclusion, and, anticipating possible objections on the score of Basil’s weak
health, reminds them that they have to elect not a gladiator, but a primate.> To Eusebius
of Samosata he sends the letter included among those of Basil ® in which he urges him
to codperate in securing the appointment of a worthy man. Despite his age and physical
infirmity, he was laid in his litter, as his son says’ like a corpse in a grave, and borne to
Cesarea to rise there with fresh vigour and carry the election by his vote.* All resistance
was overborne, and Basil was seated on the throne of the great exarchate.

The success of the Catholics roused, as was inevitable, various feelings. Athanasius
wrote from Alexandria® to congratulate Cappadocia on her privilege in being ruled by
so illustrious a primate. Valens prepared to carry out the measures against the Catholic
province, which had been interrupted by the revolt of Procopius. ‘The bishops of the
province who had been narrowly out-voted, and who had refused to take part in the con-
secration, abandoned communion with the new primate.” But even more distressing
to the new archbishop than the disaflection of his suffragans was the refusal of his friend
Gregory to come in person to support him on his throne. Gregory pleaded that it was
better for Basil’s own sake that there should be no suspicion of favour to personal friends,
and begged to be excused for staying at Nazianzus. Basil complained that his wishes
and interests were disregarded,” and was hurt at Gregory’s refusing to accept high
responsibilities, possibly the coadjutor-bishopric, at Cxsarea.¥ A yet further cause of
sorrow and annoyance was the blundering attempt of Gregory of Nyssa to effect a
reconciliation between his uncle Gregory, who was in sympathy with the disaffected
bishops, and his brother. He even went so far as to send more than one forged letter
in their uncle’s name. The clumsy counterfeit was naturally found out, and the widened
breach not bridged without difficulty. The episcopate thus began with troubles, both
public and personal. Basil confidently confronted them. His magnanimity and capacity
secured the adhesion of his immediate neighbours and subordinates,® and soon his ener-
gies took a wider range. He directed the theological campaign all over the East, and
was ready alike to meet opponents in hand to hand encounter, and to aim the arrows of
his epistolary eloquence far and wide. He invokes the illustrious pope of Alexandria
to join him in winning the support of the West for the orthodox cause.” He is keenly
interested in the unfortunate controversy which distracted the Church of Antioch.¥ He
makes an earnest appeal to Damasus for the wonted sympathy of the Church at Rome.”
At the same time his industry in his see was indefatigable. He is keen to secure the


1 Greg. N., Ep. xl. (xxi.). 4.57. χὶϊ. 7 Or, ΧΙ,

2 Or. xlili. 5 am xliii. 8 Or. xviii., xlili. Ν

§ Or, xliii. § 37. eh Bite 9 Athan., Ad Pall. 953; Ad Yohan, et Ant. 951.

10 This is inferred from the latter part of Zp. xlviii. cf. Maran, Vit. Bas. xiii. 11 Greg. Naz., Ep. xlv.
12 Jd, Ep. xlvi. τι Epp. lviii., lix., lx. * 18 Ep. Ixix.


2.
Mt: : ; be 16 74. § 43.
8 τήνδε τῆς καθέδρας τίμην. Greg. Naz., Or. xliii., 15 Greg. Naz., Or. xliii.§ 40. 17 Basil, ΝΣ Ixvi., Ixvii. 19.3.2. lxx.


PROLEGOMENA. Χ ΧΙ


purity of ordination and the fitness of candidates. Crowds of working people come to
hear him preach before they go to their work for the day.* He travels distances which
would be thought noticeable even in our modern days of idolatry of the great goddess
Locomotion. He manages vast institutions eleemosynary and collegiate. His correspond-
ence is constant and complicated. He seems the personification of the active, rather
than of the literary and scholarly, bishop. Yet all the while he is writing tracts and
treatises which are monuments of industrious composition, and indicative of a memory
stored with various learning, and of the daily and eftective study of Holy Scripture.

Nevertheless, while thus actively engaged in fighting the battle of the faith, and in the
conscientious discharge of his high duties, he was not to escape an unjust charge of pusilla-
nimity, if not of questionable orthodoxy, from men who might have known him better.
On September 7th, probably in 371,° was held the festival of St. Eupsychius. Basil
preached the sermon. Among the hearers were many detractors.* A few days after the
festival there was a dinner-party at Nazianzus, at which Gregory was present, with
several persons of distinction, friends of Basil. Of the party was a certain unnamed guest,
of religious dress and reputation, who claimed a character for philosophy, and said some
very hard things against Basil. He had heard the archbishop at the festival preach
admirably on the Father and the Son, but the Spirit, he alleged, Basil defamed.’ While
Gregory boldly called the Spirit God, Basil, from poor motives, refrained from any clear
and distinct enunciation of the divinity of the Third Person. The unfavourable view of
Basil was the popular one at the dinner-table, and Gregory was annoyed at not being
able to convince the party that, while his own utterances were of comparatively little im-
portance, Basil had to weigh every word, and to avoid, if possible, the banishment which
was hanging over his head. It was better to use a wise ‘‘ economy” ® in preaching the
truth than so to proclaim it as to ensure the extinction of the light of true religion.
Basil 7 shewed some natural distress and astonishment on hearing that attacks against him
were readily received.®

It was at the close of this same year 371° that Basil and his diocese suffered most
severely from the hostility of the imperial government. Valens had never lost his antipathy
to Cappadocia. In 370 he determined on dividing it into two provinces. Podandus, a

oor little town at the foot of Mt. Taurus, was to be the chief seat of the new province, and

thither half the executive was to betransferred. Basil depicts in lively terms the dismay and
dejection of Caesarea.” He even thought of proceeding in person to the court to plead the
cause of his people, and his conduct is in itself a censure of those who would confine the
sympathies of ecclesiastics within rigidly clerical limits. The division was insisted on.
But, eventually, Tyana was substituted for Podandus as the new capital; and it has been
conjectured " that possibly the act of kindness of the prefect mentioned in Ep. LXXVIII.
may have been this transfer, due to the intervention of Basil and his influential friends.

But the imperial Arian was not content with this administrative mutilation. At the
close of the year 371, flushed with successes against the barbarians,” fresh from the baptism
of Endoxius, and eager to impose his creed on his subjects, Valens was travelling leisurely
towards Syria. He is said to have shrunk from an encounter with the famous primate of
Cesarea, for he feared lest one strong man’s firmness might lead others to resist.7 Before
him went Modestus, Prefect of the Pratorium, the minister of his severities, and before
Modestus, like the skirmishers in front of an advancing army, had come a troop of Arian


1 Ep, liii. 8 Maran, Vit. Bas. xviii. 4. 5 παρασύρειν. 760. ΤᾺ 2: xxi,

2 Hex. Hom. iii. p. 65. ‘Greg. Naz., Ep. ἵν. 6 οἰκονομηθῆναι.

8 Mr. C. Εἰ. H. Johnston (The Book of St. Basil the Great on the Holy Spirit), in noting that St. Basil in the De Sp.
Scto. refrained from directly using the term Θεός of the Holy Ghost, remarks that he also avoided the use of the term ὁμοούσιος
of the Son, “in accordance with his own opinion expressed in Ep. ix.” In Ep. ix., however, he rather gives his reasons for
preferring the homoousion. The. epitome of the essay of C. G. Wuilcknis (Leipsig, 1724) on the economy or reserve of St.
Basil, appended by Mr. Johnston, is a valuable and interesting summary of the best defence which can be made for such
reticence. It is truly pointed out that the only possible motive in Basil’s case was the desire of serving God, for no one could
suspect or accuse him of ambition, fear, or covetousness, And if there was an avoidance of a particular phrase, there was no
paltering with doctrine. As Dr. Swete (Doctrine of the H.S.,p. 64) puts it: ‘‘ He knew that the opponents of the Spirit’s
Deity were watching their opportunity. Had the actual name of God been used in reference to the Third Person of the
Trinity, they would have risen, and, on the plea of resisting blasphemy, expelled St. Basil from his see, which would then have
been immeiiately filled by a Macedonian prelate. In private conversations with Gregory, Basil not only asserted again and
again the Godhead of the Spirit, but even confirmed his statement with a solemn imprecation, ἐπαρασάμενος ἑαυτῷ τὸ φρικωδέσ-
τατον, αὐτοῦ τοῦ πνεύματος ἐκπεσεῖν εἰ μὴ σέβοι TO πνεῦμα μετὰ πατρὸς καὶ γιοῦ ὡς ὁμοούσιον καὶ ὁμότιμον." (Greg. Naz.,Or. xliii.)
In Letter viii. § 11 he distinctly calls the Spirit God, as in Adv. Eunomius, v., if the latter be genuine. In the De S, Scto.
(p. 12) Basil uses the word οἰκονομία in the patristic sense nearly equivalent to izcarnation. In the passage of Bp. Lightfoot,
referred to in the note on p. 7, he points out how in Jen. ad Eph. xviii. the word has ‘‘ already reached its first stage on the
way to the sense of ‘ dissimulation,’ which was afterwards connected with it, and which led to disastrous consequences in the
theology and practice of a later age.” On‘ Reserve” as taught by later casuists, see Scavini, Theolog. Mor, ii. 23, the letters
of Pascal, and fer. Taylor, Ductor Dubit. iii. 2.

9 Maran, Vit. Bas. xx. 1. 11 Maran, Vit. Bas. xix. 3. 18 Theod. iv. τό.

10 Epp. \xxiv., Ixxv., lxxvi. 12 Greg. Nyss., C. Eunom. i. 14 Soc. iv. 16.


XXiV BASIL.


bishops, with Euippius, in all probability, at their head.? Modestus found on his arrival
that Basil was making a firm stand, and summoned the archbishop to his presence with
the hope of overawing him. He met with a dignity, if not with a pride, which was more
than a match for his own. Modestus claimed submission in the name of the emperor,
Basil refused it in the name of God. Modestus threatened impoverishment, exile, torture,
death. Basil retorted that none of these threats frightened him: he had nothing to be con-
fiscated except a few rags and a few books ; banishment could not send him beyond the lands
of God; torture had no terrors for a body already dead ; death could only come asa friend to
hasten his last journey home. Modestus exclaimed in amazement that-he had never been
so spoken to before. ‘* Perhaps,” replied Basil, ‘‘ you never met a bishop before.” The
prefect hastened to his master, and reported that ordinary means of intimidation appeared
unlikely to move this undaunted prelate. The archbishop must be owned victorious, or
crushed by more brutal violence. But Valens, like all weak natures, oscillated between
compulsion and compliance. He so far abated his pretensions to force heresy on Cappadocia,
as to consent to attend the services at the Church on the Festival of the Epiphany.’
The Church was crowded. A mighty chant thundered over the sea of heads. At the end
of the basilica, facing the multitude, stood Basil, statue-like, erect as Samuel among the
prophets at Naioth,® and quite indifferent to the interruption of the imperial approach.
The whole scene seemed rather of heaven than of earth, and the orderly enthusiasm of the
worship to be rather of angels than of men. Valens half fainted, and staggered as he ad-
vanced to make his offering at God’s Table. On the following day Basil admitted him
within the curtain of the sanctuary, and conversed with him at length on sacred subjects.‘

The surroundings and the personal appearance of the interlocutors were significant.
The apse of the basilica was as a holy of holies secluded from the hum and turmoil of the
vast city.” It was typical of what the Church was to the world. The health and strength
of the Church were personified in Basil. He was now in the ripe prime of life, but bore
marks of premature age. Upright in carriage, of commanding stature, thin, with brown hair
and eyes, and long beard, slightly bald, with bent brow, high cheek bones, and smooth skin,
he would shew in every tone and gesture at once his high birth and breeding, the supreme
culture that comes of intercourse with the noblest of books and of men, and the dignity of a
mind made up and of a heart of single purpose. The sovereign presented a marked contrast
to the prelate.* Valens was of swarthy complexion, and by those who approached him nearly
it was seen that one eye was defective. He was strongly built, and of middle height, but his
person was obese, and his legs were crooked. He was hesitating and unready in speech
and action.’ It is on the occasion of this interview that Theodoret places the incident of
Basil’s humorous retort to Demosthenes,® the chief of the imperial kitchen, the Nebuza-
radan, as the Gregories style him, of the petty fourth century Nebuchadnezzar. This
Demosthenes had already threatened the archbishop with the knife, and been bidden to go
back to his fire. Now he ventured to join in the imperial conversation, and made some
blunder in Greek. ὁ An illiterate Demosthenes!” exclaimed Basil; ‘* better leave the-
ology alone, and go back to your soups.” The emperor was amused at the discomfiture of
his satellite, and for a while seemed inclined to be friendly. He gave Basil lands, possibly
part of the neighbouring estate of Macellum, to endow his hospital.®

But the reconciliation between the sovereign and the primate was only on the surface.
Basil would not admit the Arians to communion, and Valens could not breok the refusal.
The decree of exile was to be enforced, though the very pens had refused to form the letters
of the imperial signature." Valens, however, was in distress at the dangerous illness of


1 cf. Epp. \xviii., cxxviii., cexliv. and ccli., and Maran, Vit. Bas. xx. 13; possibly the bishops were in Cappadocia as early
as the Eupsychian celebration.

2 Jan. 6, 372. At this time in the Eastern Church the celebrations of the Nativity and of the Epiphany were combined.
fo iC A, i fiz. AY 3 1 Sam. xix. 20.

_ _* Greg. Naz., Or. xliii., Greg. Nyss., Adv, Eunom. i., Soz. vi. 16, Theod. iv. 16. De Broglie well combines the variations
which are not quite easy to harmonize in detail. On the admission within the sanctuary, cf. the concession of Ambrose to
Theodosius in Theod. v. 18.

5 Cesarea, when sacked by Sapor in 260, is said to have contained 400,000 inhabitants (Zonaras, xii. 630). It may be
presumed to have recovered and retained much, if not all, of its importance,

ie [he authority for the personal appearance of Basil is an anonymous Vatican document quoted by Baronius, Av”.

378: “Procero fuit habitu corporis et recto, siccus, gracilis ; color ejus fuscus, vultus temperatus pallore, justus nasus, super-
cilia in orbem inflexa et adducta; cogitabundo similis fuit, pauce in vultu ruge@, eeque renidentes, gene oblonga, tempora
aliquantum cava, promtissa barba, et mediocris canities.”?

7Amm. Marc, xxx. 14, 7: “‘Cessator et piger: nigri coloris, pupula oculi unius obstructa, sed ita ut non eminus
appareret 5 figura bene compacta membrorum, stature nec Mee nec humilis, incurvis crurtbus, exstanteque mediocriter
ventre.” ‘Bon pére, bon époux, arien fervent et zélé, mais faible, timide, Valens était né pour la vie privée, on tl et été un
honnéte citoyen et un des saints del’ Arianisme.”’ Fialon, Et. Hist. 159.

8 cf. Theod. v. 16 and note on p. 120 of Theod. in this series.

9 Theod. iv. 16. Bas., Zp. xciv. 10 Theod. iv. 16,


PROLEGOMENA. XXV


Galates, his infant son, and, on the very night of the threatened expatriation, summoned Basil
to pray over him. A brief rally was followed by relapse and death, which were afterwards
thought to have been caused by the young prince’s Arian baptism.’ Rudeness was from
time to time shewn to the archbishop by discourteous and unsympathetic magistrates, as in
the case of the Pontic Vicar, who tried to force an unwelcome marriage on a noble widow.
The lady took refuge at the altar, and appealed to Basil for protection. The magistrate de-
scended to contemptible insinuation, and subjected the archbishop to gross rudeness. His
ragged upper garment was dragged from his shoulder, and his emaciated frame was
threatened with torture. He remarked thatto remove his liver wouldrelieve him of a great
inconvenience.’

Nevertheless, so far as the civil power was concerned, Basil, after the famous visit of
Valens, was left at peace.* He had triumphed. Was it a triumph for the nobler prin-
ciples of the Gospel? Had he exhibited a pride and an irritation unworthy of the Christian
name? Jerome, in a passage of doubtful genuineness and application, is reported to have
regarded his good qualities as marred by the one bane of pride,‘ a “" leaven” of which sin
is admitted by Milman’ to have been exhibited by Basil, as well as uncompromising firm-
ness. The temper of Basil in the encounter with Valens would probably have been some-
what differently regarded had it not been for the reputation of a hard and overbearing
spirit which he has won from his part in transactions to be shortly touched on. His
attitude before Valens seems to have been dignified without personal haughtiness, and to
have shewn sparks of that quiet humour which is rarely exhibited in great emergencies
except by men who are conscious of right and careless of consequences to self.


VII.— THE BrREAcH witTH GREGORY OF NAZIANZUS.


Cappadocia, it has been seen, had been divided into two provinces, and of one of these
Tyana had been constituted the chief town. Anthimus, bishop of Tyana, now contended
that an ecclesiastical partition should follow the civil, and that Tyana should enjoy parallel
metropolitan privileges to those of Czesarea. To this claim Basil determined to offer an
uncompromising resistance, and summoned Gregory of Nazianzus to his side. Gregory
replied in friendly and complimentary terms,’ and pointed out that Basil’s friendship for
Eustathius of Sebaste was a cause of suspicion in the Church. At the same time he
placed himself at the archbishop’s disposal. The friends started together with a train οἵ
slaves and mules to collect the produce of the monastery of St. Orestes, in Cappadocia
Secunda, which was the property of the see of Caesarea. Anthimus blocked the defiles
with his retainers, and in the vicinity of Sasima’ there was an unseemly struggle between
the domestics of the two prelates.° The friends proceeded to Nazianzus, and there, with
imperious inconsiderateness, Basil insisted upon nominating Gregory to one of the bishop-
rics which he was founding in order to strengthen his position against Anthimus.® For
Gregory, the brother, Nyssa was selected, a town on the Halys, about a hundred miles
distant from Caesarea, so obscure that Eusebius of Samosata remonstrated with Basil on
the unreasonableness of forcing such a man to undertake the episcopate of such a place.”
For Gregory, the friend, a similar fate was ordered. The spot chosen was Sasima. a townlet
commanding the scene of the recent fray." It was an insignificant place at the bifurcation of
the road leading northwards from Tyana to Doara and diverging westward to Nazianzus.”


1 Theod. iv. 16.. Soz. vi. 17." Soc. iv. 26. Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. Ruf. xi. 9. 2 Greg. Naz., Ov. xliii.

3." The archbishop, who asserted, with inflexible pride, the truth of his opinions and the dignity ot nis rank, was left in
the free possession of his conscience and his throne.”” Gibbon, Chap. xxv.

‘Une sorte d’inviolabilité de fait demeurait acquisea Basile a Césarée comme a Athanase ἃ Alevandrie.” De Broglie.

4 Quoted by Gibbon /.c. from Jerome’s Chron. A.D. 380, and acknowledged by him to be not in Scaliger’s edition. The
Benedictine editors of Jerome admit it, but refer it to Photinus. cf. D.C.B. i. 2838.

5 Hrst. Christ. iii. 45. 6 Greg. Naz., Ep. xlvii. tcf. Maran, Vit. Bas- xxiii. 4.

8 Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. 58, and Ep. xlviii. Bas., Epp. Ixxiv., Ixxv., Ixxvi.

9 It has been debated whether the odium theologicum was here mixed up with the odfum ecclesiasticum. Gregory (Orat.
xliii. 5S) represents Anthimus as defending his seizure of the metropolitan revenues on the ground that it was wrong δασμοφορειν
κακοδόξοις, to pay tribute to men of evil opinions, and LeClerc ( Brb/. Univer. xviii. p. 60) has condemned Anthimus as an
Arian. He was undoubtedly ἀρήϊος (Greg. Naz., Ep. xlviii.), a devotee of Ares, as he shewed in the skirmish by Sasima; but
there is no reason to suppose him to have been Αρειανός, or Arian. He probably looked askance at the orthodoxy of Basil.
eon would never have called him ὁμόψυχος (2. ccx. 5) if he had been unsound on the incarnation. cf. Baronius, Act. Sanc.

aj. ii. p. 394.

10 Ep. xcviii., but see note, p. 182, on the doubt as to this allusion.

11 Greg. Naz., with grim humour, objects to be sent to Sasima to fight for Basil’s supply of sucking pigs and poultry from
St. Orestes. Zp. x\viii. ι

12 « Nyssa was more clearly than either Sasima or Doaraa part of Cappadocia Secunda; it always retained its ecclesiastical
dependence on Cesarea, but politically it must have been subject to Tyana from 372 to 536, and afterwards to Mokissos.
All three were apparently places to which Basil consecrated bishops during his contest with Anthimus and the civil power.
His bishop of Nyssa, his own brother Gregory, was ejected by the dominant Arians, but the eminence and vigour of Gregory


XXVI1 BASIL.


Gregory speaks of it with contempt, and almost with disgust,’ and never seems to have
forgiven his old friend for forcing him to accept the responsibility of the episcopate, and in
such a place.?. Gregory resigned the distasteful post,* and with very bitter feelings. The
utmost that can be said for Basil is that just possibly he was consulting for the interest of
the Church, and meaning to honour his friend, by placing Gregory in an outpost of peril
and difficulty. in the kingdom of heaven the place of trial is the place of trust.“ But,
unfortunately for the reputation of the archbishop, the war in this case was hardly the
Holy War of truth against error, and of right against wrong. It was a rivalry between
official and official, and it seemed hard to sacrifice Gregory to a dispute between the claims
of the metropolitans of Tyana and Cesarea.” _

Gregory the elder joined in persuading his son. Basil had his way. He won a con-
venient suffragan for the moment. But he lost his friend. The sore was never healed,
and even in the great funeral oration in which Basil’s virtues and abilities are extolled,
Gregory traces the main trouble of his chequered career to Basil’s unkindness, and owns
to feeling the smart still, though the hand that inflicted the wound was cold.°


secured his reinstatement and triumphant return. Basil’s appointment was thus successful, and the connexion always con-
tinued. His appointment at Sasima was unsuccessful. Gregory of Nazianzus would not maintain the contest, and Sasima
passed under the metropolitan of Tyana. At Doara, in like fashion, Basil’s nominee was expelled, and apparently never
reinstated. Ep. ccxxxix. Greg. Naz. Or., xiii.” Ramsay, fist. Geog. of A.M. 305.

1 Asin Carm. De Vita Sua:


Σταθμός τις ἐστὶν ἐν μέσῃ λεωφόρῳ “Α post town on the king’s high road,
Τῆς Καππαδοκῶν ὃς σχίζετ᾽ εἰς τρισσὴν Oddy. Where three ways meet, is my abode;
"Avudpos, axAous, οὐδ᾽ ὅλως ἐλεύθερος, No brooklet, not a blade of grass,
Δεινῶς ἐπευκτὸν καὶ στενὸν κωμύδριον, Enlivens the dull hole, alas!
Κόνις τὰ πάντα, καὶ ψόφοι, σὺν ἅρμασι, Dust, din, all day; the creak of wheels;
Θρῆνοι, στεναγμοὶ, πράκτορες, στρέβλαι, πέδαι" Groans, yells, the exciseman at one’s heels
Λαὸς δ᾽ ὅσοι ἕξένοι τε καὶ πλανώμενοι, With screw and chain; the population
Αὕτη Σασίμων τῶν ἐμῶν ἐκκλησία. A shifting horde from every nation.

[N.B. — The last line marks the quantity.] A viler spot you long may search,


Than this Sasima, now my church!”


2Τὶ is curious that a place which had so important a connexion with Gregory the divine should have passed so com-
pletely into oblivion, From it_he derived his episcopal rank. His consecration to Sasima was the main ground of the
objection of his opponents at Constantinople in 381 to his occupying the see of the imperial city. He was bishop of Sasima,
and, by the fifteenth Canon of Nicza, could not be transferred to Constantinople. He never was bishop of Nazianzus,
though he did administer that diocese before the appointinent of Eulalius in 383. But while the name ‘‘Gregory of
Nazianzus”’ has obscured the very existence of his father, who was really Gregory'of Nazianzus, and is known even to the
typical schoolboy, Gregory has never been described as *‘ Gregory of Sasima.” ‘* The great plain which extends from Sasima
nearly to Soandos is full of underground houses and churches, which are said to be of immense extent. The inhabitants are
described by Leo Diaconus (p. 35) as having been originally named Troglodytes. . . . Every house in Hassa Keni has an
underground story cut out of the rock; long narrow passages connect the underground rooms belonging to each house, and
also run from house to house. A big solid disc of stone stands in a niche outside each underground house door, ready to be
pulled in front of the door on any alarm. . . . Sasima was on the road between Nazianzus and Tyana. The distances point
certainly to Hassa Keni. . . . An absolutely unhistorical legend about St. Makrina is related at Hassa Keni. Recently a
good-sized church has been built in the village, evidently on the site of an ancient church; it is dedicated to St. Makrina, who,
as the village priest relates, fled hither from Kaisari to escape marriage, and to dedicate herself to a saintly life. The under-

round cell in which she lived is below the church.”?” Ramsay, Hist. Geog. of Asia Minor, pp. 293, 294. Paul Lucas identi-
ed Sasima with Inschesu. 3 cf. Greg. Naz. Ep. 1.

4 cf. De Joinville’s happy illustration of this in Hiistofre du roi Saint Louts, p. 18. Ed. 1617. The King of France
would shew more confidence in the captain whom he might choose to defend La Rochelle, close to the English pale, than in.
the keeper of Monthléry, in the heart of the realm.

5 At the same time it is disappointing to find Gregory mixing up with expressions of reluctance to assume awful
responsibilities, objections on the score of the disagreeable position of Sasima. Perhaps something of the sentiments of Basil
on this occasion may be inferred from what he says in Letter cii. on the postponement of private to public considerations in the
case of the appointment of Pamenius to Satala.

6 Or. xliii. cf. Newman, The Church of the Fathers, Ὁ. 142, where the breach is impartially commented on: ‘ An ascetic,
like Gregory, ought not to have complained of the country as deficient in beauty and interest, even though he might be allowed
to feel the responsibility of a situation which made him a neighbour of Anthimus. Yet such was his infirmity; and he repelled
the accusations of his mind against himself by charging Basil with unkindness in placing him at Sasima. On the other hand,
it is possible that Basil, in his eagerness for the settlement of his exarchate, too little consulted the character and taste of
Gregory; and, above all, the feelings of duty which bound him to Nazianzus. . . . Henceforth no letters, which are pre-
served, passed between the two friends; nor are any acts of intercourse discoverable in their history. Anthimus appointed a
rival bishop to Sasima; and Gregory, refusing to contest the see with him, returned to Nazianzus. Basil laboured by himself.
Gregory retained his feelings of Basil’s unkindness even after his death. . . . This lamentable occurrence took place
eight or nine years before Basil’s death; he had, before and after it, many trials, many sorrows; but this probably was the
greatest of all.” The statement that no letters which are preserved passed between the two friends henceforth will have to be
modified, if we suppose Letter clxix. to be addressed to Gregory the Divine. But Professor Ramsay’s arguments (/i7sé.
Geog.of Asta Minor, p. 293) in favour of ey of Nazianzus the elder seem irresistible.

On Letter clxix. he writes: “ For topographical purposes it is necessary to discover who was the Gregory into whose
diocese Glycerius fled. ‘Tillemont considers that either Gregory of Nyssa or Gregory of Nazianzus is meant. But the tone of
the letter is not what we might expect if Basil were writing to either of them. It is not conceived in the spirit of authority in
which Basil wrote to his brother or to his friend. It appears to me to show a certain deference which, considering the resolute,
imperious, and uncompromising character of Basil (seen especially in his behaviour to Gregory Nazianzen in the matter of the
bishopric of Sasima), I can explain only on the supposition that he is writing to the aged and venerable Gregory, bishop of
Nazianzos. Then the whole situation is clear, Wenasa was in the district of Malakopaia, or Suvermez, towards the limits of
the diocese of Cesareia. The adjoining bishopric was that of Nazianzos. Wenasa being so far from Czsareia was adminis-
tered by one of the fifty chorepiscopi whom Basil had under him (Tillemont, Mem. p. servir, etc., ix. p. 120), and the authority
of Basil was appealed to only in the final resort. Glycerius, when Basil decided against him, naturally fled over the border
into the diocese of Nazianzos.’’? (There is, however, not much reverence in Letter clxxi.)

** Comment homme qui avait tant souffert de l’injustice des autres, put-il étre injuste envers son meilleur ami ?
Damitié est de tous les pays. Partout,on voit des hommes qui semblent nés l'un pour Dautre, se rapprocher par une estime
mutuelle, par la conformité de leurs gouts et de leurs caractéres partager les petnes et les jotes dela vie, et donner le spectacle
du plus beau sentiment que nous ayons recu de la divinité, Matisla Gréce avait singulicrement ennobli ce sentiment déja si
pur et si satnt, en lut donnant pour but l'amour dela patrie. Les amis, destines a se servir un & Pautre de modéle et de
soutien, Saiment moins pour eux-mémes, que pour rivaliser de vertu, se dévouer ensemble, s’immoler sil le faut, au bien
public... Crest cette amitié de dévouement et de sacrifice, gu’au milieu de la mollesse du \Vme siécle, Basile congoit pour


PROLEGOMENA. XXVIi


With Anthimus peace was ultimately established. Basil vehemently desired it.’
Eusebius of Samosata again intervened.” Nazianzus remained for a time subject to
Czsarea, but was eventually recognised as subject to the Metropolitan of Tyana.?

The relations, however, between the two metropolitans remained for some time
strained. When in Armenia in 372, Basil arranged some diflerences between the bishops
of that district, and dissipated a cloud of calumny hanging over Cyril, an Armenian
bishop.‘ He also acceded to a request on the part of the Church of Satala that he would
nominate a bishop for that see, and accordingly appointed Pcemenius, a relation of his
own.® Later on a certain Faustus, on the strength of a recommendation from a pope with
whom he was residing, applied to Basil for consecration to the see, hitherto occupied by
Cyril. With this request Basil declined to comply, and required as a necessary prelimi-
nary the authorisation of the Armenian bishops, specially of Theodotus of Nicopolis.
Faustus then betook himself to Anthimus, and succeeded in obtaining uncanonical conse-
cration from him. This was naturally a serious cause of disagreement.® However, by 375,
a better feeling seems to have existed between the rivals. Basil is able at that date to
speak of Anthimus as in complete agreement with him.’


Vill. —.St. Basm ΑΝ EUSTATHIUS.


It was Basil’s doom to suffer through his friendships. If the fault lay with himself in
the case of Gregory, the same cannot be said of his rupture with Eustathius of Sebaste.
If in this connexion fault can be laid to his charge at all, it was the fault of entering into
intimacy with an unworthy man. In the earlier days of the retirement in Pontus the
austerities of Eustathius outweighed in Basil’s mind any suspicions of his unorthodoxy.*®
Basil delighted in his society, spent days and nights in sweet converse with him, and
introduced him to his mother and the happy family circle at Annesi.? And no doubt
under the ascendency of Basil, Eustathius, always ready to be all things to all men who
might be for the time in power and authority, would appear as a very orthodox ascetic.
Basil likens him to the Ethiopian of immutable blackness, and the leopard who cannot
change his spots.” But in truth his skin at various periods shewed every shade which
could serve his purpose, and his spots shifted and changed colour with every change in his
surroundings." He is the patristic Proteus. There must have been something singularly
winning in his more than human attractiveness.” But he signed almost every creed that
went about for signature in his lifetime.” He was consistent only in inconsistency. It |
was long ere Basil was driven to withdraw his confidence and regard, although his con-
stancy to Eustathins raised in not a few, and notably in Theodotus of Nicopolis, the
metropolitan of Armenia, doubts as to Basil’s soundness in the faith. When Basil was in
Armenia in 373, a creed was drawn up, in consultation with Theodotus, to be offered to
Eustathius for signature. It consisted of the Nicene confession, with certain additions re-
lating to the Macedonian controversy.“ LEustathius signed, together with Fronto and
Severus. But, when another meeting with other bishops was arranged, he violated his
pledge to attend. He wrote on the subject as though it were one of only small impor-
tance.’ Eusebius endeavoured, but endeavoured in vain, to make peace.” Eustathius
renounced communion with Basil, and at last, when an open attack on the archbishop
seemed the paying game, he published an old letter of Basil’s to Apollinarius, written by
ἐς layman to layman,” many years before, and either introduced, or appended, heretical ex-
pressions of Apollinarius, which were made to pass as Basil’s. In his virulent hostility
he was aided, if not instigated, by Demosthenes the prefect’s vicar, probably Basil’s old
opponent at Cesarea in 372.” His duplicity and slanders roused Basil’s indignant denunci-
ation.’* Unhappily they were not everywhere recognized as calumnies. Among the bitterest
of Basil’s trials was the failure to credit him with honour and orthodoxy on the part of those


Grégoire de Naztanze. Formée dans les écoles, entretenne par l’amour des lettres, elle avait pour but unique, non plus la
patrie, mais Dieu. L’amitié de Grégotre et plus tendre et plus humaine. . . . Llavoué savie a son amt, mats il en attend
la méme condescendance, le méme denouement a ses propres désirs. Basile au contraire, semble prendre a la lettre ce qu’il a’
lu dans Plutarque et dans Xénophon de Vamitié antique.” ἘΣ. Fialon, £t. Hist. In other words, Gregory’s idea of friend-
ship was to sacrifice one’s self: Basil’s to sacrifice one’s friend. This is an interesting vindication of Basil, but the cause of
God was hardly identical with the humiliation of Anthimus.


: Om xcvii. 3 Greg. Naz., Ep. clii. 5 Epp. cii., ciii. Τ 12. eck.

2 Ep, xcviii. 4 Ep. xcix. 6 Epp. cxx., cxxi., cxxii,

8 ΤᾺ ccexiii. 8.2. He had been in early days a disciple of Arius at Alexandria. *Fd2§ Ὁ:

10 .cxxx. §1. 13 ze: ccxliv. § 9. 16 ze Cxxviii.

1: ΤΩΣ ccxliv. 89. Fialon, 52. Hist. 128. 14 mg cxxi., ccxliv. 17 Ep. ccxxxvii.

12 Fp, ccxii.§ 2. cof. Newman, Hist. Sketches, iii. 20. 15 Fp. ccxliv. 18 Epp. ccxxiii., cexliv., cclxiii.


XXViii BASIL.


from whom he might have expected sympathy and support. An earlier instance of this is
the feeling shewn at the banquet at Nazianzus already referred to.1 In later days he was
cruelly troubled by the unfriendliness of his old neighbours at Neocesarea,’ and this alien-
ation would be the more distressing inasmuch as Atarbius, the bishop of that see, appears
to have been Basil’s kinsman.? He was under the suspicion of Sabellian unsoundness. He
slighted and slandered Basil on several apparently trivial pretexts, and on one occasion
hastened from Nicopolis for fear of meeting him.* He expressed objection to supposed
novelties introduced into the Church of Caesarea, to the mode of psalmody practised there,
and to the encouragement of ascetic life.* Basil did his utmost to win back the Neoczsare-
ans from their heretical tendencies and to their old kindly sentiments towards himself. ἢ

The clergy of Pisidia and Pontus, where Eustathius had been specially successful in
alienating the district of Dazimon, were personally visited and won back to communion.*®
But Atarbius and the Neocesareans were deaf to all appeal, and remained persistently
irreconcilable.?. On his visiting the old home at Annesi, where his youngest brother Petrus
was now residing, in 375, the Neocesareans were thrown into a state of almost ludicrous
panic. They fled as from a pursuing enemy.* They accused Basil of secking to win their
regard and support from motives of the pettiest ambition, and twitted him with travelling
into their neighbourhood uninvited.®


IX. — UNBROKEN FRIENDSHIPS.


Brighter and happier intimacies were those formed with the older bishop of Samosata,
the Eusebius who, of all the many bearers of the name, most nearly realised its meaning,”
and with Basil’s junior, Amphilochius of Iconium. With the former, Basil’s relations
were those of an affectionate son and of an enthusiastic admirer. The many miles that
stretched between Cesarea and Samosata did not prevent these personal as well as
epistolary communications." In 372 they were closely associated in the eager efforts of the
orthodox bishops of the East to win the sympathy and active support of the West.” In
374 Eusebius was exiled, with all the picturesque incidents so vividly described by
Theodoret.” He travelled slowly from Samosata into Thrace, but does not seem to have
met either Gregory or Basil on his way. Basil contrived to continue a correspondence
with him in his banishment. It was more like that of young lovers than of elderly bishops.*
The friends deplore the hindrances to conveyance, and are eager to assure one another
that neither is guilty of forgetfulness.”

The friendship with Amphilochius seems to have begun at the time when the young
advocate accepted the invitation conveyed in the name of Heracleidas,® his friend. and
repaired from Ozizala to Caesarea. The consequences were prompt and remarkable.
Amphilochius, at this time between thirty and forty years of age, was soon ordained and
consecrated, perhaps, like Ambrose of Milan and Eusebius of Cesarea, per saltum, to the
important see of Iconium, recently vacated by the death of Faustinus. Henceforward the
intercourse between the spiritual father and the spiritual son, both by letters and by
visits, was constant. The first visit of Amphilochius to Basil, as bishop, probably at
Easter 374, not only gratified the older prelate, but made a deep impression on the
Church of Cesarea.” But his visits were usually paid in September, at the time of the
services in commemoration of the martyr Eupsychius. On the occasion of the first of
them, in 374, the friends conversed together on the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, now im-
pugned by the Macedonians, and the result was the composition of the treatise De
Spiritu Sancto. This was closely followed by the three famous canonical epistles,’®
also addressed to Amphilochius. Indeed, so great was the affectionate confidence of the
great administrator and theologian” in his younger brother, that, when infirmities were clos-
ing round him, he asked Amphilochius to aid him in the administration of the archdiocese.”

If we accept the explanation given of Letter CLXIX. in a note on a previous page,” Greg-
ory the elder, bishop of Nazianzus, must be numbered among those of Basil’s correspon-
dents letters to whom have been preserved. The whole episode referred to in that and in the
eo Following letters 15 curiously. illustrative of outbiarsts of tAisaisc ite Ite Malley εν πο


1§ vi. 8. Ep. ccex. ὃ 4. 5 Ep. ccevii. 7 Epp. \xv., xxvi., ccx.
2 ΤΡ: cciv., ccvii, 4 ZS. CXXVi. 6 ty . cciii. and ccexvi. 8 a eee ‘

9 Jb, Ἶ 10 Bp. in 3261, ο΄. Greg. Naz., Ep. xxviii. and xxix., and Theod., Ecc. Hist. xxvii.

1 [ῃ 369, it is to the prayers of Eusebius, under the divine grace, that Basil refers his partial recovery from


sickness (Zp. xxvii.), and sends Hypatius to Samosata in hope of similar blessing. (Zp. xxxi.)
12 Ep. xcii. 18 Bec. Fist. iv. 14. 14 cf. Principal Reynolds in D.C.B. i. 372.
15 ΤῸ: clvii., clviii., clxii., clxvii., clxviii., cxeviii., cexxxvii., ccxxxix., cexli., celxviii. 16 Fp. cl.
7 Epp. cixiii., clxxvi. 19 «ὁ Pace Eunomii,” whom Greg. of Nyssa quotes. C. Eunom, i.
18 Epp. clxxxviii., cxcix., ccxvii. 0 Ep. Cc., ὍΣΣ» 21 § viii.


PROLEGOMENA. KI


have been expected to occur in Cappadocia in the fourth century, as well as in soberer
regions in several other centuries when they have occurred. It has been clothed with fresh
interest by the very vivid narrative of Professor Ramsay, and by the skill with which he
uses the scanty morsels of evidence available to construct the theory which he holds
about 1.1 This theory is that the correspondence indicates a determined attempt on
the part of the rigidly orthodox archbishop to crush proceedings which were really ‘+ only
keeping up the customary ceremonial of a great religious meeting,” and, as such, were
winked at, if not approved of, by the bishop to whom the letter of remonstrance is
addressed, and the presbyter who was Glycerius’ superior. Valuable information is fur-
nished by Professor Ramsay concerning the great annual festival in honour of Zeus of
Venasa (or Venesz), whose shrine was richly endowed, and the inscription discovered
on a Cappadocian hill-top, ““ Great Zeus in heaven, be propitious to me.” But the
‘¢evident sympathy ” of the bishop and the presbyter is rather a strained inference from the
extant letters; and the fact that in the days when paganism prevailed in Cappadocia
Venasa was a greit religious centre, and the scene of rites in which women played an im-
portant part, is no conclusive proof that wild dances performed by an insubordinate deacon
were tolerated, perhaps encouraged, because they represented a popular old pagan obser-
vance. Glycerius may have played the patriarch, without meaning to adopt, or travesty,
the style of the former high priest of Zeus. Cappadocia was one of the most Christian
districts of the empire long before Basil was appointed to the exarchate of Czsarea, and
Basil is not likely to have been the first occupant of the see who would strongly disapprove
of, and endeavour to repress, any such manifestations as those which are described.’
That the bishop whom Basil addresses and the presbyter served by Glycerius should have
desired to deal leniently with the offender individually does not convict them of accepting
the unseemly proceedings of Glycerius and his troupe as a pardonable, if not desirable,
survival of a picturesque national custom.°*

Among other bishops of the period with whom Basil communicated by letter are Abra-
mius, or Abraham, of Batnez in Osrhoene,’* the illustrious Athanasius,® and Ambrose,® Athan-
asius of Ancyra;’ Barses of Edessa,® who died in exile in Egypt; Elpidius,® of some
unknown see on the Levantine seaboard, who supported Basil in the controversy with
Eustathius ; the learned Epiphanius of Salamis; Meletius,” the exiled bishop of Antioch;
Patrophilus of Ave; Petrus of Alexandria ; 5 Theodotus of Nicopolis, and Ascholius
of Thessalonica.”

Basil’s correspondence was not, however, confined within the limits of clerical clan-
ship. His extant letters to laymen, both distinguished and undistinguished, shew that he
was in touch with the men of mark of his time and neighbourhood, and that he found time
to express an affectionate interest in the fortunes of his intimate friends.

Towards the later years of his life the archbishop’s days were darkened not only by ill-
health and anxiety, but by the death of some of his chief friends and allies. Athanasius died
in 373, and so far as personal living influence went, there was an extinction of the Pharos
not of Alexandria only, but of the world.”® It was no longer ‘* Athanas?us contra mun-
dum," but **\ Mundus sine Athanasto.” In 374 Gregory the elder died at Nazianzus, and
the same year saw the banishment of Eusebius of Samosata to Thrace. In 375 died
Theodotus of Nicopolis, and the succession of Fronto was a cause of deep sorrow.

1 Ramsay’s Church of the Roman Empire, chap. xviii.

2 The description of Cesarea, as being ‘ Christian toa man” (πανδημεὶ χριστιανίζοντας. 807. ν΄. 4), would apply pretty
generally to all the province.

8 In ths chipcer in which Professor Ramsay discusses the story of Glycerius he asks how it was that, while Phrygia
was heretical, Cappadocia, in the fourth century, was orthodox: ‘*Can any reason be suggested why this great Cappadocian
leader follow2! the Roman Church, whereas all the most striking figures in Phrygian ecclesiastical history opposed it ἢ In
Phrygia was the great centre of Montanism,a form of religionism not unfavourable to excesses such as those of Glycerius.
But in Letter cciv., place | in 375, Basil claims both the Phrygias, 7,6. Pacatiana and Salutaris, as being in communion with
him. By tne “Roman Church,” followed by Cappadocia and opposed by Phrygia, must be meant either the ecclesiastical
system of the Roman Empire, or the Church at Rome regarded as holding a kind of hegemony of Churches. If the former,
it will be remembered that Cappadocia boldly withstood the creed patronized and pressed by imperial authority, when the
influence of Valens made Arianism the official religion of Rome. Ifthe latter, the phrase seems a misleading anachronism.
In the fourth century there was no following or opposing the Church of Rome as we understand the phrase. To the
bishop of Rome was conceded a certain personal precedence, as bishop of the capital, and he was beginning to claim more.
In the West there was the dignity of the only western apostolic see, and the Church of Rome, as a society, was eminently
orthodox and respectable. But, as important ecclesiastical centres, Antioch and Alexandria were far ahead of Rome, and the
pope of Alexandria occuvied a greater place than the pope of Rome. What Basil was eager to follow was not any local


church, but the Faith which he understood to be the true and Catholic Faith, z.e., the Faith of Nicea. There was no church of
Rome in the sense of one organized cecumenical society governed by a central Italian authority. Basil has no idea of any such


thing asa Roman supremacy. cf. Letter ccxiv. and note. 4 Ep. cxxxii.
5 Fp. \xi., Ixvi., lxvii., lxix., 1xxx., Ixxxii, .9 be Celt. σον.» Cevi. 12 Epp. cexliv., ccl.
6 Ep. cxcvii. 10 Xp. cclviii. 13 Epp. cxxxiii., cclxvi.
7 Ep. xxiv. 11 Epp. Wii., lxviii., Ixxxix., cxx., cxxix., ccxvi.
8 Epp. cclxiv., eclxvii. 14 Epp. CXxi., CXxx. 15 Epp. cliv., clxiv., clxv. 16 cf, Epp. 1xxxii. and note.


17 [az proverodial expression is conjectured by Dean Stanley to be derived from the Latin version of the famous passage
concerning Athanasius in Hooker, Ecc. Pol. v.42. Vide Stanley, Grk. Church, lect. vii.


XXX BASIL.


-.-... ..--.-.---Θ-Ξο͵ς͵.ς-᾽-᾿- . ..


At this time! some short solace would come to the Catholics in the East in the
synodical letter addressed to the Orientals of the important synod held in Illyria, under the
authority of Valentinian. The letter which is extant® is directed against the Macedonian
heresy. The charge of conveying it to the East was given to the presbyter Elpidius.*
Valentinian sent with it a letter to the bishops of Asia in which persecution is forbidden,
and the excuse of submission to the reigning sovereign anticipated and condemned. AI-
though the letter runs in the names of Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian, the western


brother appears to condemn the eastern.*


X.— TROUBLES OF THE CLosING YEARS.


The relief to the Catholic East was brief. The paroxysm of passion which caused Val-
entinian to break a blood-vessel, and ended his life,? ended also the force of the imperial
rescript. The Arians lifted their heads again. A council was held at Ancyra,® in which
the homoousion was condemned, and frivolous and vexatious charges were brought
against Gregory of Nyssa.”7_ At Cyzicus a Semiarian synod blasphemed the Holy Spirit.®
Similar proceedings characterized a synod of Antioch at about the same time.® Gregory of
Nyssa having been prevented by illness from appearing before the synod of Ancyra,
Eustathius and Demosthenes persisted in their efforts to wound Basil through his
brother, and summoned a synod at Nyssa itself, where Gregory was condemned in his
absence and deposed.” He was not long afterwards banished." On the other hand the
Catholic bishops were not inactive. Synods were held on their part, and at Iconium
Amphilochius presided over a gathering at which Basil was perhaps present himself, and
where his treatise on the Holy Spirit was read and approved.” The Ilyrian Council was
a result incommensurate with Basil’s passionate entreaties for the help of the westerns.
From the midst of the troubles which beset the Eastern Church Basil appealed,” as he had
appealed before, for the sympathy and active aid of the other half of the empire. He was
bitterly chagrined at the failure of his entreaties for support, and began to suspect that the
neglect he complained of was due to coldness and to pride.” It has seemed to some that
this coldness in the West was largely due to resentment at Basil’s non-recognition of the
supremacy of the Roman see.” In truth the supremacy of the Roman see, as it has been
understood in later times, was hardly in the horizon.” No bishop of Rome had even been
present at Nicza, or at Sardica, where a certain right of appeal to his see was conceded.
A bishop of Rome signed the Sirmian blasphemy. No bishop of Rome was present
to save ‘the world’ from the lapse of Ariminum. Julian ὁ“ might seem to have for-
gotten that there was such acity as Rome.” 8 The great intellectual Arian war was fought
out without any claim of Rome to speak. Half a century after Basil’s death great orientals
were quite unconscious of this supremacy.” At Chalcedon the measure of the growing
claim is aptly typified by the wish of Paschasinus of Lilybaeum, one of the representatives
of Leo, to be regarded as presiding, though he did not preside. The supremacy is hardly
in view even at the last of the four great Councils.

In fact the appeal of Basil seems to have failed to elicit the response he desired, not so
much from the independent tone of his letters, which was only in accordance with the re-
cognised facts of the age,”° as from occidental suspicions of Basil’s orthodoxy,” and from the
failure of men, who thought and wrote in Latin, to enter fully into the controversies con-
ducted in a more subtle tongue.” Basil had taken every precaution to ensure the convey-
ance of his letters by messengers of tact and discretion. He had deprecated the advocacy
of so simple-minded and undiplomatic an ambassador as his brother Gregory.’* He


1 The date of the Council is, however, disputed. Pagi is for 373, Cave for 367. Hefele and Ceillicr are satisfied of the


correctness of 375. cf. D.C.A, i. 813. 2Theod., Ecc. Hist. iv. 8. 8 Mansi, iii. 386. Hefele, ὃ go.
4Theod., 4.Z. iv. 7. 7 x cCCxxv. 10 Ep. ccxxxvii.
5 Nov. 17, 375. Amm. Marc, xxx.6. Soc. iv. 31. 8 Ep. ccxliv. 11 Greg., Vit. Mac. ii. 192.
6 Mansi, iii. 499. Hefele, ὃ go. 9 Soc. v. 4.
12 Fp. ccii., cclxxii. WHefele, ὃ 90. Mansi, iii. 502-506. There is some doubt as to the exact date of this synod. cf.
D.C.A, i. 807. 13 Fp. ccexliii. 14 Fp. |xx., addressed in 371 to Damasus. 15 Fp. CCXXXix.


16 cf. D.C.B. i. 294: “* C’est esprit, conciliant aux les ortentaux jusqu’a soulever I’ intolérance orientale, est aussi inflex-
thle avec les occidentaux qu’avec le pouvotr impérial. On sent dans ses lettres la révolte de Vorient qui réclame ses préroga-
tives, ses droits d’anctenneté ; l'esprit d’indépendance de la Gréce, qui, si elle supporte le joug matériel de Rome, refuse de
reconnaitre sa suprématie spirituelle.” Fialon, Et. Hist. 133.

17 cf, note on § ix. 18 Milman, Lat. Christ.i. 85. 19 cf, Proleg. to Theodoret in this series, p. 9, note.

20 A ses yeux, l Orient et l’Occident ne sont ils pas, deux fréres, dont les droits sont égaux,.sans suprématie, sans
ainesse ?”? Fialon, £t. Hist. p.134. This is exactly what East and West were to most eves, and what they were asserted to
be in the person of the two imperial capitals by the Twenty-Eighth Canon of Chalcedon. cf. Bright, Canons of the First Four
General Councils, pp. 93, 192, and note on Theodoret in this series, p. 293.

21. Fp. cclxvi. § 2. 23 of, Ep. ccxiv. ὃ 4, p. 254. 23 Ep. ccxv.


PROLEGOMENA. XXXi


had poured out his very soul in entreaty.' But all wasunavailing. He suffered, and he had
to suffer unsupported by a human sympathy on which he thought he had a just claim.’,

It is of a piece with Basil’s habitual silence on the general affairs of the empire
that he should seem to be insensible of the shock caused by the approach of the Goths ir
378. <A letter to Eusebius in exile in Thrace does shew at least a consciousness of a dis-
turbed state of the country, and he is afraid of exposing his courier to needless danger by
entrusting him with a present for hisfriend. But this is all.“ He may have written letters
shewing an interest in the fortunes of the empire which have not been preserved. But his
whole soul was absorbed in the cause of Catholic truth, and in the fate of the Church. His
youth had been steeped in culture, but the work of his ripe manhood left no time for the
literary amusement of the dilettante. So it may be that the intense earnestness with
which he said to himself, ‘* This one thing I do,” of his work as a shepherd of souls, and a
fighter for the truth, and his knowledge that for the doing of this work his time was short,
accounts for the absence from his correspondence of many atopic of more than contemporary
interest. At all events, it isnot difficult to descry that the turn in the stream of civil history
was of vital moment to the cause which Basil held dear. The approach of the enemy was
fraught with important consequences to the Church. The imperial attention was diverted
from persecution of the Catholics to defence of the realm. Then came the disaster of
Adrianople,* and the terrible end of the unfortunate Valens.* Gratian, a sensible lad, of
Catholic sympathies, restored the exiled bishops, and Basil, in the few menths of life yet
left him, may have once more embraced his faithful friend Eusebius. The end drew rap-
idly near. Basil was only fifty, but he was an old man. Work, sickness, and trouble had
worn him out. His health had never been good. A chronic liver complaint was a con-
stant cause of distress and depression.

In 373 he had been at death’s door. Indeed, the news of his death was actually circu-
lated, and bishops arrived at Caesarea with the probable object of arranging the succession.®
He had submitted to the treatment of a course of natural hot baths, but with small benefi-
cial result.’ By 376, as he playfully reminds Amphilochius, he had lost all his teeth.? At
last the powerful mind and the fiery enthusiasm of duty were no longer able to stimulate
the energies of the feeble frame.

The winter of 378-9 dealt the last blow, and with the first day of what, to us, is now
the new year, the great spirit fled. Gregory, alas! was not at the bedside. But he has
left us a narrative which bears the stamp of truth. For some time the bystanders thought
that the dying bishop had ceased to breathe. Then the old strength blazed out at the last.
He spoke with vigour, arid even ordained some of the faithful who were with him. Then
he lay once more feeble and evidently passing away. Crowds surrounded his residence,
praying eagerly for his restoration to them, and willing to give their lives for his. Witha
few final words of advice and exhortation, he said: ‘‘Into thy hands I commend my
spirit,” and so ended.

The funeral was a scene of intense excitement and rapturous reverence. Crowds filled
every open space, and every gallery and window; Jews and Pagans joined with Christians
in lamentation, and the cries and groans of the agitated oriental multitude drowned the
music of the hymns which were sung. The press was so great that several fatal accidents
added to the universal gloom. Basil was buried in the ‘*sepulchre of his fathers” —a
phrase which may possibly mean in the ancestral tomb of his family at Caesarea.

- So passed away a leader of men in whose case the epithet ‘ great’ is no conventional
compliment. He shared with his illustrious brother primate of Alexandria the honour of
rallying the Catholic forces in the darkest days of the Arian depression. He was great as
foremost champion of a great cause, great in contemporary and posthumous influence, great
in indfistry and self-denial, great as a literary controversialist. The estimate formed of
him by his contemporaries is expressed in the generous, if somewhat turgid, eloquence of
the laudatory oration of the slighted Gregory of Nazianzus. Yet nothing in Gregory’s


1Sce specially Ep. ccxlii.

2 Foiled in all his repeated demands; a deaf ear turned to his most earnest entreaties; the council he had begged for
not summoned; the deputation he had repeatedly solicited unsent; Basil’s span of life drew to its end amid blasted hopes and
apparently fruitless labours for the unity of the faith. It was not permitted him to live to see the Eastern Churches, for the
purity of whose faith he had devoted all his powers, restored to peace and unanimity.’? Canon Venables, D.C.B. i. 295.

‘He had to fare on as best he might, — admiring, courting. but coldly treated by the Latin world, desiring the friend-
ship of Rome, yet wounded by her superciliousness, suspected of heresy by Damasus, and accused by Jerome of pride.”
Newman, Church of the Fathers, ,p. 115.

3 Ep. cclxviii. So Fialon, £t. Hist. p. 149: “ On ny trouve pas un mot sur la désastreuse expédition de Fulien, sur le
honteux traité de Fovien, sur la révolte de Procope.” Atthe same time the argument from silence is always dangerous. It
may be unfair to charge Basil with indifference to great events, because we do not possess his letters about them.

4 Aug. 9, 378. 5 Theod. iv. 32. Amm. Marc, xxxi. 13. 6 Ep. cxli. 1 Ep. cxxxvii. 8 Ep. ccxxxii.


XXX BASIL.


eulogy goes beyond the expressions of the prelate who has seemed to some to be ‘‘ the
wisest and holiest man in the East in the succeeding century.”! Basil is described by the
saintly and learned ‘Theodoret * in terms that might seem exaggerated when applied to any
but his master, as the light not of Cappadocia only, but of the world.* To Sophronius * he
is the ‘glory of the Church.” To Isidore of Pelusium,°’ he seems to speak as one
inspired. To the Council of Chalcedon he is emphatically a minister of grace;°
to the second council of Nicwa a layer of the foundations of orthodoxy.’ His death
lacks the splendid triumph of the martyrdoms of Polycarp and Cyprian. His life lacks
the vivid incidents which make the adventures of Athanasius an enthralling romance. He
does not attract the sympathy evoked by the unsophisticated simplicity of Gregory his
friend or of Gregory his brother. There does not linger about his memory the close per-
sonal interest that binds humanity to Augustine, or the winning loyalty and tenderness that
charm far off centuries into affection for Theodoret. Sometimes he seems a hard, almost
a sour man.® Sometimes there is a jarring reminder of his jealousy for his own dig-
nity.° Evidently he was not a man who could be thwarted without a rupture of pleasant
relations, or slighted with impunity. Inany subordinate position he was not easy to get
on with. But aman of strong will, convinced that he is championing a righteous cause,
will not hesitate to sacrifice, among other things, the amenities that come of amiable
absence of self-assertion. To Basil, to assert himself was to assert the truth of Christ and
of His Church. And in the main the identification was atrue one. Basil was human, and
occasionally, as in the famous dispute with Anthimus, so disastrously fatal to the typical
friendship of the earlier manhood, he may have failed to perceive that the Catholic cause
would not suffer from the existence of two metropolitans in Cappadocia. But the great
archbishop could be an affectionate friend, thirsty for sympathy." And he was right in
his estimate of his position. Broadly speaking, Basil, more powerfully than any
contemporary official, worker, or writer in the Church, did represent and defend
through all thé populous provinces of the empire which stretched from the Bal-
kans to the Mediterranean, from the AZgean to the Euphrates, the cause whose failure or
success has been discerned, even by thinkers of no favourable predisposition, to have meant
death or life to the Church.” St. Basil is duly canonized in the grateful memory, no less than
in the official bead-roll, of Christendom, and we may be permitted to regret that the exist-
ing Kalendar of the Anglican liturgy has not found room for so illustrious a Doctor in its
somewhat niggard list.’* For the omission some amends have lately * been made in the
erection of a statue of the great archbishop of Caesarea under the dome of the Cathedral of
St. Paul in London.*


Il. WORKS.


The extant works of St. Basil may be conveniently classified as follows:


εὐ eee | (i) Adversus ELunomium. Πρὸς Εὐνόμιον.
Gi) De Speritu Sancto. Περὶ τοῦ Πνεύματος,
(i) Ln Hexaemeron. Εἰς τὴν "Ἑξαήμερον. ΄"
(it) - Homillaon £58. ἃς, νἴϊον Χίνο, RVING, ORI Ray RRR Ide,
ΧΙ͂ν,, ΧΊν κινεῖς lixis ἐπι γεν
(iil) Commentary on Isatah i.-xvi.


1. Exrceric.*


1 Kingsley, Hypatia, chap. xxx. 5 Ep, \xi. 9 of. xcviii.

2 cf. Gibbon, chap. xxi. 6 cf. Ceillier, vi. 8, 1. 10 δι΄. his relations with his predecessor.
5 Theod., HE. iv. τό, and Zp. cxlvi. 116. 11 Fp. xci.

4 Apud Photium Cod. 231. 8cf. Ep. κχν.


12¢.9,.T.Carlyle. ‘ He perceived Christianity itself to have been at stake. If the Arians had won, it would have dwindled
away intoalegend.” J A. Froude, Life of Carlyle in London, ii. 462.

18 In the Greek Kalendar January 1, the day of the death, is observed in honour of the saint. In the West St. Basil’s
day is June 14, the traditional date of the consecration. The martyrologies of Jerome and Bede do not contain the name. The
first mention is ascribed by the Bollandists to Usuard. (Usuard’s martyrology was composed for Charles the Bold at Paris.)
In the tenth century a third day was consecrated in the East to the common commemoration of SS. Basil, Gregory of
Nazianzus, and John Chrysostom. 14 1894.

15 Basil lived at the period when the relics of martyrs and saints were beginning to be collected and honoured. (eg. Ep.
excvii.) To Damasus, the bishop of Rome, whose active sympathy he vainly strove to win, is mainly due the reverent
rearrangement of the Roman catacombs. (/toma Sotteranea, Northcote and Brownlow, Ρ.. 97.) It was not to be expected that
Basil’s own remains should be allowed to rest in peace; but the gap between the burial at Cesarea and the earliest record of
their supposed reappearance is wide. There was a Church of St. Basilat Bruges founded in 1187, which was believed to possess
some of the archbishop’s bones. These were solemnly translated in 1463 to the Church of St. Donatian, which disappeared at
the time of the French revolution. Pancirola (d. 15y9) mentions a head, an arm, and a rib, said to be Basil’s, among the
treasures of Rome.

16 According to Cassiodorus (Justit. Divin. Litt. Prefat.) St. Basil wrote in interpretation of the whole of Scripture,
but this statement lacks confirmation. cf. Maran, Vit. Bas. xli.


PROLEGOMENA. XXXiii


1


( (

| Gi) Proemium de Judicio Det and De Fide.
itl.) “Ascetic.” :4 {0} Adoralia. Ta ᾿Ηθικά͵

| (

la


i) Zractatus prevtt.

i
iv) fegule fusius tractate. Ὅροι κατὰ πλάτος.
nd Regule brevius tractate. Ὅροι κατ᾽ ἐπιτόμην.

Gy Dormatic.

IV. Homiretic. XXIV. Homitiszs. (ii) Moral.
(iii) Panegyric.

) Historic.

1 Dogmatic.

» Moral.

v) Disciplinary.

v) | Consolatory.

(vi) Commendatory.

( (vii) Familiar.


δι LEetrers.


VI. Lirurcic.

I. (i) Agacnst Eunomtus. The work under this title comprises five books, the first
three generally accepted as genuine, the last two sometimes regarded as doubtful. Greg-
ory of Nazianzus,' Jerome,’ and Theodoret?® all testify to Basil’s having written against
Eunomius, but do not specify the number of books. Books IV. and V. are accepted by
Bellarmine, Du Pin, Tillemont, and Ceillier, mainly on the authority of the edict of Jus-
tinian against the Three Chapters (Mansi ix., 552), the Council of Seville (Mansi x.,
566) and the Council of Fiorence (Hardouin ix., 200). Maran ( Vzt. Bas. xiii.) speaks
rather doubtfully. Bohringer describes them as of suspicious character, alike on grounds
of style, and of their absence from some MSS. They may possibly be notes on the con-
troversy in general, and not immediately directed against Eunomius. Fessler’s conclusion
is ‘*Wajor tamen eruditorum pars eos etiam genuinos esse censet.” .

The year 364 is assigned for the date of the publication of the three books.* At that
time Basil sent them with a few words of half ironical depreciation to Leontius the
sophist.° He was now about thirty-four years of age, and describes himself as hitherto
inexperienced in sucha kind of composition.® Eunomius, like his illustrious opponent,
was a Cappadocian. Emulous of the notoriety achieved by Aetius the Anomean, and
urged on by Secundus of Ptolemais, an intimate associate of Aetius, he went to Alexan-
dria about 356, and resided there for two years as Aetius’ admiring pupil and secretary.
In 358 he accompanied Actius to Antioch, and took a prominent part in the assertion of
the extreme doctrines which revolted the more moderate Semiarians. He was selected as
the champion of the advanced blasphemers, made himself consequently obnoxious to Con-
stantius, and was apprehended and relegated to Migde in Phrygia. At the same time
Eudoxius withdrew for a while into Armenia, his native province, but ere long was re-
stored to the favour of the fickle Constantius, and was appointed to the see of Constanti-
nople in 359. Eunomius now was for overthrowing Aetius, and removing whatever
obstacles stood between him and promotion, and, by the influence of Eudoxius, was nomi-
nated to the see of Cyzicus, vacant by the deposition of Eleusius. Here for a while he
temporized, but ere long displayed his true sentiments. ‘To answer for this he was sum-
moned to Constantinople by Constantius, and, in his absence, condemned and deposed.
Now he became more marked than ever in his assertion of the most extreme Arianism,
and the advanced party were henceforward known under his name. The accession of
Julian brought him back with the rest of the banished bishops, and he made Constanti-
nople the centre for the dissemination of his views.’

Somewhere about this period he wrote the work entitled Apologeticus, in twenty-eight
chapters, to which Basil replies. The title was at once a parody on the Afologies of de-
fenders of the Faith, and, at the same time, a suggestion that his utterances were not
spontaneous, but forced from him by attack. The work is printed in Fabricius, B76/. Grec.
Vili. 262, and in the appendix to Migne’s δας. Pat. Gr. xxx. 827." It is a brief treatise,
and occupies only about fifteen columns of Migne’s edition. It professes to be a defence
of the ** simpler creed which is common to all Christians.” ὃ

1 Or, xiiii. § 67. ‘ 8 Dial. ii. p. 207 in the ed. of this series. 5 of. Ep. xx.

2 De Script. Eccl. 116. 4 Maran, V7t. Bas. viii. 6; Eunom. i.

Τ᾿ Theod., AE. ii. 25; and Her. Fab. iv.3. 'Philost., 7.2. vi. 1.


.. of. also Basnage in Canitstt Lectiones antt. i. 172; Fessler, Inst. Pat. 1. 507. Dorner, Christologie, 1. 853, and
Bohringer, Airchengeschichte, vii. 62. 9 ἁπλουστέρα καὶ κοινὴ πάντων πίστις. ὃ 5.


XXXIV BASIL.


This creed is as follows: ‘* We believe in one God, Father Almighty, of Whom are
all things: and in one only-begotten Son of God, God the Word, our Lord Jesus Christ,
through Whom are all things: and in one Holy Spirit, the Comforter.”* But it is in
reality like the extant Exfosztion of the Creed,” a reading into this “" simpler” creed,
in itself orthodox and unobjectionable, of explanations which ran distinctly counter to the
traditional and instinctive faith of the Church, and inevitably demanded corrective explana-
tions and definitions.

In the creed of Eunomius the Son is God, and it is not in terms denied that He
is of one substance with the Father. But in his doctrinal system there is a practical
denial of the Creed; the Son may be styled God, but He is a creature, and therefore, in
the strict sense of the term, not God at all, and, at best, a hero or demigod. The Father,
unbegotten, stood alone and supreme; the very idea of ‘* begotten” implied posteriority,
inferiority, and unlikeness. Against this position Basil* protests. The arguments of
Eunomius, he urges, are tantamount to an adoption of what was probably an Arian
formula, ‘* We believe that ingenerateness is the essence of God,” * z.e., we believe that
the Only-begotten is essentially unlike the Father.° This word ‘* unbegotten,” of which
Eunomius and his supporters make so much, what is its real value? Basil admits that it
is apparently a convenient term for human intelligence to use; but, he urges, ‘* It is no-
where to be found in Scripture; it is one of the main elements in the Arian blasphemy ; it
had better be left alone. ‘The word ‘ Father” implies all that is meant by ‘ Unbegotten,’
and has moreover the advantage of suggesting at the same time the idea of the Son. He
Who is essentially Father is alone of no other. In this being of no other is involved the
sense of ‘Unbegotten.? The title ‘unbegotten’ will not be preferred by us to that of
Father, unless we wish to make ourselves wiser than the Saviour, Who said, ‘Go and
baptize in the name’ not of the Unbegotten, but ‘ of the Father.’?”° ‘To the Eunomian
contention that the word “" Unbegotten ” is no mere complimentary title, but required by
the strictest necessity, in that it involves the confession of what He is,’ Basil rejoins that it
is only one of many negative terms applied to the Deity, none of which completely ex-
presses the Divine Essence. ‘* There exists no name which embraces the whole nature of
God, and is sufficient to declare it; more names than one, and these of very various kinds,
each in accordance with its own proper connotation, give a collective idea which may be
dim indeed and poor when compared with the whole, but is enough for us.” ° The word
ἐς unbegotten,” like “ὁ immortal,” “6 invisible,” and the like, expresses only negation. ‘* Yet
essence ® is not one of the qualities which are absent, but signifies the very being of God:
to reckon this in the same category as the non-existent is to the last degree unreasonable.” ”
Basil ““ would be quite ready to admit that the essence of God is unbegotten,” but he ob-
jects to the statement that the essence and the unbegotten are identical." It is sometimes
supposed that the Catholic theologians have been hair-splitters in the sphere of the incon-
ceivable, and that heresy is the exponent of an amiable and reverent vagueness. In the
Arian controversy it was Arius himself who dogmatically defined with his negative ‘* There
was when He was not,” and Eunomius with his ‘‘ The essence is the unbegotten.”
‘¢ What pride! What conceit!” exclaims Basil. ‘* The idea of imagining that one has dis-
covered the very essence of God most high! <Assuredly in their magniloquence they quite
throw into the shade even Him who said, ‘I will exalt my throne above the stars.’” It is
not stars, it is not heaven, that they dare to assail. It is in the very essence of the God of


1THE CREED OF EUNOMIUS. THE CREED OF ARIUS AND EUZOIUS.
(Adv. Eunom. i. 4.) (Soc. #.£. i. 26.)
Πιστεύομεν εἰς ἕνα Θεὸν, Πατέρα παντοκράτορα, ἐξ οὗ τὰ πάντα " Πιστεύομεν εἰς ἕνα Θεὸν Πατέρα παντοκράτορα, καὶ εἰς Κύριον


καὶ εἰς ἕνα Μονογενῆ Ὑιὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ, Θεὸν λόγον, τὸν Κύριον | Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν, τὸν Ὑιὸν αὐτοῦ, τὸν ἐξ αὐτοῦ πρὸ πάντων τῶν

ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν, δι᾽ οὗ τὰ πάντα" καὶ εἰς ἕν Πνεῦμα ἅγιον, τὸ | αἰώνων γεγεννημενον, Θεὸν Δόγον, & οὗ τὰ πάντα ἐγένετο τά τε ἐν

παράκλητον. Eunom., Apol. ὃ 5. τοῖς οὐρανοῖς Kal τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, τὸν κατελθόντα, καὶ σαρκωθέντα,
καὶ παθόντα, καὶ ἀναστάντα, καὶ ἀνελθόντα εἰς τοὺς οὐρανοὺς καὶ
πάλιν ἐρχόμενον κρῖναι ζῶντας καὶ νεκρούς" καὶ εἰς τὸ ἅγιον
Πνεῦμα" καὶ εἰς σαρκὸς ἀναστάσιν" καὶ εἰς ζωὴν τοῦ μέλλοντος
αἰῶνος " καὶ εἰς Βασιλείαν οὐρανῶν " καὶ εἰς μίαν καθολικὴν ἐκκλη-
σίαν τοῦ θεοῦ τὴν ἀπὸ περάτων ἑὼς περάτων.


2 Ἔκθεσις τῆς πίστεως, published in the notes of Valesius to Soc., Ecc. Hist. ν. 12. This was offered to Theodosius after
the Council of Constantinople. The Son is πρωτότοκον πάσης κτίσεως, and πρὸ πάσης κτίσεως γενόμενον, but οὐκ ἄκτιστον. The
Holy Ghost is γενόμενον ὑπο τοῦ Μονογενοῦς kai... καθάπαξ ὑποτετανμένον, οὔτε κατὰ τόν Πατέρα οὔτε τῷ Πατρὶ συναριθμούμενον
οὔτε τῷ Υἱῷ συνεξισούμενον οὔτε μὴν ἄλλῳ τινὶ συντασσόμενον .. - πρῶτον ἔργον καὶ κράτιστον τοῦ Μονογενοῦς. cf. St. Aug., De
Her. \iv., ““ἙἘΠπιποπλῖαβ asserted that the Son was altogether dissimilar to the Father and the Spirit to the Son,” and Philos-
trius, De Her. ixviii., who represents the Eunomians as believing in three essences descending in value like gold, silver, and
copper. Vide Swete, Doctrine of the Holy Ghost, p. 61. 8 Adv. Eunom.i.5.

4 πιστεύομεν τὴν ἀγεννησίαν οὐσίαν εἶνας TOU Θεον, For the word ἀγεννησία cf. Letter ccxxxiv. p. 274.

5 Adv. Eunom. i. 4. 6 Matt. xxviii. 19. Adv. £un.i.5. 7 ἐν τῇ τοῦ εἴναι ὁ ἐστιν Ouoroyia. Adv. Eunom. i. 8.

8 Jd. i. το. 9 οὐσία. 10 Jd. 11 7d, ii. 12 7,6. Lucifer, cf. Is. xiv. 13.


PROLEGOMENA. XXXV


all the world that they boast that they make their haunt. Let us question him as to where
he acquired comprehension of this essence. Was it from the common notion that all men
share?! This does indeed suggest to us that there is a God, but not what God is. Was it
from the teaching of the Spirit? What teaching? Where found? What says great David,
to whom God revealed the hidden secrets of His wisdom? He distinctly asserts the unap-
proachableness of knowledge of Him in the words, * Such knowledge is too wonderful for
me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it.?? And Isaiah, who saw the glory of God, what
does he tell us concerning the Divine Essence? In his prophecy about the Christ he says,
‘Who shall declare His generation?’* And what of Paul, the chosen vessel, in whom
Christ spake, who was caught up into the third heaven, who heard unspeakable werds,
which it is not lawful to man to utter? What teaching has he given us of the essence of
God? When Paul is investigating the special methods of the work of redemption * he
seems to grow dizzy before the mysterious maze which he is contemplating, and utters the
well-known words, ‘ O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding out!’° ‘These things are
beyond the reach even of those who have attained the measure of Paul’s knowledge.
What then is the conceit of those who announce that they know the essence of God! I
should very much like to ask them what they have to say about the earth whereon they
stand, and whereof they are born. What can they tell us of its ‘essence’? If they can
discourse without hesitation of the nature of lowly subjects which lie beneath our feet, we will
believe them when they profler opinions about things which transcend all human intelli-
gence. What is the essence of the earth? How can it be comprehended? Let them tell
us whether reason or sense has reached this point! If they say sense, by which of the
senses is it comprehended? Sight? Sight perceives colour. Touch? Touch distin-
guishes hard and soft, hot and cold, and the like; but no idiot would call any of these
essence. I need not mention taste or smell, which apprehend respectively savour and
scent. Hearing perceives sounds and voices, which have no affinity with earth. They
must then say that they have found out the earth’s essence by reason. What? In what
part of Scripture? A tradition from what saint? δ

‘‘In a word, if any one wishes to realise the truth of what I am urging, let him ask
himself this question; when he wishes to understand anything about God, does he ap-
proach the meaning of ‘the unbegotten’ ἢ I for my part see that, just as when we extend
our thought over the ages that are yet to come, we say that the life bounded by no limit is
without end, so is it when we contemplate in thought the ages of the past, and gaze on the
infinity of the life of God as we might into some unfathomable ocean. We can conceive
of no beginning from which He originated: we perceive that the life of God always tran-
scends the bounds of our intelligence; and so we call that in His life which is without
origin, unbegotten.?. The meaning of the unbegotten is the having no origin from with-
out.” ® As Eunomius made ingenerateness the essence of the Divine, so, with the object
of establishing the contrast between Father and Son, he represented the dezug begotten to
indicate the essence of the Son.® God, said Eunomius, being ingenerate, could never
admit of generation. This statement, Basil points out, may be understood in either of
two ways. It may mean that ingenerate nature cannot be subjected to generation. It may
mean that ingenerate nature cannot generate. Eunomius, he says, really means the latter,
while he makes converts of the multitude on the lines of the former. Eunomius makes
his real meaning evident by what he adds to his dictum, for, after saying ‘‘ could never
admit of generation,” he goes on, ‘* so as to impart His own proper nature to the begot-
ten.” As in relation to the Father, so now in relation to the Son, Basil objects to the
term. Why ‘ begotten” ?' Where did he get this word? From what teaching? From
what prophet? Basil nowhere finds the Son called ‘‘ begotten” in Scripture.” We read
that the Father begat, but nowhere that the Son was a degotten thing. ““ Unto usa child
is born, unto us a Son is given.” But His name is not degotten thing, but ‘‘ angel of
great counsel.” If this word had indicated the essence of the Son, no other word would
have been revealed by the Spirit."°| Why, if God begat, may we not call that which was
begotten a thing begotten? It 15 ἃ terrible thing for us to coin names for Him to Whom


1 Οη κοινὴ ἔννοια, cf. Origen, C. Cels.i. 4. 4 τοὺς μερικοὺς τῆς οἰκονομίας λόγους. Β΄ χα 1. τὸς
2 Ps. cxxxix. 6. ἢ : _ 5 Rom, xi. 33. δ χα τ, 12. 9 τὸ γέννημα. Td. ii. 6.
S [se li. 8. Ἰ τοῦτο TO ἄναρχον τῆς ζωῆς ἀγέννητον προσειρήκαμεν. 10 Jd. i. 16.


11 γέννημα, 2.é., thing begotten ;” the distinction between this substantive and the scriptural adjective μονογενής must be
borne in mind.
12 Jd. ii. 6. 18 LXX., ἐγεννήθη. 14 Is. ix. 6. 156 Jd, LXX. 16 74. ii. 7.


XXXVI BASIL.


—=


God has given a ‘*name which is above every name. We must not add to or take from
what is delivered to us by the Spirit.2. Things are not made for names, but names for
things.? Eunomius unhappily was led by distinction of name into distinction of being.*
If the Son is begotten in the sense in which Eunomius uses the word, He is neither be-
gotten of the essence of God nor begotten from eternity. Eunomius represents the Son
as not of the essence of the Father, because begetting is only to be thought of as a sensual
‘act and idea, and therefore is entirely unthinkable in connexion with the being of God.
‘©The essence of God does not admit of begetting; no other essence exists for the Son’s
begetting ; therefore I say that the Son was begotten when non-existent.” * Basil rejoins
that no analogy can hold between divine generation or begetting and human generation or
begetting. ‘* Living beings which are subject to death generate through the operation of
the senses: but we ΟΥΥΝΔὴ not on this account conceive of God in the same manner ; nay,

rather shall we be hence guided to the truth that, because corruptible beings operate in
this manner, the Incorruptible will operate in an opposite manner.”* ‘+ All who have
even a limited loyalty to truth ought to dismiss all corporeal similitudes. ‘They must be
very careful not to sully their conceptions of God by material notions. They must follow
the theologies’ delivered to us by the Holy Ghost. They must shun questions which are
little better than conundrums, and admit of a dangerous double meaning. Led by the ray
that shines forth from light to the contemplation of the divine generation, they must think of
a generation worthy of God, without passion, partition, division, or time. They must
conceive of the image of the invisible God not after the analogy of images which
are subsequently fashioned by craft to match, their archetype, but as of one nature
and subsistence with the originating prototy pe.* . - . This image is not produced by
imitation, for the whole nature of the Father is expressed in the Son as on a seal.” © ** Do
not press me with the questions: What is the generation? Of what kind was it? In
what manner could it be effected? The manner is ineflable, and wholly beyond the scope
of our intelligence; but we shall not on this account throw away the foundation of our
faith in Father and Son. If we try to measure everything by our comprehension, and to
suppose that what we cannot comprehend by our reasoning is wholly non-existent, fare-
well to the reward of faith; farewell to the reward of hope! If we only follow what is
clear to our reason, how can we be deemed worthy of the blessings in store for the reward
of faith in things not seen”?

If not of the essence of God, the Son could not be held to be eternal. ‘* How utterly
absurd,” exclaims Basil, ‘‘ to deny the glory of God to have had brightness ;” to deny the
wisdom of God to have been ever with God! . . . The Father is of eternity. So
also is the Son of eternity, united by generation to the unbegotten nature of the Father.
This is not my own statement. I shall prove it by quoting the words of Scripture. Let
me cite from the Gospel ‘In the beginning was the Word.’ * and from the Psalm, other
words spoken as in the person of the Father, ‘From the womb before the morning I
have begotten them.’ Let us put both together, and say, He was, and He was begotten.
. . + How absurd to seek for something higher in the case of the unoriginate and the
unbegotten! Just as absurd is it to start questions as to time, about priority in the case of
Him Who was with the Father from eternity, and between Whom and Him that begat
Him there is no interval.” 1

A dilemma put by Eunomius was the following: When God begat the Beet, the
Son either was or was ποῖ. If He was not, no argument could lie against E Eunomius
and the Arians. If τ was, the position is blasphemous and absurd, for that which
is needs no begetting.”

To meet this dilemma, Basil drew a distinction between eternity and the being
unoriginate.* The Eunomians, from the fact of the unoriginateness of the Father heing
called eternity, maintained that unoriginateness and eternity are identical.” Because
the Son is not unbegotten they do not even allow Him to be eternal. But there is a
wide distinction to be observed in the meaning of the terms. The word zzdegoéten is


331


1 Phil. ii. 2 7d. ii. 8. 8 74. ii. 4. i Jd. il, 3. 5 74. ii. 18. 6 Jd. ii. 23.

7On the distinction between θεολογία and οἰκονομία, cf. p. 7, πὰ

8 συνυπάρχουσαν καὶ παρυφεστηκυῖαν τῷ πρωτοτύπῳ ὑποστήσαντι. Expressions of this kind, used even by Basil, may help to
explain the earlier Nicene sense of ὑπόστασις. The Son has, as it were, a parallel hypostasis to that of the Father, Who eternally
furnishes this hypostasis. cf. p. 195, n.

9 Here the MSS. vary, but the main sense is not affected by the omission of the variant phrase.


10 Jd, ii. 16. cf. De Sp. Scto. § 15, Ὁ. 9, and ὃ 84, p. 40, and notes. Ta. We 24.
12 ἀπαύγασμα. cf. Heb, i. 13. ae fp | Ee 18 cf, De Sp. Scto. pp. 27, 30, and notes.
15 Johni. 1. 16 τοι ὄντα ἐγέννησεν ὃ Θεὸς τὸν Yudv, ἢ οὐκ ὄντα.


44 Ps, cx. 3, LXX. 17 Fd. ii. 14. 19 ταυτὸν τῷ ἀνάρχῳ TO ἀΐδιον.


PROLEGOMENA. XXXVIi


predicated of that which has origin of itself, and no cause of its being: the word eternal
is predicated of that which is in being beyond all time and age.’ Wherefore the Son
is both not unbegotten and eternal.” Eunomius was ready to give great dignity to the
Son as a supreme creature. He did not hold the essence of the Son to be common to
that of the things created out of nothing.* He would give Him as great a preéminence
as the Creator has over His own created works.* Basil attributes little importance to
this concession, and thinks it only leads to confusion and contradiction. If the God of
the universe, being unbegotten, necessarily differs from things begotten, and all things
begotten have their common hypostasis of the non-existent, what alternative is there to
a natural conjunction of all such things? Just as in the one case the unapproachable
effects a distinction between the natures, so in the other equality of condition brings
them into mutual contact. They say that the Son and all things that came into being
under Him are of the non-existent, and so far they make those natures common, and
yet they deny that they give Him a nature of the non-existent. For again, as though
Eunomius were Lord himself, and able to give to the Only Begotten what rank and dignity
he chooses, he goes on to argue, — We attribute to Him so much supereminence as
the Creator must of necessity have over His own creature. He does not say, ‘‘ We
conceive,” οὐ We are of opinion,” as would be befitting when treating of God, but
he says ** We attribute,” as though he himself could control the measure of the attri-
bution. And how much supereminence does he give ? As much as the Creator must
necessarily have over His own creatures. This has not yet reached a statement of
difference of substance. Human beings in art surpass their own works, and yet are
consubstantial with them, as the potter with his clay, and the shipwright with his
timber. For both are alike bodies, subject to sense, and earthy. Eunomius
explained the title ““ Only Begotten” to mean that the Son alone was begotten and
created by the Father alone, and therefore was made the most perfect minister. ‘¢¢ If,”
rejoins Basil, ‘* He does not possess His glory in being perfect God, if it lies only
in His being an exact and obedient subordinate, in what does He differ from the
ministering spirits who perform the work of their service without blame?®
Indeed Eunomius joins ‘created’ to ‘begotten’ with the express object of shew-
ing that there is no distinction between the Son and ἃ creature!’ And how un-
worthy a conception of the Father that He should need a servant to do His work!
‘He commanded and they were created.?* What service was needed by Him Who
creates by His will alone ? But in what sense are all things said by us to be ‘through
the Son’? In that the divine will, starting from the prime cause, as it were from a
source, proceeds to operation through its own image, God the Word.” °® Basil sees
that if the Son is a creature mankind is still without a revelation of the Divine. He
sees that Eunomius, ‘‘ by alienating the Only Begotten from the Father, and altogether
cutting Him off from communion with Him, as far as he can, deprives us of the as-
cent of knowledge which is made through the Son. Our Lord says that all that is
the Father's is His."2 Eunomius states that there is no fellowship between the Father
and Him Who is of Him.” " If so there is no * brightness” of glory; no ‘express
image of hypostasis.” ”* So Dorner, who freely uses the latter portion of the
treatise, ‘* The main point of Basil’s opposition to Eunomius is that the word unbe-
gotten is not a name indicative of the essence of God, but only of a condition of exist-
ence.'* The divine essence has other predicates. If every peculiar mode of existence causes
a distinction in essence also, then the Son cannot be of the same essence with the
Father, because He has a peculiar mode of existence, and the Father another; and men
cannot be of the same essence, because each of them represents a different mode of ex-
istence. By the names of Father, Son, and Spirit, we do not understand different
essences, (οὐσίας). but they are names which distinguish the ὕπαρξις of each. All are God,
and the Father is no more God than the Son, as one man is no more man than another.
Quantitative differences are not reckoned in respect of essence; the question is only of
being or non-being. But this does not exclude the idea of a variety in condition in the


1 ἀΐδιον δὲ τὸ χρόνον παντὸς καὶ αἰῶνος κατὰ TO εἶναι πρεσβύτερον. 2 7d. ii. 18.

8 Eunomius is therefore not to be ranked with the extreme ‘‘ Exucontians.” cf. Soc. H.E. ii. 45.

4 7d. ii. 19. 5 Td. ii. 19.

6 So R.V. distinguishes between the words λειτουργικὰ and διακονίαν which are confused in A.V.

1 Id, .t, 23. 8 Ps, cxlviii. 5. WIG oty 21. 10 cf, John xvii. Io. 11 Jd, i. 18.

12 On this brief summary of Basil’s controversy with Eunomius, cf. Bohringer, A?rchengeschichte, vii. 62, seqge
15 Christologie, i. 906. 14 τὸ ἀγέννητος ὑπάρξεώς τρόπος καὶ οὐκ οὐσίας ὄνομα. Adv. Eunom. iv.


XXXVIil BASIL.


Father and the Son (érépue ἔχειν). — the generation of the Latter. The dignity of both
is equal. The essence of Begetter and Begotten is identical.’ ὦ

The Fourth Book contains notes on the chief passages of Scripture which were re-
lied on by Arian disputants. Among these are


I Cor. xv. 28. On the Subjection of the Son.


(ΤΡ the Son is subjected to the Father in the Godhead, then He must have
been subjected from the beginning, from whence He was God. But if He was not sub-
jected, but shall be subjected, it is in the manhood, as for us, not in the Godhead, as
for Himself.”


Philipp. tt. 9. On the Name above every Name.


‘If the name above every name was given by the Father to the Son, Who was
God, and every tongue owned Him Lord, after the incarnation, because of His obedi-
ence, then before the incarnation He neither had the name above every name nor was
owned by all to be Lord. It follows then that after the incarnation He was greater
than before the incarnation, which is absurd.” So of Matt. xxviii. 18. ** We must
understand this of the incarnation, and not of the Godhead.”


John xiv. 28. “My Father is Greater than I.”


‘¢¢ Greater’ is predicated in bulk, in time, in dignity, in power, or as cause. The
Father cannot be called greater thanthe Son in bulk, for He is incorporeal: nor yet in
time, for the Son is Creator of times: nor yet in dignity, for He was not made what He
had once not been: nor yet in power, for ‘ what things soever the Father doeth, these also
doeth the son likewise’:” nor as cause, since (the Father) would be similarly greater
than He and than we, if He is cause of Him and of us. The words express rather the
honour given by the Son to the Father than any depreciation by the speaker; moreover
what is greater is not necessarily of a different essence. Man is called greater than
man, and horse than horse. If the Father is called greater, it does not immediately fol-
low that He is of another substance. In a word, the comparison [165 between beings of
one substance, not between those of different substances.°

‘¢ A man is not properly said to be greater than a brute, than an inanimate thing,
but man than man, and brute than brute. The Father is therefore of one substance with
the Son, even though He be called greater.” *


On Matt. xxiv. 36. Of Knowledge of that Day and of that Hour.®


«ς ΤΡ the Son is the Creator of the world, and does not know the time of the judgment,
then He does not know what He created. For He said that He was ignorant not of the
judgment, but of the time. How can this be otherwise than absurd?

‘¢ If the Son has not knowledge of all things whereof the Father has knowledge, then
He spake untruly when He said ‘ All things that the Father hath are mine’ ° and * As the
Father knoweth me so know 1 the Father.’?’ If there is a distinction between knowing
the Father and knowing the things that the Father hath, and if, in proportion as every one
is greater than what is his, it is greater to know the Father than to know what is His, then
the Son, though He knew the greater (for no man knoweth the Father save the Son),*®
did not know the less. ἧ

‘¢ This is impossible. He was silent concerning the season of the judgment. because it
was not expedient for men to hear. Constant expectation kindles a warmer zeal for true
religion. The knowledge that a long interval of time was to elapse would have made men
more careless about true religion, from the hope of being saved by a subsequent change of


1 ο΄. De Sp. Scto. pp. 13, 39, and notes; Thomasius, Dogmengeschichte, i. 245; Herzog, Real-Encycl. “ Eunomius und
Eunomianer.”’

2 John v. 19. 3 ἐπὶ τῶν ὁμοουσίων οὐκ ἐπὶ τῶν ἑτεροουσίων.

4It will be noted that Basil explains this passage on different grounds from those suggested by the Clause in the
Athanasian Creed, on which Waterland’s remark is that it “needs no comment.” St. Athanasius himself interpreted the
‘minority ” not of the humanity, or of the special subordination of th time when the words were uttered. οὐ. Ath., Orat. c.
Ar. i.§ 5S: “The Son says not ‘my Father is better than I,’ lest we should conceive Him to be foreign to His nature, but
‘greater,’ not indeed in size, nor in time, but because of His generation from the Father Himself; nay, in saying
‘greater,’ He again shews that He is proper to His essence” (Newman’s transl.). The explanation given in Letter viii.,
p. 118, does include the inferiority as touching His manhood.

5 cf. Letter viii. p. 118, 6 John xv. 16. 7John x. 15. 8 Matt. xi. 27.


PROLEGOMENA. ΧΧΧΙΝ


life. How could He who had known everything up to this time (for so He said) not
know that hour also? If so, the Apostle vainly said ‘ In whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge.’ ὦ

‘*If the Holy Spirit, who ‘ searcheth the deep things of God,’” cannot be ignorant of
anything that is God’s, then, as they who will not even allow Him to be equal must con-
tend, the Holy Ghost is greater than the Son.” ?


On Matt. xxvi. 39. Father, if tt be Possible, let this Cup pass from Me.


‘Tf the Son really said, ‘ Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me,’ He not
only shewed His own cowardice and weakness, but implied that there might be something
impossible to the Father. The words ‘ if it be possible’ are those of one in doubt, and not
thoroughly assured that the Father could save Him. How could not Hewho gave the
boon of life to corpses much rather be able to preserve life in the living? Wherefore then
did not He Who had raised Lazarus and many of the dead supply life to Himself ? Why did
He ask life from the Father, saying, in His fear, ‘Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass away from me’? If He was dying unwillingly, He had not yet humbled Himself;
He had not yet been made obedient to the Father unto death; * He had not given Himself,
as the Apostle says, ‘who gave Himself for our sins,* a ransom.’* If He was dying will-
ingly, what need of the words * Father, if it be possible, let thiscup passaway’? No: this
must not be understood of Himself; it must be understood of those who were on the point
of sinning against Him, to prevent them from sinning; when crucified in their behalf He
said, ‘ Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.’7 We must not understand
words spoken in accordance with the ceconomy * to be spoken simply.”


On John vi. 57. 7 live by the Father.®


‘¢ Tf the Son lives on account of ® the Father, He lives on account of another, and not
of Himself. But He who lives on account of another cannot be Self-life. So He who is
holy of grace is not holy of himself.” Then the Son did not speak truly when He said, ‘ I
am the life,’ ® and again, ‘ the Son quickeneth whom He will.’ * We must therefore under-
stand the words to be spoken in reference to the incarnation, and not to the Godhead.”


On John v.19. The Son can do Nothing of Himself.


‘¢ If freedom of action ™ is better than subjection to control, anda man is free, while the
Son of God is subject to control, then the man is better than the Son. This is absurd.
And if he who is subject to control cannot create free beings (for he cannot of his own will
confer on others what he does not possess himself), then the Saviour, since He made us free,
cannot Himself be under the control of any.”

ἐν If the Son could do nothing of Himself, and could only act at the bidding of the
Father, He is neither good nor bad. He was not responsible for anything that was done.
Consider the absurdity of the position that men should be free agents both of good and
evil, while the Son, who is God, should be able to do nothing of His own authority !”


On John xv. 1. Lam the Vine.


‘¢ If, say they, the Saviour is a vine, and we are branches, but the Father is husband-
man; and if the branches are of one nature with the vine, and the vine is not of one nature
with the husbandman; then the Son is of one nature with us, and we are a part of Him,
but the Son is not of one nature with, but in all respects of a nature foreign to, the Father,
I shall reply to them that He called us branches not of His Godhead, but of His flesh, as
the Apostle says, we are ‘the body of Christ, and members in particular,’'’? and again,
‘know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ ?’'S and in other places, ‘as is


1Col. ii. 3. 21 Cor. ii. 10.

8 cf. this passage more fully treated of in Letter ccxxxvi. p. 276. The above is rather a tentative memorandum than an
explanation,
ῃ 4 οὗ, Phil. ii. 8. 5 Gal. i. 4. 6 Matt. xxi. 28. 7 Luke xxiii. 34.

8 cf. pp. 7 and 12. Most commentators that Iam acquainted with write on the lines of Bengel, “ poculum a patre oblatum,
tota passionis massa plenum.” cf. Athanasius, ‘‘ the terror was of the flesh.”” C. Arian. Orat. III., ὃ xxxix., Amphilochius,
Apud Theod. Dial. iii., and Chrysost., Hom. in Matt. \xxxiii.

9 cf. Ep. viii. and note on ἢ. 117. 12 αὐτοάγιος. 15 τὸ αὐτεξούσιον, 181 Cor. vi. 15.

10 διά. Vide note referred to. 13 John xi. 25. 16 τὸ ὑπεξούσιον. :


41 Or underived life. αὐτοζωή. 14 John v. a1. 17 1 Cor. xii. 27.


xl BASIL.


the earthy, such are they that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are
heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, let us all bear the image of the
heavenly.’! If the head of the *‘ man is Christ, and the head of Christ is God,’ * and man
is not of one substance with Christ, Who is God (for man is not God), but Christ is
of one substance with God (for He is God), therefore God is not the head of Christ in the
same sense as Christ is the head of man. ‘The natures of the creature and the creative God-
head do not exactly coincide. God is head of Christ, as Father; Christ is head of us, as
Maker. If the will of the Father is that we should believe in His Son (for this is the
will of Him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on Him, may
have everlasting life),* the Son is not a Son of will. That we should believe in Him is
(an injunction) found with Him, or before Him.” *


On Mark x. 18. There is none Good, etc.


‘¢Tf the Saviour is not good, He is necessarily bad. For He is simple, and His char-
acter does not admit of any intermediate quality. How can it be otherwise than absurd
that the Creator of good should be bad? And if life is good, and the words of the Son
are life, as He Himself said, ‘ the words which I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they
are life,’> in what sense, when He hears one of the Pharisees address Him as good
Master, does He rejoin, ‘ There isnone good but One, that is God’? It was not when
He had heard no more than good that he said, ‘there is none good,’ but when He had
heard good Master. He answered as to one tempting Him, as the gospel expresses it,
or to one ignorant, that God is good, and not simply a good master.”


On John xvii. 5. Father, glorify Me.


(ΤΡ when the Son asked to be glorified of the Father He was asking in respect of
His Godhead, and not of His manhood, He asked for what He did not possess. Therefore
the evangelist speaks falsely when he says ‘we beheld His glory’;° and the apostle, in
the words ‘ They would not have crucified the Lord of glory,’’? and David in the words
‘And the King of glory shall come in.’*® It is not therefore an increase of glory which
he asks. He asks that there may be a manifestation of the cconomy.’® Again, if He
really asked that the glory which He had before the world might be given Him of the
Father, He asked it because He had lost it. He would never have sought to receive that of
which He was in possession. But if this was the case, He had lost not only the glory,
but also the Godhead. For the glory is inseparable from the Godhead. Therefore,
according to Photinus,” He was mere man. It is then clear that He spoke these words
in accordance with the ceconomy of the manhood, and not through failure in the Godhead.”


On Coloss. 1. 15. Firstborn of every Creature.


‘‘ If before the creation the Son was not a generated being but a created being,” He
would have been called first created and not firstborn.” If, because He is called first


11 Cor. xv. 48, 49: in the last clause Basil reads φορέσωμεν, instead of the φορέσομεν of A.V., with δὲ, A, C, Ὁ, E, F,
G, K, L,P. 21 /Cor. xi, 2. 3 John vi. 40.

4 7,6. simultaneous with, or even anterior to, His advent. Maran hesitates as to the meaning of the phrase, and writes:
“ Suspicor tamen intelligi οὐ ἰώμημς Quanguam voluntas patris est ut in Filium credamus, non tamen propterea sequitur,
Filium ex voluntate esse. am credere nos oportet in Filium, ut primum in hunc mundum ventt, tmo antequam etiam
naturam humanam assumeret, cum patriarche et ὙΦ ΕΝ ad salutem consequendam tn Christum venturum credere
necesse habuerint. Itague cum debeamus necessarito credere in Filium omni etate et tempore; hinc efficitur, Filium esse
natura, non voluntate, neque adoptione. Si voluntas est Patris ut nos in ejus Filium credamus, non est ex voluntate Filius,
quippe nostra in ipsum fides aut cum ipso aut ante ipsum invenitur. Subtil1s hec rattocinatio tllustratur ex alia simili, que
reperitur (1.6. at the beginning of Book IV.). Si fides in Filium nostra opus est Dei, ipse Det opus esse non potest. Nam
fides in ipsum et tpse non tdem.”

ὁ John vi. 64. 6 John i. 14. 71 Cor, ii. 8. 8 Ps, xxiv. 7. 9 7.6. of the incarnation, cf. pp. 7, 12.

10On Photinus cf. Socrates, Ecc. Hist. ii. 29, and Theodoret, Her. Fab. iii. 1, and Epiphanius, Her. |xxi. ὃ 2. The
question as to what Synod condemned and deposed him has been thought to have been settled in favour of that of Sirmium
in 349. (D.C.B. iv. 394.) of. Hefele’s Counctls, tr. Oxenham, ii. 188.

11 οὐ γέννημα ἀλλὰ κτίσμα. The use of the word γέννημα in this book is one of the arguments alleged against its genuine-
ness, for in Book II., Capp. 6, 7, and 8. Basil objects to it; butin the same Book II., Cap. 32, he uses it apparently without
objection in the sentence ἐκ τοῦ γεννήματος νοῆσαι βᾷδιον τοῦ γεγεννηκότος τὴν φύσιν. Maran, Vit. Bas. xliii. 7.

12 The English word firstborn is not an exact rendering of the Greek πρωτότοκος. and in its theological use it may lead to
confusion. “ Bear ”’ and its correlatives in English are only used of the mother. τίκτω (VTEK. cf Ger. Zeug.) is used indifferently
of both father and mother. πρωτότοκος is exactly rendered firstborn in Luke ii. 7; but first begotten, as in A.V. Heb. i. 6, and -
Rev.i. 5, more precisely renders the word in the text, and in such passages as Ex. xiii. 2, and Psalm ]xxxix. 28, which are
Messianically applied to the divine Word. So early as Clemens Alexandrinus the only begotten and first begotten had been
contrasted with the first created, the highest order of created beings. With him may be compared Tertullian, Adv. Prax.7, Adv.
Marc. v.19, Hippolvtus, Her. x. 33, Origen, C. Cels. vi. 47, 63, 64, In Toann.1, § 22 (iv. p. 21), xix. § 5 (ἢ. 305), xxviii. § 14
(p. 392), Cyprian, Test. ii. 1, Novatian, De Trin. 16. On the history and uses of the word, see the exhaustive note of Bp.
Lightfoot on Col. i. 15.


PROLEGOMENA. xli


begotten of creation He is first created, then because He is called first begotten of the dead?
He would be the first of the dead who died. If onthe other hand He is called first begotten
of the dead because of His being the cause of the resurrection from the dead, He is in
the same manner called first begotten of creation, because He is the cause of the bringing
of the creature from the non existent into being. If His being called first begotten of
creation indicates that He came first into being, then the Apostle, when he said, ‘all
things were created by Him and for Him,’? ought to have added, ‘And He came into
being first of all.’ But in saying ‘ He is before all things,’ * he indicated that He exists
eternally, while the creature came into being. ‘Is’ in the passage in question is in har-
mony with the words ‘In the beginning was the Word.’* It is urged that if the Son is
first begotten, He cannot be only begotten, and that there must needs be some other, in
comparison with whom He is styled first begotten. Yet, OQ wise objector, though He is
the only Son born of the Virgin Mary, He is called her first born. For it is said, * Till
she brought forth her first born Son.’® There is therefore no need of any brother in com-
parison with whom He is styled first begotten.°®

‘It might also be said that one who was before all generation was called first begotten,
and moreover in respect of them who are begotten of God through the adoption of the
Holy Ghost, as Paul says, ‘For whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the first born among many
brethren.”"’ ’


On. £70. Ut. 22, 752. Loped, ἐγεαϊσ Me (LX X.)\."


‘‘Tf it is the incarnate Lord who says ‘I am the way,’ " and ‘No man cometh unto
the Father but by me,’ ” it is He Himself Who said, ‘ The Lord created me beginning of
ways.’ The word is also used of the creation and making of a begotten being,” as * I have
created a man through the Lord,’ ¥ and again ‘ He begat sons and daughters,’ * and so
David, ‘ Create in me a clean heart, O God,’ * not asking for another, but for the cleansing
of the heart he had. And a new creature is spoken of, not as though another creation
came into being, but because the enlightened are established in better works. If the Father
created the Son for works, He created Him not on account of Himself, but on account of
the works. But that which comes into being on account of something else, and not on its
own account, is either a part of that on account of which it came into being, or is inferior.
The Saviour will then be either a part of the creature, or inferior to the creature. We
must understand the passage of the manhood. And it might be said that Solomon uttered
these words of the same wisdom whereof the Apostle makes mention in the passage " For
after that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God.’ ” It must moreover
be borne in mind that the speaker is not a prophet, but a writer of proverbs. Now pro-
verbs are figures of other things, not the actual things which are uttered. If it was God the
Son Who said, ‘ The Lord created me,’ He would rather have said, ‘The Father created
me.’ Nowhere did He call Him Lord, but always Father. The word ‘ begot,’ then, must
be understood in reference to God the Son, and the word created, in reference to Him
who took on Him the form of a servant. In all these cases we do not mention two, God
apart and man apart (for He was One), but in thought we take into account the nature of
each. Peter had not two in his mind when he said, ‘ Christ hath uffered for us in the
flesh.’ If, they argue, the Son is a thing begotten and not a thing made, how does Scrip-
ture say, ‘ Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made that
same Jesus, Whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ’?’7 We must also say here that


1 ev. 1. 5. 2 Col. i. τό. 8 Col. i. 17. 4Johni.y. + 5 Matt. i. 25.

6 Jerome’s Tract on the Perpetual Virginity of the Blessed Virgin appeared about 383, and was written at Rome in the
episcopate of Damasus (363-384). The work of Helvidius which Jerome controverted was not published till about 380, and
there can be no reference to him in the passage in the text. Basil is contending against the general Arian inference, rather
than against any individual statement as to who the “ Brethren of the Lord”? were. cf. also dub. Hom. in Sanct. Christ. Gen.
p. 600. Ed. Garn. On the whole subject see Bp. Lightfoot, in his Zp. to the Galatians, E. 5. Ffoulkes in D.C.B.s.v. Hel-
vidius, and Archdeacon Farrar in his Life of Chrrst, chap. vii.. who warmly supports the Helvidian theory in opposition to
the almost universal belief of the early Church. Basil evidently has no more idea that the ἕως οὗ of Matt. i. 25 implies any
thing as to events subsequent to the τόκος than the author of 2 Sam, had when he said that Michal had no child till (ILXX. ews}
the day of her death, or St. Paul had that Christ’s reigning ¢/// (ἄχρις οὗ) He had put all enemies under His feet implied that
He would not reign afterwards. Too much importance must not be given to niceties of usage in Hellenistic Greek, but it is 2.
well-knawn distinction in Attic Greek that ποίν with the infinitive is employed where the action is not asserted to take place,
while it is used with the indicative of a past fact. Had St. Matthew written πρὶν συνῆλθον, the Helvidians might have laid
still greater stress than they did on the argument from Matt. i.18, which St. Jerome ridicules. His writing πρὶν ἢ συνελθεῖν is
what might have been expected if he wished simply to assert that the conception was not preceded by any cohabitation.

7 Rom. viii. 29. 8 The LXX. version is Κύριος ἔκτισέ we ἀρχὴν ὁδῶν αὐτοῦ. 9 John xiv. 6. 10 Tg,

11 γέννημα. 12 The Heb. verb here is the same as in Prov. viii. 22, though rendered ἐκτησάμην in the LXX.

13 Gen. v.4. Here Basil has ἐποίησεν for the LXX. ἐγέννησεν, representing another Hebrew verb.

14 Ps. li. 10 καρδίαν καθαρὰν κτίσον. 15 y Cor. i. 21, σα Pet. iv. 1. W Acts ii. 36.


xlii BASIL.


ee


this was spoken according to the flesh about the Son of Man; just as the angel who an-
nounced the glad tidings to the shepherds says, " ΤῸ you is born to-day a Saviour, Who is
Christ the Lord.’?! The word “ to-day’ could never be understood of Him Who was before
the ages. This is more clearly shewn by what comes afterwards where it is said, ¢ That
same Jesus whom ye have crucified.’* If when the Son was born*® He was then made
wisdom, it is untrue that He was‘the power of God and the wisdom of God.’* His
wisdom did not come into being, but existed always. And so, as though of the Father, it is
said by David, ‘ Be thou, God, my defender,’ ἢ and again, Thou art become my salvation,’ ἢ
and so Paul, ‘ Let God be true, but every mana liar.’ Thus the Lord ‘ of God is made
unto us wisdom and sanctification and redemption.’?® Now when the Father was made
defender and true, He was not a thing made; and similarly when the Son was made
wisdom and sanctification, He was not a thing made. If it is true that there is one God
the Father, it is assuredly also true that there is one Lord Jesus Christ the Saviour.
According to them the Saviour is not God nor the Father Lord, and it is written in vain,
‘the Lord said unto my Lord.’® False is the statement, ‘ Therefore God, thy God, hath
anointed thee.’ False too, ‘ The Lord rained from the Lord.’" False, ‘ God created in the
image of God,’ 5 and ‘ Who is God save the Lord?’ ® and ‘ Who is a God save our God.’ "ἢ
False the statement of John that ‘ the Word was God and the Word was with God;’” and
the words of Thomas of the Son, ‘ my Lord and my God.’ The distinctions, then, ought
to be referred to creatures and to those who are falsely and not properly called gods, and
not to the Father and to the Son.”


On John xvit. 3. That they may know Thee, the only true God.


‘¢ The ¢ruwe (sing.) is spoken of in contradistinction to the false (pl.). But He is
incomparable, because in comparison with all He is in all things superexcellent. When
Jeremiah said of the Son, ‘ This is our God, and there shall none other be accounted of in
comparison with Him,’ ” did he describe Him as greater even than the Father? That the
Son also is true God, John himself declares in the Epistle, ‘ That we may know the only
true God, and we are (in Him that is true, even) in His (true) Son Jesus Christ. This is
the true God, and eternal 1Π1{6.᾿ 8. It would be wrong, on account of the words " There shall
none other be accounted of in comparison of Him,’ to understand the Son to be greater
than the Father; nor must we suppose the Father to be the only true God. Both expres-
sions must be used in connexion with those who are falsely styled, but are not really, gods.
In the same way it is said in Deuteronomy, ‘ So the Lord alone did lead him, and there
was no strange God with him.’™ If God is alone invisible and wise, it does not at once
follow that He is greater than all in all things. But the God Who is over all is necessarily
superior to 411. Did the Apostle, when he styled the Saviour God over a//, describe Him
as greater than the Father? The idea is absurd. The passage in question must be viewed
in the same manner. The great God cannot be less than a different God. When the
Apostle said of the Son, we look for ‘ that blessed hope. and the glorious appearing of the
great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ,’ *® did he think of Him as greater than the Father?”
It is the Son, not the Father, Whose appearance and advent we are waiting for. These
terms are thus used without distinction of both the Father and the Son, and no exact nicety
is observed in their employment. ‘ Being equally with God’ * is identical with being
equal with God.** Since the Son ‘ thought it not robbery’ to be equal with God, how can
He be unlike and unequal to God? Jews are nearer true religion than Eunomius. When-
ever the Saviour called Himself no more than Son of God, as though it were due to the
Son, if He be really Son, to be Himself equal to the Father, they wished, it is said, to
stone Him, not only because He was breaking the Sabbath, but because, by saying that
God was His own Father, He made Himself equal with God.** Therefore, even though


1 Luke ii. 11. 2 Acts ii. 36. 3 ἐγεννήθη. But it seems to refer to the birth from Mary. #1 Cor. i. 24.
ΡΞ xxx. 2, LXX. 81 Cor. ἱ. 30. 11 Gen. xix. 24. 14 Jd. LXX.

6 Ps. cxviii. 21. OPS, ΟΣ ας 12 Gen. i. 27. 15 John i. 1.

7 Rom. iii. 4. 10 Ps. xlv. 8. 13 Ps, xviii. 21. 16 John xx. 28.


17 Baruch iii. 35. The quoting of Baruch under the name of Jeremiah has been explained by the fact that in the LXX.
Baruch was placed with the Lamentations, and was regarded in the early Church as of equal authority with Jeremiah. It was
Ea Tag so gnmeee e.g. by Ireneus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Tertullian. So Theodoret, D/a/. i. (in this edition, p. 165,
where cf. note).

181 John v. 20. There is some MS. authority for the insertion of “ God” in the first clause, but none for the omission of
the former ἐν τῷ. 19 Deut. xxxii. 12. 20 Tit. ii. 13.

21 St. Basil, with the mass of the Greek orthodox Fathers, has no idea of any such interpretation of Tit. ii. 13, as Alford
endeavours to support. cf. Theodoret, pp. 391 and 321, and notes.

22 τὸ εἶναι ἴσα Θεῷ, as in Phil, ii. 6, tr. in A.V. to be equal with God; R.V. has to be on an equality with God,

25 τῷ εἶναι ἴσον Oey. 24 John v. 18.


PROLEGOMENA. xiii


Eunomius is unwilling that it should be so, according both to the Apostle and to the
Saviour’s own words, the Son is equal with the Father.”


On Matt. xx. 23. Is not Mine to give, save for whom it ts prepared.


‘¢ If the Son has not authority over the judgment, and power to benefit some and chastise
others, how could He say, ‘ The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment
unto the Son’?? And in another place, ‘The Son of man hath power on earth to forgive
sins;” ἢ and again, " All power is given unto mé in heaven and in earth ;’* and to Peter, ‘I
will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven ;’° and to the disciples, ‘ Verily, I say
unto you that ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, . . . shall sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.”® The explanation is clear from the
Scripture, since the Saviour said, ‘ Then will I reward every man according to his work ;’'
and in another place, ‘ They that have done good shall come forth unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation.’* And the Apostle
says, ‘We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive
the things done in his body, according to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad.’ ®
It is therefore the part of the recipients to make themselves worthy of a seat on the left


and on the right of the Lord: it is not the part of Him Who is able to give it, even though
the request be unjust.” ”


On Ps. xvitt.31, LXX. Who ts God, save the Lord? Whois God save our God?


(ΤῈ has already been sufficiently demonstrated that the Scriptures employ these ex-
pressions and others of a similar character not of the Son, but of the so-called gods who
were not really so. I have shewn this from the fact that in both the Old and the New
Testament the Son is frequently styled both God and Lord. David makes this still clearer
when he says, ‘ Who is like unto Thee?’ " and adds, ‘ among the gods, O Lord,’ and Moses,
in the words, ‘ So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him.’ ”
And yet although, as the Apostle says, the Saviour was with them, ‘ They drank of that
spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ,’ and Jeremiah, ‘The gods
that have not made the heavens and the earth, . . . let them perish under the
heavens.’!* The Son is not meant among these, for He is Himself Creator of all. It is
then the idols and images of the heathen who are meant alike by the preceding passage
and by the words, ‘ I am the first God and Iam the last, and beside me there is no God,’ "ἢ
and also, ‘ Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me,’ "ἢ and ‘ Hear,


O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.’” None of these passages must be understood as
referring to the Son.”


The Fifth Book against Eunomius is on the Holy Spirit, and therefore, even if it were
of indubitable genuineness, it would be of comparatively little importance. as the subject
is fully discussed in the treatise of his maturer life. A reason advanced against its genuine-
ness has been the use concerning the Holy Ghost of the term God. (§ 3.) But it has
been replied that the reserve which St. Basil practised after his elevation to the episcopate
was but for a special and temporary purpose. He calls the Spirit God in Ep. VIII. ὃ τι.
At the time of the publication of the Books against Eunomius there would be no such
reason for any ‘* economy” ® as in 374.

(ii) De Spiritu Sancto. To the illustration and elucidation of this work I have
little to add to what is furnished, however inadequately, by the translation and notes in the
following pages. The famous treatise of St. Basil was one of several put out about the
same time by the champions of the Catholic cause. Amphilochius, to whom it was


11 donot here render with the Arian gloss of A.V., infelicitously reproduced in the equally inexact translation of R.V.
The insertion of the words ‘it shall be given” and “it is” is apparently due to a pedantic prejudice against translating
ἀλλά by ‘save ’’ or ‘fexcept,” a rendering which is supported inclassical Greek by such a passage as Soph., O.7. 1331, and in
Hellenistic Greek by Mark ix. 8. The Vulgate has, quite correctly, *‘ zou est meum dare vobts, sed hohe ἐν Sg est a patre
meo,’’ so far as the preservation of the Son as the giveris concerned. <A similar error is to be found in both the Frenc and
German (Luther’s) of Bagster’s polyglot edition. Wiclif has correctly, ‘is not myn to geve to you but to whiche it is made
redi of my fadir.”” So Tyndale, ‘is not myne to geve but to them for whom it is prepared of my_father.” The gloss
begins with Cranmer (1539), ‘it shall chance unto them that it is prepared for,” and first appears in the Geneva of 1557 as the
A.V. has perpetuated it. The Rheims follows the z'0h/'s of the Vulgate, but is otherwise correct. οὐ note on Theodoret in this
edition, p. 160. 2 John ν. 22. 3 Mark ii. 10. 4 Matt. xxviii. 18. 5 Matt. xvi. 19.

6 Matt. xix. 28. 7 cf. Matt. xvi. 27. 8 John v. 29. 92 Cor. v. 10.

10 These last words are explained by a Scholium to the MS. Reg: II. to be a reference to the unreasonable petition of
James and John. It will be seen how totally opposed Basil's interpretation is to that required by the gloss of A.V.

11 Ps, Ixxxvi. 8. 12 Deut. xxxii, 12. 13 1 Cor. X. 4. 14 Jer. x. 2, LXX. 15 Is. xliv. 6, “ God” inserted.

16 Is, xliii. 10. 17 Deut. vi. 4. 18 cf, remarks in § vi. p. xxiii.of Prolegomena,


xliv BASIL.


addressed, was the author of a work which Jerome describes (De Vir. 71... cxxxiii.) as
arguing that He is God Almighty, and to be worshipped. The Ancoratus of Epiphanius
was issued in 373 in support of the same doctrine. At about the same time Didymus, the
blind master of the catechetical school at Alexandria, wrote a treatise which is extant in
St. Jerome’s Latin; and of which the work of St. Ambrose, composed in 381, for the
Emperor Gratian, is ‘‘ to a considerable extent an echo.” +

So in East and West a vigorous defence was maintained against the Macedonian assault.
The Catholic position is exactly defined in the Synodical Letter sent by Damasus to Paulinus
of Tyre in 378.? Basil died at the crisis of the campaign, and with no bright Pisgah view
of the ultimate passage into peace. The generalship was to pass into other hands. There
is something of the irony of fate, or of the mystery of Providence, in the fact that the voice
condemned by Basil to struggle against the mean din and rattle of Sasima should be the
vehicle for impressing on the empire the truths which Basil held dear. Gregory of Sasima
was no archiepiscopal success at Constantinople. He was not an administrator or a man of
the world. But he was a great divine and orator, and the imperial basilica of the Athanasia
rang with outspoken declarations of the same doctrines, which Basil had more cautiously
suggested to inevitable inference. The triumph was assured, Gregory was enthroned
in St. Sophia, and under Theodosius the Catholic Faith was safe from molestation.


Ll... ἘΣΧΕΘΈΤΙΟ:


(i) As of the De Spiritu Sancto, so of the Hexaemeron, no further account need be
given here. It may, however, be noted that the Ninth Homily ends abruptly, and the
latter, and apparently more important, portion of the subject is treated of at less length
than the former. Jerome * and Cassiodorus* speak of nine homilies only on the creation.
Socrates ° says the Hexaemeron was completed by Gregory of Nyssa. ‘Three orations are
published among Basil’s works, two on the creation of men and one on Paradise, which
are attributed to Basil by Combefis and Du Pin, but not considered genuine by Tillemont,
Maran, Garnier, Ceillier, and Fessler. They appear to be compositions which some editor

) ) be ;
thought congruous to the popular work of Basil, and so appended them to it.

The nine discourses in the Hexaemeron all shew signs of having been delivered ex-
tempore, and the sequence of argument and illustration is not such as to lead to the con-
clusion that they were ever redacted by the author into exact literary form. We probably
owe their preservation to the skilled shorthand writers of the day.°® ,

(1) The Homilies on the Psalms as published are seventcen ἴῃ number; it has how-
ever been commonly held that the second Hornily on Ps. xxviii. is not genuine, but the com-
position of some plagiarist. "The Homily also on Ps. xxxvii. has been generally objected to.
These are omitted from the group of the Ben. Ed., together with the first on Ps. cxiv.,
and that on cxv. Maran’ thinks that none of these orations shew signs of having been
delivered in the episcopate, or of having reference to the heresy of the Pneumatomachi ;
two apparently point directly to the presbyterate. In that on Ps. xiv. he speaks of an
ἀμεριμνία Which would better befit the priest than the primate; on Ps. cxiv. he describes
himself as serving a particular church. Both arguments seem a little far-fetched, and
might be opposed on plausible grounds. Both literal and allegorical interpretations
are given. If Basil is found expressing himself in terms similar to those of Eusebius, it is
no doubt because both were inspired by Origen.* The Homily on Psalm i. begins with a
partial quotation from 2 Tim. ili. 16, "“ All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable,” and goes on, ‘‘and was composed by the Spirit to the end that all of us
men, as in a general hospital for souls, may choose each what is best for his own cure.”
For him, Scripture is supreme.® As is noticed on Hom. [X.” of the Hexaemeron, Basil is

’ Ρ Ρ ’
on the whole for the simpler sense. But he was a student of Origen, and he well knows

1 Swete, Doctrine of the Holy Spirit, p.71, who further notes: ‘‘ St. Jerome is severe upon St. Ambrose for copying
Didymus, and says that the Archbishop of Milan had produced ‘ex Grecis bonis Latina non bona.’ The work of the Latin
Father is, however, by no means a mere copy; and other writers besides Didymus are laid under contribution in the argument;
é.g. St. Basil and perhaps St. Athanasius.”

2 Theod. v. 11 in this edition, p. 139; Mansi iii. 486.

8 De Vir. Illust. cxvi. 4 Instit. Div. i. 5 Ecc. Hist. iv. 26.

6 cf. Letter ccxxiii. § 5, p. 264. It is believed that tachygraphy was known from very early times, and Xenophon is said
to have ‘‘ reported”? Socrates by its aid. The first plain mention of a tachygraphist is in a letter of Flavius Philostratus
(A.D.195). It has been thought that the systems in use in the earlier centuries of our era were modifications of a cryptographic
method employed by the Christians to circulate documents in the Church. No examples are extant of an earlier date than the
tenth century, and of these an interesting specimen is the Paris MS. of Hermogenes described by Montfaucon, Pad. Gr.


p.35!. The exact minutes of some of the Councils — e.g. Chalcedon — seem to he due to very successful tachygraphy.
7 Vit. Bas. xii. 4. 8 cf, Fessler, p. 512. 0 of. Epp. cv., clx. § 2, cxceviii. § 3, and cclxiv. § 4. 10 See p. 101.


PROLEGOMENA. xlv


how to use allegory when he thinks fit.1 An example may be observed in Letter
VIII.,* where there is an elaborate allegorisation of the ““ times and the seasons” of
Acts i. 7. An instance of the application of both systems is to be found in the Homily
on Psalm xxviii. (2.6. inA.V. KRIK. The LXX. Title is Ψαλμὸς τῷ Aarid ἐξοδίου σκηνῆς, ** Psal-
mus David tn exitu 6 tabernaculo.” Primarily this is a charge delivered to the priests and
Levites on leaving their sacred cffices. They are to remember all that it is their duty to
prepare for the holy service. Asthey go out of the Tabernacle the psalm tells them all
that it behoves them to have in readiness for the morrow, young rams (Ps. xxix. 1, LXX.),
glory and honour, glory for His name. ‘* But to our minds, as they contemplate high and
lofty things, and by the aid of an interpretation dignified and worthy of Holy Scripture
make the Law our own, the meaning is different. There is no question of ram in flock,
nor tabernacle fashioned of lifeless material, nor departure from the temple. The taber-
nacle for us is this body of ours, as the Apostle has told us in the words, ‘ For we that
are in this tabernacle do groan.’ * The departure from the temple is our quitting this life.
For this these words bid us be prepared, bringing such and such things to the Lord, if the
deeds done here are to be a means to help us on our journey to the life to come.”

This is in the style of exegesis hitherto popular. To hearers familiar with exegesis
of the school of Origen, it is an innovation for Basil to adopt such an exclusively literal
system of exposition as he does,— e.g. in Hom. IX. on the Hexaemeron,— the system which
is one of his distinguishing characteristics. In his common-sense literalism he is thus a
link with the historical school of Antioch, whose principles were in contrast with those of
Origen and the Alexandrians, a school represented by Theodore of Mopsuestia, Dio-
dorus of Tarsus, and later by Theodoret.®

It is remarked by Gregory of Nazianzus in his memorial oration® that Basil used
a threefold method of enforcing Scripture on his hearers and readers. This may be under-
stood to be the literal, moral, and allegorical. Ceillier points out that this description, so
far as we know, applies only to the Homilies on the Psalms.

The praise of the Psalms, prefixed to Psalm i., is a passage of noticeable rhetorical
power and of considerable beauty. Its popularity is shewn by the fact of its being found
in some manuscripts of St. Augustine, and also in the commentary of Rufinus. The
latter probably translated it; portions of it were transcribed by St. Ambrose.7

‘* The prophets,” says St. Basil, ‘‘ the historians, the law, give each a special kind of
teaching, and the exhortation of the proverbs furnishes yet another. But the use and
profit of all are included in the book of Psalms. There is prediction of thing to come.
There our memories are reminded of the past. There laws are laid down for the guidance
of life. There are directions as to conduct. The book, in a word, isa treasury of sound
teaching, and provides for every individual need. It heals the old hurts of souls, and
brings about recovery where the wound is fresh. It wins the part that is sick and
preserves that whichis sound. As far as lies within its power, it destroysthe passions which
lord it in this life in the souls of men. And all this it effects with a musical persuasiveness
and with a gratification that induces wise and wholesome reflexion. The Holy Spirit saw
that mankind was hard to draw to goodness, that our life’s scale inclined to pleasure, and
that so we were neglectful of the right. What plan did He adopt? He combined the
delight of melody with His teaching, to the end that by the sweetness and softness of what
we heard we might, all unawares, imbibe the blessing of the words. He acted like wise
leeches, who, when they would give sour draughts to sickly patients, put honey round about
the cup. So the melodious music of the Psalms has been designed for us, that those who
are boys in years, or at least but lads in ways of life, while they seem to be singing, may
in reality be carrying on the education of the soul. It is not easy for the inattentive to
retain in their memory, when they go home, an injunction of an apostle or prophet; but
the sayings of the Psalms are sung in our houses and travel with us through the streets.


7


1“ Origine sacrifiatt tout au sens mystique Eusébe le farsatt aller de pair avec le sens historique. Comme lui St.
Basile respecte scrupuleusement la lettre; mais comme lui ausst, tl vott sous la lettre tous les mystéres du Nouveau Testament
ef surtout des ensetgnements moraux. Les différents caractéres que présente son interprélation sont un moyen presque
tnfarllible de connaitre la date des ses grands travaux exégétiques. Ausst ne dott-on pas hésiter ἃ assigner aux premticres
années de sa retraite la composition du commentaire d’Isaie, dans lequel domine ἃ peu pres exclusivement Vinterprétation
morale; ἃ sa prétrese celle des homilies sur les Psaumes, oi il donne une égale importance au sens moral et au sens m rystique,
mats en leur sacrifiant sans cesse le sens littéral; @ son épiscopat, enfin. Hexaméron, qui, sans négliger les sens figurés,
S’attache surtout ἃ donner une explication exacte de la lettre.” Fialon, Et Hist. p. 291. The theory is suggestive, but I am
not sure that the prevalence of the literal or of the allegorical is not due less to the period of the composition than to the
objects the writer has in view. 2p. 118. 3 2 Cor. v. 4.

4 Im Allgemeinen und im Grundsatze aber ist Basil gegen die allegorische Erklirungsweise, so oft er sie dann auch
tm Einzelnen anwendet. Bohringer, Basil, p. 116.

5 of. Gieseler i. p. 109. 6 Or. xliii. § 67. 7 Ceillier.


xlvi BASIL.


Let a man begin even to grow savage as some wild beast, and no sooner is he soothed by
psalm-singing than straightway he goes home with passions lulled to calm and quiet by
the music of the song.’

‘¢ A psalm is souls’ calm, herald of peace, hushing the swell and agitation of thoughts.
It soothes the passions of the soul; it brings her license under law. <A psalm is welder of
friendship, atonement of adversaries, reconciliation of haters. Who can regard a man as
his enemy, when they have lifted up one voice to God together? So Psalmody gives us the
best of all boons, love. Psalmody has bethought her of concerted singing as a mighty
bond of union, and links the people together in a symphony of one song. <A psalm puts
fiends to flight, and brings the aid of angels to our side; it is armour in the terrors of the
night; in the toils of the day it is refreshment; to infants it is a protection, to men in life’s
prime a pride, to elders a consolation, to women an adornment. It turns wastes into
homes. It brings wisdom into marts and meetings. ‘To beginners it is an alphabet, to
all who are advancing an improvement, to the perfect aconfirmation. It is the voice of the
church. Itgladdens feasts. It produces godly sorrow. It brings a tear even from a heart of
stone. A psalm is angels’ work, the heavenly conversation, the spiritual sacrifice. Oh, the
thoughtful wisdom of the Instructor Who designed that we should at one and the same
time sing and learn to our profit! It is thus that His precepts are imprinted on our souls.
A lesson that is learned unwillingly is not likely to last, but all that is learned with pleasure
and delight effects a permanent settlement in our souls. What can you not learn from
this source? You may learn magnificent manliness, scrupulous righteousness, dignified
self-control, perfect wisdom. You may learn how to repent, and how far to endure.
What good thing can you not learn? There 15 ἃ complete theology; a foretelling of the
advent of Christ in the flesh; threatening of judgment; hope of resurrection; fear of
chastisement; promise of glory; revelation of mysteries. Everything is stored in the
book of the Psalms as in some vast treasury open to all the world. There are many in-
struments of music, but the prophet has fitted it to the instrument called Psaltery. I think
the reason is that he wished to indicate the grace sounding in him from on high by the gift
of the Spirit, because of all instruments the Psaltery is the only one which has the source of
its sounds above.® . In the case of the cithara and the lyre the metal gives forth its sound at
the stroke of the plectrum from below. The Psaltery has the source of its melodious
strains above. So are we taught to be diligent in seeking the things which are above, and
not to allow ourselves to be degraded by our pleasure in the music to the lusts of the flesh.
And what I think the word of the Prophet profoundly and wisely teaches by means of the
fashion of the instrument is this, —that those whose souls are musical and harmonious
find their road to the things that are above most easy.”


On Psalm xiv. (ἐμ A.V. xv.) the commentary begins:


‘¢ Scripture, with the desire to describe to us the perfect man, the man who is ordained
to be the recipient of blessings, observes a certain order and method in the treatment of
points in him which we may contemplate, and begins from the simplest and most obvious,
‘Lord, who shall sojourn‘ in thy tabernacle?’ A sojourning is a transitory dwelling. It.
indicates a life not settled, but passing, in hope of our removal to the better things. It is
the part of a saint to pass through this world, and to hasten to another life. In this sense
David says of himself, ‘ I am a stranger with thee and a sojourner, as all my fathers were.’ °
Abraham was a sojourner, who did not possess even so much land as to set his foot on,
and, when he needed a tomb, bought one for money.® The word teaches us that so long as
he lives in the flesh he is a sojourner, and, when he removes from this life, rests in his own
home. In this life he sojourns with strangers, but the land which he bought in the tomb
to receive his body is his own. And truly blessed is it, not to rot with things of earth as
though they were one’s own, nor cling to all that is about us here as though here were our
natural fatherland, but to be conscious of the fall from nobler things, and of our passing our
time in heaviness because of the punishment that is laid upon us, just like exiles who for
some crimes’ sake have been banished by the magistrates into regions far from the land
that gave them birth. Hard it is to find a man who will not heed present things as though
they were his own; who knows that he has the use of wealth but for a season; who


1 The English reader is reminded of Congreve’s ‘‘ music”? charming “ the savage breast.” 2cf.p.7, note.

3 Cassiodorus (Pref. in Is. iv.) describes a psalterv shaped like the Greek A, with the sounding board above the strings
which were struck downwards. cf. St. Aug. on Ps. xxxii. and Dict, Bib. s.v.

4A.V.marg.andR.V. The LXX. is παροικήσει. 6 Ps, xaxix. 12. 6¢f. Gen. xxiii. 16, and Acts vii. 16.


“PROLEGOMENA. xlvil


reckons on the brief duration of his health; who remembers that the bloom of human glory
fades away.

ες Who shall sojourn in thy tabernacle?’ The flesh that is given to man’s soul for it
to dwell in is called God’s tabernacle. Who will be found to treat this ftesh as though it
were not his own? Sojourners, when they hire land that is not their own, till the estate
at the will of the owner. So, too, to us the care of the flesh has been entrusted by bond,
for us to toil with diligence therein, and make it fruitful for the use of Him Who gave it.
And if the flesh is worthy of God, it becomes verily a tabernacle of God, accordingly as
He makes His dwelling in the saints. Such is the flesh of the sojourner. ‘ Lord, who
shall sojourn in Thy tabernacle?’ Then there come progress and advance to that which is
more Leeds ‘And who shall dwell in thy holy hill?’ A Jew, in earthly sense, when he
hears of the “ hill,’ turns his thoughts to Sion. ‘ Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?’ The
sojourner in the flesh shall dwell in the holy hill, he shall dwell in that hill, that heavenly
country, bright and splendid, whereof the Apostle says, ‘ Ye are come unto Mount Sion, ᾿
and unto me city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,’ where is the general assembly
of ‘ angels, and church of the firsebouis which are written in heaven.’ ”?


The Second Homily on Psalm xiv. (xv.) has a special interest in view of the denun-
ciation of usury alike in Scripture and in the early Church. The matter had been treated of
at Nicea. With it may be compared Homily VII., De Avaritia.?

After a few words of introduction and reference to the former Homily on the same
Psalm, St. Basil proceeds ; — ‘‘ In depicting the character of the perfect man, of him, that
is, who is ordained to ascend to the life of everlasting peace, the prophet reckons among
his noble deeds his never having given his money upon usury. This particular sin is con-
demned in many passages of Scripture. Ezekiel * reckons taking usury and increase among
the greatest of crimes. The law distinctly utters the prohibition ὁ Thou shalt not lend upon
usury to thy brother’* and tothyneighbour. Againitis said, ‘ Usury upon usury; guile upon
guile.’® And of the city abounding ina multitude of wickednesses, what does the Psalm say?
‘Usury and guile depart not from her streets.’® Now the prophet instances precisely the
same point as characteristic of the perfect man, saying, ‘ He that putteth not out his money.
to usury.’” For in truth it is the last pitch of inhumanity that one man, in need of the bare
necessities of life, should be compelled to borrow, and another, not ee with the prin-
cipal, should seek to make gain and profit for himself out of the calamities of the poor.
The Lord gave His own injunction quite plainly in the words, " from him that would bor-
row of thee turn not thou away.’* But what of the money lover? He sees before him a
man under stress of necessity bent to the ground in supplication. He sees him hesitating
at no act, no words, of humiliation. Hesees him suffering undeserved misfortune, but he
is merciless. He does not reckon that he is a fellow-creature. He does not give in to his
entreaties. He stands stiff andsour. He is moved by no prayers; his resolution is broken
by no tears. He persists in refusal, invoking curses on his own head if he has any money
about him, and swearing that he is himself on the lookout for a friend to furnish
him aloan. He backs lies with oaths, and makes a poor addition to his stock in trade by
supplementing inhumanity with perjury. Then the suppliant mentions interest, and utters
the word security. Allis changed. The frown is relaxed; with a genial smile he recalls
old family connexion. Now it is ‘my friend.’ ‘I will see,’ says he, ‘if I have any
money by me. Yes; there is that sum which a man I know has left in my hands on deposit
for profit. He named very heavy interest. - However, I shall certainly take something off,
and give it you on better terms.’ With pretences of this kind and talk like this he fawns
on the wretched victim, and induces him to swallow the bait. Then he binds him with
written security, adds loss of liberty to the trouble of his pressing poverty, and is off. The
man who has made himself responsible for interest which he cannot pay has accepted vol-
untary slavery for life. Tell me; do you expect to get money and profit out of the pauper?
If he were in a position to add to your wealth, why should he come begging at your door?
He came seeking an ally, and he found a foe. He was looking for medicine, and he
lighted on poison. You ought to have comforted him in his distress, but in your attempt
to grow fruit on the waste you are aggravating his necessity. Just as well might a physi-
cian go in to his patients, and instead of restoring them to health, rob them of the little
strength they might have left. This is the way in which you try to profit by the misery of
the wretched. Just as farmers pray for rain to make their fields fatter, so you are anxious


4 Heb. 2. 22, 23 Sexi. Τῶν 5 Jer, ix. 6, LXX. 7 Ps, xv. δ.
2 cf. note on Basil’s xivth Can. “ Ὁ. 228. 4 Deut. xxiii. 10. 6 Ps, lv. 11, LXX. 8 Matt. v. 42.


xviii BASIL. ᾿


for men’s need and indigence, that your money may make more. You forget that the
addition which you are making to your sins is larger than the increase to your wealth
which you are reckoning on getting for your usury. The seeker of the loan is helpless
either way: he ‘bethinks him of his poverty, he gives up all idea of payment. as hope-
less when at the need of the moment he risks the loan. ‘The borrower bends to necessity
and is beaten. The lender goes off secured by bills and bonds.

ἐς After he has got his money, at first a man is bright and joyous; he shines with
another’s splendour, and is conspicuous by his altered mode of life. His table is lavish ;
his dress is most expensive. His servants appear in finer liveries ; he has flatterers and boon
companions; his rooms are full of drones innumerable. But the money slips away.
Time as it runs on adds the interest to its tale. Now night brings him no rest; no day is
joyous; no sun is bright; he is weary of his life; he hates the days that are hurrying on to
the appointed period; he is afraid of the months, for they are parents of interest. Even
if he sleeps, he sees the lender in his slumbers—a bad dream — standing by his pillow.
If he wakes up, there is the anxiety and dread of the interest. ‘The poor and the
usurer,’ he exclaims, ‘ meet together: the Lord lighteneth both their eyes.’* The lender
runs like a hound after the game. ‘The borrower like a ready prey crouches at the coming
catastrophe, for his penury robs him of the power of speech. Both have their ready-
reckoner in their hands, the one congratulating himself as the interest mounts up, the
other groaning at the growth of his calamities. ‘ Drink waters out of thine own cistern.’ ?
Look, that is to say, at your own resources ; do not approach other men’s springs; provide
your comforts from your own reservoirs. Have you household vessels, clothes, beast of
burden, all kinds of furniture? Sell these. Rather surrender all than lose your liberty.
Ah, but — he rejoins —I am ashamed to put them up for sale. What then do you think
of another’s bringing them out a little later on, and crying your goods, and getting rid of
them for next to nothing before your very eyes? Do not go to another man’s door.
Verily ‘ another man’s well is narrow.’* Better is it to relieve your necessity gradually
by one contrivance after another than after being all in a moment elated by another man’s
means, afterwards to be stripped at once of everything. If you have anything wherewith
to pay, why do you not relieve your immediate difficulties out of these resources? If you
are insolvent, you are only trying to cure ill with ill. Decline to be blockaded by an usurer.
Do not suffer yourself to be sought out and tracked down like another man’s game.‘
Usury is the origin of lying; the beginning of ingratitude, unfairness, perjury. . .


e e e e e e e Φ e e e e e


‘¢ But, you ask, how am Itolive? You have hands. You have acraft. Work for
wages. Go into service. There are many ways of getting a living, many kinds of
resources. You are helpless? Ask those who have means. It is discreditable to ask? It
will be much more discreditable to rob your creditor. I do not speak thus to lay down the
law. I only wish to point out that any course is more advantageous to you than
borrowing.

‘¢ Listen, you rich men, to the kind of advice I am giving to the poor because of your
inhumanity. Far better endure under their dire straits than undergo the troubles tliat are
bred of usury! But if you were obedient to the Lord, what need of these words? What
is the advice of the Master? Lend to those from whom ye do not hope to receive.” And
what kind of loan is this, it is asked, from which all idea of the expectation of repayment
is withdrawn? Consider the force of the expression, and you will be amazed at the
loving kindness of the legislator, When you mean to supply the need of a poor man
for the Lord’s sake, the transaction is at once a gift andaloan. Because there is no
expectation of reimbursement, it is a gift. Yet because of the munificence of the Master,
Who repays on the recipient’s behalf, it is aloan. ‘He that hath pity on the poor
lendeth unto the Lord.’® Do you not wish the Master of the universe to be responsible
for your repayment? If any wealthy man in the town promises you repayment on behalf
of others, do you admit his suretyship? But you do not accept God, Who more than
repays on behalf of the poor. Give the money lying useless, without weighting it with
increase, and both shall be benefited. To you will accrue the security of its safe keeping.
The recipients will have the advantage of its use. And if it is increase which you seek,


1 Prov. xxix. 13, A.V. marg. R.V. has “ oppressor.” 2 Prov. v. 15. 8 Prov. xxiii. 27, LXX.
S@omep ἀλλότριον θήραμα. Ed. Par, Vulg. ὥσπερ ἄλλο τι θήραμα. δ cf. Luke vi. 34, 35. 6 Prov. xix. 17.


PROLEGOMENA. xlix


be satisfied with that which is given by the Lord. He will pay the interest for the poor.
Await the loving-kindness of Him Who is in truth most kind.

‘¢ What you are taking involves the last extremity of inhumanity. You are making your
profit out of misfortune; you are levying a tax upon tears. You are strangling the naked.
You are dealing blows on the starving. There is no pity anywhere, no sense of your
kinship to the hungry; and you call the profit you get from these sources kindly
and humane! Wo unto them that ‘put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter,’' and
call inhumanity humanity! This surpasses even the riddle which Samson _ proposed
to his boon companions: — ‘ Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong
came forth sweetness.’* Out of the inhuman came forth humanity! Men do not gather
grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles,* nor humanity of usury. A corrupt tree bringeth
forth evil fruit.* here are such people as twelve-per-cent-men and ten-per-cent-men: I
shudder to mention their names. They are exactors by the month, like the demons who
produce epilepsy, attacking the poor as the changes of the moon come round.’

ες Here there is an evil grant to either, to giver and to recipient. To the latter, it brings
ruin on his property ; to the former, on his soul. The husbandman, when he has the ear
in store, does not search also for the seed beneath the root; you both possess the fruit
and cannot keep your hands from the principal. You plant where there is no ground.
You reap where there has been no sowing. For whom you are gathering you cannot
tell. The man from whom usury wrings tears is manifest enough; but it is doubtful who
is destined to enjoy the results of the superfluity. You have laid up in store for yourself
the trouble that results from your iniquity, but it is uncertain whether you will not leave
the use of your wealth. to others. Therefore, ‘from him that would borrow of thee,
turn not thou away ;’° and do not give your money upon usury. Learn from both Old
and New Testament what is profitable for you, and so depart hence with good hope to
your Lord; in Him you will receive the interest of your good deeds, — in Jesus Christ our
Lord to Whom be glory and might for ever and ever, Amen.”

iii.) Zhe Commentary on Isaiah. The Commentary on Isaiah is placed by the Bene-
dictine Editors in the appendix of doubtful composition, mainly on the ground of inferiority
of style. Ceillier is strongly in favour of the genuineness of this work, and calls attention
to the fact that it is attested by strong manuscript authority, and by the recognition of St.
Maximus, of John of Damascus, of Simeon Logothetes, of Antony Melissa of Tarasius,
and of the Greek scholiast on the Epistles of St. Paul, who is supposed to be GEcumenius.
Fessler ’ ranks the work among those of doubtful authority on the ground of the silence of
earlier Fathers and of the inferiority of style, as well as of apparent citations from the Com-
mentary of Eusebius, and of some eccentricity of opinion. He conjectures that we may
possibly have here the rough material of a proposed work on Isaiah, based mainly on Origen,
which was never completed. Garnier regards it as totally unworthy of St. Basil. Maran
(Vet. Bas. 42) would accept it, and refutes objections.

Among the remarks which have seemed frivolous is the comment on Is. xi. 12, that
the actual cross of the Passion was prefigured by the four parts of the universe joining in
the midst. Similar objections have been taken to the statement that the devils like rich
fare, and crowd the idols’ temples to enjoy the sacrificial feasts.° On the other hand it has
been pointed out that this ingenuity in finding symbols of the cross is of a piece with that
of Justin Martyr,'® who cites the yard on the mast, the plough, and the Roman trophies,
and that Gregory of Nazianzus"’ instances the same characteristic of the devils. While
dwelling on the holiness of character required for the prophetic offices, the Commentary
points out '* that sometimes it has pleased God to grant it to Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar
for the sake of their great empires; to Caiaphas as the high priest; to Balaam, because of
the exigencies of the crisis at which he appeared. The unchaste lad’* who has some great
sin upon his conscience shrinks from taking his place among the faithful, and is ashamed
to rank himself with the weepers. So he tries to avoid the examination of those whose
duty it is to enquire into sins '* and he invents excuses for leaving the church before the
celebration of the mysteries. The Commentary urges’® that without penitence the best con-
duct is unavailing for salvation ; that God requires of the sinner not merely the abandonment


115. v. 20. 2 Judges xiv. 14. 3 Matt. vii. 16. 4 of, Matt. vil. 18.
5 On the connexion between σεληνιασμός and ἐπιληψία, cf. Origen iii. §75-577, and Cesarius, Dvest.so. On the special
attribution of epilepsy to demoniacal influence illustrated by the name ἱερὰ νόσος, see Hippocrates, De Morbo Sacro.
6 Matt. v. 42. 1 Patr.i. 522. 8 § 249. 9 § 236. 10 Apol. i. ὃ 72.
11 Carm. 11, Epig. 28: Δαίμοσιν εἰλαπίναζον, ὅσοις τοπάροιθε μέμηλει
: Δαίμοσιν ἦρα φέρειν, ov καθαρὰς Ovaias.
12.8.4. cf. § 199. 13 § το. 14 id, ὄκνος εἰς προφάσεις πεπλασμένας ἐπινοῶν πρὸς τοὺς ἐπιζητοῦντας. 1δ § 34, 278.


xviii BASIL.


for men’s need and indigence, that your money may make more. You forget that the
addition which you are making to your sins is larger than the increase to your wealth
which you are reckoning on getting for your usury. The seeker of the loan is helpless
either way: he ‘bethinks him of his poverty, he gives up all idea of payment. as hope-
less when at the need of the moment he risks the loan. ‘The borrower bends to necessity
and is beaten. The lender goes off secured by bills and bonds.

ἐς After he has got his money, at first a man is bright and joyous; he shines with
another’s splendour, and is conspicuous by his altered mode of life. His table is lavish ;
his dress is most expensive. His servants appear in finer liveries ; he has flatterers and boon
companions; his rooms are full of drones innumerable. But the money slips away.
Time as it runs on adds the interest to its tale. Now night brings him no rest; no day is
joyous; no sun is bright; he is weary of his life; he hates the days that are hurrying on to
the appointed period; he is afraid of the months, for they are parents of interest. Even
if he sleeps, he sees the lender in his slumbers—a bad dream — standing by his pillow.
If he wakes up, there is the anxiety and dread of the interest. ‘The poor and the
usurer,’ he exclaims, ‘ meet together: the Lord lighteneth both their eyes.’+ The lender
runs like a hound after the game. ‘The borrower like a ready prey crouches at the coming
catastrophe, for his penury robs him of the power of speech. Both have their ready-
reckoner in their hands, the one congratulating himself as the interest mounts up, the
other groaning at the growth of his calamities. ‘ Drink waters out of thine own cistern.’ ?
Look, that is to say, at your own resources; do not approach other men’s springs; provide
your comforts from your own reservoirs. Have you household vessels, clothes, beast of
burden, all kinds of furniture? Sell these. Rather surrender all than lose your liberty.
Ah, but — he rejoins —I am ashamed to put them up for sale. What then do you think
of another’s bringing them out a little later on, and crying your goods, and getting rid of
them for next to nothing before your very eyes? Do not go to another man’s door.
Verily ‘ another man’s well is narrow.’* Better is it to relieve your necessity gradually
by one contrivance after another than after being all in a moment elated by another man’s
means, afterwards to be stripped at once of everything. If you have anything wherewith
to pay, why do you not relieve your immediate difficulties out of these resources? If you
are insolvent, you are only trying to cure ill with ill. Decline to be blockaded by an usurer.
Do not suffer yourself to be sought out and tracked down like another man’s game.‘
Usury is the origin of lying; the beginning of ingratitude, unfairness, perjury. . . .


‘¢ But, you ask, how am I to live? You have hands. You havea craft. Work for
wages. Go into service. There are many ways of getting a living, many kinds of
resources. You are helpless? Ask those who have means. It is discreditable to ask? It
will be much more discreditable to rob your creditor. I do not speak thus to lay down the
law. I only wish to point out that any course is more advantageous to you than
borrowing.

‘¢ Listen, you rich men, to the kind of advice I am giving to the poor because of your
inhumanity. Far better endure under their dire straits than undergo the troubles that are
bred of usury! But if you were obedient to the Lord, what need of these words? What
is the advice of the Master? Lend to those from whom ye do not hope to receive.” And
what kind of loan is this, it is asked, from which all idea of the expectation of repayment
is withdrawn? Consider the force of the expression, and you will be amazed at the
loving kindness of the legislator. When you mean to supply the need of a poor man
for the Lord’s sake, the transaction is at once a gift andaloan. Because there is no
expectation of reimbursement, it is a gift. Yet because of the munificence of the Master,
Who repays on the recipient’s behalf, it is aloan. ‘He that hath pity on the poor
lendeth unto the Lord.’*® Do you not wish the Master of the universe to be responsible
for your repayment? [ any wealthy man in the town promises you repayment on behalf
of others, do you admit his suretyship? But you do not accept God, Who more than
repays on behalf of the poor. Give the money lying useless, without weighting it with
increase, and both shall be benefited. To you will accrue the security of its safe keeping.
The recipients will have the advantage of its use. And if it is increase which you seek,


1 Prov. xxix. 13, A.V. marg. R.V. has “ oppressor.” 2 Prov. v. 15. 8 Prov. xxiii. 27, LXX.
4 ὥσπερ ἀλλότριον θήραμα. Ed. Par, Vulg. ὥσπερ ἄλλο τι θήραμα. 5 cof. Luke vi. 34, 35. 6 Prov. xix. 17.


PROLEGOMENA. xlix


be satisfied with that which is given by the Lord. He will pay the interest for the poor.
Await the loving-kindness of Him Who is in truth most kind.

‘¢ What you are taking involves the last extremity of inhumanity. You are making your
profit out of misfortune; you are levying a tax upon tears. You are strangling the naked.
You are dealing blows on the starving. There is no pity anywhere, no sense of your
kinship to the hungry; and you call the profit you get from these sources kindly
and humane! Wo unto them that ‘put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter,’' and
call inhumanity humanity! This surpasses even the riddle which Samson proposed
to his boon companions: — ‘ Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong
came forth sweetness.’? Out οἵ the inhuman came forth humanity! Men do not gather
grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles,* nor humanity of usury. A corrupt tree bringeth
forth evil fruit.* There are such people as twelve-per-cent-men and ten-per-cent-men: I
shudder to mention their names. They are exactors by the month, like the demons who
produce epilepsy, attacking the poor as the changes of the moon come round.’

ἐς Flere there is an evil grant to either, to giver and to recipient. To the latter, it brings
ruin on his property ; to the former, on his soul. The husbandman, when he has the ear
in store, does not search also for the seed beneath the root; you both possess the fruit
and cannot keep your hands from the principal. You plant where there is no ground.
You reap where there has been no sowing. For whom you are gathering you cannot
tell. The man from whom usury wrings tears is manifest enough; but it is doubtful who
is destined to enjoy the results of the superfluity. You have laid up in store for yourself
the trouble that results from your iniquity, but it is uncertain whether you will not leave
the use of your wealth. to others. Therefore, ‘from him that would borrow of thee,
turn not thou away ;’* and do not give your money upon usury. Learn from both Old
and New Testament what is profitable for you, and so depart hence with good hope to
your Lord; in Him you will receive the interest of your good deeds, — in Jesus Christ our
Lord to Whom be glory and might for ever and ever, Amen.”

(iii.) Zhe Commentary on Lsatah. The Commentary on Isaiah is placed by the Bene-
dictine Editors in the appendix of doubtful composition, mainly on the ground of inferiority
of style. Ceillier is strongly in favour of the genuineness of this work, and calls attention
to the fact that it is attested by strong manuscript authority, and by the recognition of St.
Maximus, of John of Damascus, of Simeon Logothetes, of Antony Melissa of Tarasius,
and of the Greek scholiast on the Epistles of St. Paul, who is supposed to be GEcumenius.
Fessler ’ ranks the work among those of doubtful authority on the ground of the silence of
earlier Fathers and of the inferiority of style, as well as of apparent citations from the Com-
mentary of Eusebius, and of some eccentricity of opinion. He conjectures that we may
possibly have here the rough material of a proposed work on Isaiah, based mainly on Origen,
which was never completed. Garnier regards it as totally unworthy of St. Basil. Maran
(Vet. Bas. 42) would accept it, and refutes objections.

Among the remarks which have seemed frivolous is the comment on Is. xi. 12, that
the actual cross of the Passion was prefigured by the four parts of the universe joining in
the midst.° Similar objections have been taken to the statement that the devils like rich
fare, and crowd the idols’ temples to enjoy the sacrificial feasts.° On the other hand it has
been pointed out that this ingenuity in finding symbols of the cross is of a piece with that
of Justin Martyr,'® who cites the yard on the mast, the plough, and the Roman trophies,
and that Gregory of Nazianzus*!’ instances the same characteristic of the devils. While
dwelling on the holiness of character required for the prophetic offices, the Commentary
points out '? that sometimes it has pleased God to grant it to Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar
for the sake of their great empires; to Caiaphas as the high priest; to Balaam, because of
the exigencies of the crisis at which he appeared. The unchaste lad’ who has some great
sin upon his conscience shrinks from taking his place among the faithful, and is ashamed
to rank himself with the weepers. So he tries to avoid the examination of those whose
duty it is to enquire into sins '* and he invents excuses for leaving the church before the
celebration of the mysteries. The Commentary urges’ that without penitence the best con-
duct is unavailing for salvation ; that God requires of the sinner not merely the abandonment


1Is. v. 20. 2 Judges xiv. 14. 3 Matt. vii. 16. 4 of. Matt. vii. 18.
5 On the connexion between σεληνιασμός and ἐπιληψία, cf. Origen iii. §75-577, and Cesarius, Dvest.50. On the special
attribution of epilepsy to dzmoniacal influence illustrated by the name ἱερὰ vooo;, see Hippocrates, De Morbo Sacro.
Matt. v. 42. 7 Patr. i. 522. 8 § 249. 9 § 236. 10 Apol. i. § 72.
1 Carm. 11, Epig. 28: Δαίμοσιν εἰλαπίναζον, ὅσοις τοπάροιθε μέμηλει
. Aaiuoo pa φέρειν, οὐ καθαρὰς Θυσίας.


128 4. cf. § 199. 13 § 19. 147d, ὄκνος εἰς προφάσεις πεπλασμένας ἐπινοῶν πρὸς τοὺς ἐπιζητοῦντας. 15 5.34, 278.


I BASIL.


of the sinful part, but also the amends of penance, and warns men * that they must not dream
that the grace of baptism will free them from the obligation to live a godly life. The value
of tradition is insisted on.” Every nation, as well as every church, is said to have its own
guardian angel.®

The excommunication reserved for certain gross sins is represented * as a necessary
means enjoined by St. Paul to prevent the spread of wickedness. It is said® to be an old
tradition that on leaving Paradise Adam went to live in Jewry, and there died ; that after
his death, his skull appearing bare, it was carried to a certain place hence named ‘* place
of a skull,” and that for this reason Jesus Christ, Who came to destroy death’s kingdom,
willed to die on the spot where the first fruits of mortality were interred.®

On Is. v. 14, ** Hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure,” ’
it is remarked that these are figurative expressions to denote the multitude of souls that
perish. At the same time an alternative literal meaning is admitted, the mouth being the
opening through which the souls of the damned are precipitated into a dark region beneath
the earth.

It is noted in some MSS. that the Commentary was given to the world by an anony-
mous presbyter after St. Basil’s death, who may have abstained from publishing it because
it was in an unfinished state. Erasmus was the first to undertake to print it, and to trans-
late it into Latin, but he went no further than the preface. It was printed in Paris in 1556
by Tilmann, with a lengthy refutation of the objections of Erasmus.*


III. Ascetic.


(i) Of the works comprised under this head, the first are the three compositions
entitled Zractatus Previt. The first, Previa Institutio ascetica (᾽ Ασκητικὴ προδιατύπωσις) , 15
an exhortation to enlistment in the sacred warfare; the second, on renunciation of the world
and spiritual perfection, is the Sermo asceticus (λόγος ἀσκητικός). The third, Sermo de as-
celica disciplina (λόγος περὶ ἀσκήσεως, πῶς δεὶ κοσμέισθαι τὸν μοναχόν)» treats of the virtues to be
exhibited in the life of the solitary.

The first of the three is a commendation less of monasticism than of general Christian
endurance. It has been supposed to have been written in times of special oppression and
persecution.

The second discourse is an exhortation to renunciation of the world. Riches are to
be abandoned to the poor. The highest life is the monastic. But this is not to be hastily
and inconsiderately embraced. ΤῸ renounce monasticism and return to the world is
derogatory to a noble profession. The idea of pleasing God in the world as well as out of
it is, for those who have once quitted it, a delusion. God has given mankind the choice of
two holy estates, marriage or virginity. The law which bids us love God more than father,
mother, or self, more than wife and children, is as binding in wedlock as in celibacy.
Marriage indeed demands the greater watchfulness, for it offers the greater temptations.
Monks are to be firm against all attempts to shake their resolves. They will do well to
put themselves under the guidance of some good man of experience and pious life, learned
in the Scriptures, loving the poor more than money, superior to the seductions of flattery,
and loving God above all things. Specific directions are given for the monastic life, and
monks are urged to retirement, silence, and the study of the Scriptures.

The third discourse, which is brief, is a summary of similar recommendations. The
monk ought moreover to labour with his hands, to reflect upon the day of judgment, to suc-
cour the sick, to practise hospitality, to read books of recognized genuineness, not to
dispute about the doctrine of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but to believe in and confess
an uncreate and consubstantial Trinity.

(11) Next in order come the Prowmium de Fudtcio Det (προοΐμιον περὶ κρίματος Θεοῦ) and
the De Fide (περὶ πίστεως). These treatises were prefixed by Basil to the Moralia. He

1 § 309. 2cf. De Sp. S.p. ᾿ 8 § 240. 4§ 55. 5§ 141.

6 The tradition that Adam’s skull was found at the foot of the cross gave rise to the frequent representation of a skull in
Christian art. Instances are given by Mr. Jameson, Hist. of our Lord,i.22. Jeremy Taylor, (Life of our Lord, Part iii. ὃ xv.)
quotes Nonnus (7772 Joann. xix. 17): °

Εἰσόκε χῶρον ἵκανε φατιζομένοιο κρανίον
Αδὰμ πρωτογόνοιο φερώνυμον ἄντυγι κόρσης.

cf. Origen, Jn Matt.Tract. 35, and Athan, De Pass. et Cruc. Jerome speaks of the tradition in reference to its association
with the words *‘ As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive,’ as “" smooth to the ear, but not true.”” One version
of the tale was that Noah took Adam’s bones with him in the ark; that on Ararat they were divided, and the head fell to Seth’s


share. This he buried at Golgotha. cf. Fabricius i. 61.
TLXX. ἐπλάτυνεν ὁ ‘Adys τὴν φυχὴν αὐτοῦ καὶ διήνοιξε τὸ στόμα αὐτοῦ. 8.cf, Ceillier VI. viii. 2.


PROLEGOMENA. li


states that, when he enquired into the true causes of the troubles which weighed heavily
on the Church, he could only refer them to breaches of the commandments of God.
Hence the divine punishment, and the need of observing the Divine Law. The apostle
says that what is needed is faith working by love. So St. Basil thought it necessary to append
an exposition of the sound faith concerning the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and
so pass in order to morals.! It has, however, been supposed by some ? that the composition
published in the plan as the De Fide is not the original tract so entitled, but a letter on
the same subject written, if not during the episcopate, at least in the presbyterate. This
view has been supported by the statement ** Thus we believe and baptize.” °

This, however, might be said generally of the custom obtaining in the Church, without
reference to the writer’s own practice. Certainly the document appears to have no con-
nexion with those among which it stands, and to be an answer to some particular request
for a convenient summary couched in scriptural terms.* Hence it does not contain the
Homoousion, and the author gives his reason for the omission — an omission which, he
points out, is in contrast with his other writings against heretics.* Obviously, therefore,
this composition is to be placed in his later life. Yet he describes the De /de as being
anterior to the AZoralia.

It will be remembered that this objection to the title and date of the extant De fzde
implies nothing against its being the genuine work of the archbishop.

While carefully confining himself to the language of Scripture, the author points out
that even with this aid, Faith, which he defines as an impartial assent to what has been
revealed to us by the gift of God,® must necessarily be dark and incomplete. God can
only be clearly known in heaven, when we shall see Him face to face.’ The statement that
had been requested is as follows:

‘© We believe and confess one true and good God, Father Almighty, of Whom are all
things, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: and His one Only-begotten Son,
our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, only true, through Whom all things were made, both visible
and invisible, and by Whom all things consist : Who was in the beginning with God and was
God, and, after this, according to the Scriptures, was seen on earth and had His conversa-
tion with men: Who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be equal with
God, but emptied Himself, and by means of the birth from a virgin took a servant’s form,
and was formed in fashion as a man, and fulfilled all things written with reference to Him
and about Him, according to His Father’s commandment, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross. And on the third day He rose from the dead, according to
the Scriptures, and was seen by His holy disciples, and the rest, as it is written: And He
ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of His Father, whence He is coming
at the end of this world, to raise all men, and to give to every man according to his con-
duct. Then the just shall be taken up into life eternal and the kingdom of heaven, but
the sinner shall be condemned to eternal punishment, where their worm dieth not and the
fire is not quenched: And in one Holy Ghost, the Comforter, in Whom we were sealed to
the day of redemption: The Spirit of truth, the Spirit of adoption, in Whom we cry, Abba,
Father ; Who divideth and worketh the gifts that come of God, to each one for our good, as
He will; Who teaches and calls to remembrance all things that He has heard from the
Son; Who is good; Who guides us into all truth, and confirms all that believe, both in
sure knowledge and accurate confession, and in pious service and spiritual and true worship
of God the Father, and of His only begotten Son our Lord, and of Himself.” ®

(iii) The Moralia (τὰ ἠθικά) is placed in 361, in the earlier days of the Anomean
heresy. Shortly before this time the extreme Arians began to receive this name,’ and it is
on the rise of the Anomaeans that Basil is moved to write. The work comprises eighty
Rules of Life, expressed in the words of the New Testament, with special reference to the
needs of bishops, priests, and deacons, and of all persons occupied in education.

Penitence consists not only in ceasing to sin, but in expiating sin by tears and morti-
fication.’ Sins of ignorance are not free from peril of judgment."

Sins into which we feel ourselves drawn against our will are the results of sins to
which we have consented.'? Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost consists in attributing


1 De Fud. Dei. § 8. 2 cf. Ceillier VI. viii. 3.
“ - oe ΄, ’ ΄ . of x ‘ ᾽ ν ᾿ - -“ ᾿ « a - , - ’ ΄
8 οὕτως φρονοῦμεν καὶ οὕτως Βαπτίζομεν εἰς Τοιάδα ὁμοούσιον, κατὰ τὴν ἐντολὴν αὐτοῦ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ εἰπόντος
πορευθέντες μαθητεύσατε K.T.A. §; the co-essential Trinity being described as involved in the baptismal formula.
4 I 5


6 συγκατάθεσις ἀδιάκρ᾽ τος τῶν ἀκουσθεντων ἐν πληοοφοοία τῆς ἀληθείας τῶν κηρυχθέντων Θεοῦ γάριτι. § 1. 7§ 2.
8 The rest of the clavse seems t» be rather in the way of explanation and assertion, and here he explains, as cited before,
that the baptismal formula involves the homoousion.


th., De Syn. § 31, in this series, p. 467. 10 Reg. i. il Reg. ix. 12 Reg. xi.


Le)


lit BASIL.


to the devil the good works which the Spirit of God works in our brethren.’ We ought
carefully to examine whether the doctrine offered us is conformable to Scripture, and if
not, to reject it.” Nothing must be added to the inspired words of God; all that is
outside Scripture is not of faith, but is sin.*

(iv) The Regule fusius tractate (ὅροι κατὰ πλάτος)» 55 in number, and the Regule
brevius tractat@e (ὅροι κατ᾽ ἐπιτομήν), in number 313, are a series of precepts for the guid-
ance of religious life put in the form of question and answer. The former are invariably
supported by scriptural authority. |

Their genuineness is confirmed by strong external evidence.* Gregory of Nazianzus
(Or. xliii. § 34) speaks of Basil’s composing rules for monastic life, and in 4A. vi. intimates
that he helped his friend in their composition.® Rufinus (//.Z. ii. 9) mentions Basil’s
LInstituta Monachorum. St. Jerome (De Vir. zllust. cxvi.) says that Basil wrote
τὸ ἄσκητικόν, and Photius (Cod. 191) describes the Ascetécum as including the /egule.
Sozomen (27... iii. 14) remarks that the /?egule were sometimes attributed to Eusta-
thius of Sebaste, but speaks of them as generally recognised as St. Basil’s.

The monk who relinquishes his status after solemn profession and adoption is to be
regarded as guilty of sacrilege, and the faithful are warned against all intercourse with
him, with a reference to 2 Thess. iii. 14.°

Children are not to be received from their parents except with full security for pub-
licity in their reception. They are to be carefully instructed in the Scriptures. They are
not to be allowed to make any profession till they come to years of discretion (XV.). Tem-
perance is a virtue, but the servants of God are not to condemn any of God’s creatures as un-
clean, and are to eat what is given them. (XVIII.) Hospitality is to be exercised with the
utmost frugality and moderation, and the charge to Martha in Luke x. 41, is quoted with the
reading ὀλίγων δέ ἐστι χρεία ἢ ἑνός ἦ and the interpretation “few,” namely for provision, and one,”
namely the object in view, —enough for necessity. It would be as absurd for monks to change
the simplicity of their fare on the arrival of a distinguished guest as it would be for them to
change their dress (XX.). Rule XXI. is against unevangelical contention for places at table,
and Rule XXII. regulates the monastic habit. The primary object of dress is said to be
shewn by the words of Genesis,*® where God is said to have made Adam and Eve ‘‘coats
of skins,” or, as inthe LXX., χιτῶνας δερματίνους, z.e. tunics of hides. This use of tunics was
enough for covering what was unseemly. But later another object was added — that of
securing warmth by clothing. So we must keep both ends in view — decency, and pro-
tection against the weather. Among articles of dress some are very serviceable; some are
less so. It is better to select what is most useful, so as to observe the rule of poverty, and


1 Reg. xxxv. 2 Reg. xxviii.

8 Iteg. 1xxx. § 22, Fessler (De Pat, Sec. iv. p. 514) notes the similarity of a Homily, De perfectione vite Monachorum,
published under the name of St. Basil in a book published by C. F.Matthzi at Moscow in 1775, entitled Yoannis Xiphilini
et Basilit M. aliquot orationes. He describes it as quite unworthy in style of St. Basil.

4 Combetis, however, refused to accept them. 5 In this series, p. 448. :

6 With this may be compared the uncompromising denunciation in Lefer cclxxxviii., and what is said in the first of the
three Tractatus Previt, It has been represented that St. Basil introduced the practice of irrevocable vows. cf. Dr. Travers
Smith, δὲ, Basi7, p. 223. De Broglie, L’Eglise et empire, v. 180: ‘ Avant lui, Cétatt, aux yeux de beaucoup de ceux méme
gui s’y destinatent, une vocation Libre, Hine de goutet de zéle, pouvant étre dilatssée a volonté, comme elle avatt été em-
brassée par chots. Le sceau dela perpetuité obligatotre, ce fut Basile qui Vinprima; cest a lut réellement que remonte,
comme réglé commune, et comme habttude générale, Vinstitution des veux perpétuels. WHelyot, Hist, des ordres monastigues,
i, § 3, Bultean, //ist. des motnes d’orient, p. 402, Montalembert, 2715}. des moines d’occident, i. 108, s’accordent a reconnaitre
gue Pusage général des veux perpétuels remonte a St. Basil.’ To St. Basil’s posthumous influence the system may be due.
But it seems questionable whether St. Basil’s AuJe included formal vows of perpetual obligation in the more modern sense. I
ain not quite sure that_the passages cited fully bear this out. Isthe earnest exhortation not to quit the holier life consistent
with a binding pledge? Would not a more distinctly authoritative tone be adopted? cf. Letters xiv. and xlvi. Itis plain that
a reminder was needed, and that the plea was possible that the profession had not the binding force of matrimony. The line
taken is rather that a monk or nun ough? to remain in his or her profession, and that it is a grievous sin to abandon it, than
that there is an irrevocable contract. Soin the Sermo asceticus (it is not universally accepted), printed by Garnier between


_ the Moralia andthe Regula, it is said: «* Before the profession of the religious life, any one is at liberty to get the yood


of this life, in accordance with law and Custom, and to give himself to the yoke of wedlock. But when he has been enlisted, of
his own consent, it is fitting (προσήκει) that he keep himself for God, as one of the sacred offerings, so that he may not risk
incurring the damnation of sacrilege, by defiling in the service of this world the body consecrated bv promise to God.” This
πγοχήκει IS repeated in the Regule. Basil’s monk, says Fialon (Et. Hist., Pp. 49) was irrevocably bound by the laws of the
Church, by public opinion, and, st¢/77 more, by his conscience. It is tothe last that the founder of the organisation seems to
appeal. In Letter x\vi. the reproach is not addressed merely to a “" religicuse échappée de son cloitre,” as De Broglie has it, but to
anun guilty of unchastity. Vows of virginity were among the earliest of religious obligations. (¢f. J. Martyr, Apoé.i. 15,
Athenyaras, Legat. 32, Origen, C. Celsum. vii. 48.)

Basil (Can. xviii.) punishes a breach of the vow of virginity as he does adultery, but it was not till the Benedictine rule
was established in Eurone that it was generally regarded as absolutely irrevocable. (cf. D.C.A.s.v. “ Nun,” ii. p. 1411, and
FC: Lev’s History of Celibacy, Philadelphia, 1867.) Asa matter of fact, Basil’s ccenobitic monasticism, in comparison with
the ““ wilder and more dreamy asceticism which prevailed ip Egypt and Syria” (Milman, //7st. Chr7st. iii. 109). was “‘ far more
moderate and practical.” It was a community of self-denying practical beneficence. Work and worship were to aid one
another. This was the highest life, and to quit it was desertion of and disloyalty to neighbour and God. To Basil, is it not
rather the violation of holiness than the technical breach of a formal vow which is sacrilege? Lea (p. 101) quotes Epiphanius
(Panar. 61) as saving that it was better for a lapsed monk to take a lawful wife and be reconcived to the church through
Penance. Basil in Can. ]x. (p. 256) contemplates a similar reconciliation,

7 Supported by XX, B, C, and L. 8 jii. 21.


PROLEGOMENA. liii


to avoid a variety of vestments, some for show, others for use; some for day, some for
night. “A single garment must be devised to serve for all purposes, and for night as well
as day. As the soldier is known by his uniform, and the senator by his robe, so the Chris-
tian ought to have his own dress. Shoes are to be provided on the same principle, they
are tobe simple andcheap. The girdle (XXIII.) is regarded asa necessary article of dress,
not only because of its practical utility, but because of the example of the Lord Who
girded Himself. In Rule XXVI. all secrets are ordered to be confided to the superintendent
or bishop.’ If the superintendent himself is in error (X XVII.) he is to be corrected by other
brothers. Vicious brethren (X XVIII.) are to be cut off like rotten limbs. Self-exaltation
and discontent are equally to be avoided (XXIX.). XXXVII. orders that devotional exercise
is to be no excuse for idleness and shirking work. Work is to be done not only as a chas-
tisement of the body, but for the sake of love to our neighbour and supplying weak and sick
brethren with the necessaries of life. The apostle? says that if a man will not work he
must not eat. Daily work is as necessary as daily bread. The services of the day are thus
marked out. The first movements of heart and mind ought to be consecrated to God.
Therefore early in the morning nothing ought to be planned or purposed before we have


been gladdened by the thought of God; as it is written, “61 remembered God, and was ~~


gladdened;’”’* the body is not to be set to work before we have obeyed the command,
Ὁ Lord, in the morning shalt thou hear my voice; in the morning will I order my
prayer unto thee.” * Again at the third hour there is to be a rising up to prayer, and the
brotherhood is to be called together, even though they happen to have been dispersed to
rarious works. The sixth hour is also to be marked by prayer, in obedience to the words
of the Psalmist,’ “" Evening, and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud: and
He shall hear my voice.” ‘l’o ensure deliverance from the demon of noon-day,® the XCIst
Psalm is to be recited. The ninth hour is consecrated to prayer by the example of the
Apostles’ Peter and John, who at that hour went up into the Temple to pray. Now the day
is done. For all the boons of the day, and the good deeds of the day, we must give thanks.
For omissions there must be confession. For sinus voluntary or involuntary, or unknown, we
must appease God in prayer.® At nightfall the XCIst Psalm is to be recited again, mid-
night is to be observed in abedience to the example of Paul and Silas,’ and the injunction of
the Psalmist."° Before dawn we should rise and pray again, as it is written, ‘¢ Mine eyes
prevent the night watches.” "’ Here the canonical hours are marked, but no details are~
given as to the forms of prayer. Lene aS

XL. deals with the abuse of holy places and solemn assemblies. Christians ought not
to appear in places sacred to martyrs or in their neighbourhood for any other reason than to
pray and commemorate the sacred dead. Anything like a worldly festival or common-
mart at such times is like the sacrilege of the money changers in the Temple precincts.”

LI. gives directions for monastic discipline. ** Let the superintendent exert discipline
after the manner of a physician treating his patients. He is not angry with the sick, but
fights with the disease, and sets himself to combat their bad symptoms. If need be, he
must heal the sickness of the soul by severer treatment; for example, love of vain glory,
by the imposition of lowly tasks; foolish talking, by silence; immoderate sleep, by watch-
ing and prayer; idleness, by tcil; gluttony, by fasting; murmuring, by seclusion, so that
no brothers may work with the offender, nor admit him to participation in their works, till
by his penitence that needeth not to be ashamed he appear to be rid of his complaint.”

LV. expounds at some length the doctrine of original sin, to which disease and death
are traced. :

The 313 Regule brevius tractate@ are, like the Regule fustus tractate, inthe form of
questions and answers. Fessler singles out as a striking specimen XXXIV.

Q. ‘* How is any one to avoid the sin of man-pleasing, and looking to the praises of
men?”

A. ** There must be a full conviction of the presence of God, an earnest intention to


1 τῷ προεστῶτι. cf. Just. Mart. Apol. i. ὃ 87. 22 Thess. iii. το. 3 Ps. lxxvii. 3, LXX. εν Τῆς a Ps. ly. 17:

6 Ps. xci. 6, LXX. δαιμόνιον μεσημβρινόν, cf. Jer. Taylor, Serm. ii. pt. 2: ‘ Suidas’? (Col. 1227) “teils of certain
empusez that used to appear a noon, at such times as the Greeks did celebrate the funerals of the dead; and at this time some
of the Russians do fear the noon-day devil, which appeareth like a mourning widow to reapers of hay and corn, and uses to
break their arms and legs unless they worship her.” 7 Acts iii. 1.

8 cf. Pythag. Aur. Carm. 40 (quoted by Jer. Taylor in Holy Living and Holy Dying): μηδ᾽ ὕπνον μαλακοῖσιν én’ ὄμμασι
προσδέξασθαι, Tov τὼν ἡμερινὼν ἔργων τρὶς ἕκαστον ἐπελθεῖν, πῆ παρέβην ; τί δ᾽ ἔρεξα ; τί μοι δέον οὐκ ἐτελέσθη.

9 Acts xvi. 25. 10 Ps. cxix. 62. 11 Ps. cxix. 148.

12 cf, Letter clxix. and notes on this case in the Prolegomena. It is curious to notice in the Oriental church a survival of
something akin to the irreverence deprecated by St. Basil. A modern traveller in Russia has told me that on visiting a great
cemetery on the day which the Greek church observes, like November 2 in the Latin, in memory of the dead, he found a vast
and cheerful picnic going on.


liv BASH,’


please Him, and a burning desire for the blessings promised by the Lord. No ong before
his Master’s very eyes is excited into dishonouring his Master and bringing condemnation
on himself, to please a fellow servant.”

XLVII. points out that it is a grave error to be silent when a brother sins.

XLIX. tells us that vain gloriousness (τὸ περπερεύεσθα. Cf. τ Cor. xiii. 4) consists in
taking things not for use, but for ostentation ; and L. illustrates this principle in the case
of dress.

Q. ‘¢ When a man has abandoned all more expensive clothing, does he sin, and, if so,
how, if he wishes his cheap upper garment or shoes to be becoming to him?”

A. ‘*Ifhe so wishes in order to gratify men, he is obviously guilty of the sin of man-
pleasing. He is alienated from God, and is guilty of vain glory even in these cheap
belongings.”

LXIV. is a somewhat lengthy comment on Matt. xviii. 6. To “ὁ make to offend,”
or ‘‘ to scandalize,” is to induce another to break the law, as the serpent Eve, and Eve
Adam.

LXXXIII. is pithy.

(ΤΕ a man is generally in the right, and falls intoone sin. how are we to treat
him?”

aA As the Lord treated Peter.”

CXXVIII. is on fasting.

Q. ‘‘Ought any one to be allowed to exercise abstinence beyond his strength, so that
he is hindered in the performance of his duty?”

A. ‘This question does not seein to me to be properly worded. Temperance?’ does
not consist in abstinence from earthly food,” wherein lies the ‘neglecting of the body’ ὅ
condemned by the Apostles, but in complete departure from one’s own wishes. And how
great is the danger of our falling away from the Lord’s commandment on account of our
own wishes is clear from the words of the Apostle, ‘ fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and
of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath.’” * The numbers in the Coenobium
are not to fall below ten, the number of the eaters of the Paschal supper.’ Nothing is to
be considered individual and personal property. Even a man’s thoughts are not his
own.’ Private friendships are harmful to the general interests of the community.® At
meals there is to be a reading, which is to be thought more of than mere material food.?
The cultivation of the ground is the most suitable occupation for the ascetic life.’° No fees
are to be taken for the charge of children entrusted to the monks."* Such children are not
be pledged to join the community till they are old enough to understand what they are
about.”


1 ἐγκράτεια. Gal, v. 23.

2 ἄλογα βρώματα. Coimbefis translates “ terrent cibt.”? Garnier “ urhil ad rem pertinentium,” 3 Col. ii, 23.

4 Eph. ii. 3. 5 Sermo Asceticus, 3. 6 Reg. brev. tract. |\xxxv., but see note on p. 5

7 Prowm. in Reg. fus. tract.

8 Sermo Asceticus,5. The sacrifice of Gregory of Nazianzus may have been due to the idea that all private interests
must be subordinated to those of the Church. ;

9 Reg. brev, tract. clxxx. 10 Reg. fus, tract. xxxviii. 11 Weg. brev. tract. ccciv.

_ Reg. fus. tract. xv. After the Regule are printed, in Garnier’s Ed. 34, Constitutiones Monastice, with the note that
their genuineness is more suspicious than that of any of the ascetic writings. They treat of the details of monastic life, of the
virtues to be cultivated in it and the vices to be avoided. Sozomen (//.£. iii. 14) has been supposed to refer to them. All later
criticism has been unfavourable to them. cf. Maran, Vit. Bas. xliii. 7; Ceillier VI. viii. 3; Fessler, p. 524. It may be
remarked generally that the asceticism of St. Basil is eminently practical. He has no notion of mortification for mortification’s
sake. — no praise for the self-advertising and vain-glorious rigour of the Stylites. Neglecting the body, or ‘not sparing the
body ” by exaggerated mortification, is in cclviii. condemned as Manicheism. It is of course always an objection to exclusive
exaltation of the ascetic life that it is a kind of moral docetism, and ignores the fact that Christianity has τ repudiated all
concern with the body, but is designed to elevate and to purify it. (cf Bohringer vii. p.150.) Basil may be not unjustly
criticised from this point of view, and accused of the very Manichzism which he distinctly condemns. But it willbe remembered
that he recognises the holiness of marriage and family life,and if he thinks virginity and ceenobitism a higher life, has no mercy
for the dilettante asceticism of a morbid or indolent “zzcrvisme.’ Valens, from the point of viewof a master of legions, might
deplore monastic celibacy, and press Egyptian monks by thousands into the ranks of his army. (cf. Milman, 2751. Christ.
iii. 47.) Basil from his point of view was equally positive that he was making useful citizens, and that his industrious
associates, of clean and frugal lives, were doing good service. Ἁ!

_ ‘En effet, le moine basilien, n'est pas, comme le cénobite d’F gypte, séparé du monde par un mur infranchissable. ‘ Les
potssons meurent,’ disait Saint Antoine,‘ quand on les tire de l’cau, et les moines s’énervent dans les villes ; rentrons vite dans
/es montagnes, comme les potssons dans l’ean.’ (Moutalembert, Moines d’ Occident, i.61.) Les moines basiliens vivent aussi
dans la solitude pour gagner le ciel, mais tls ne veulent pasle gagner seuls. . . . Les princtpaux,au moins, dotvent se
méler a la société pour Vinstruire. Cet homme ἃ la chevelure négligée, ila demarche poste, dont l’etl nes s’égare jamats,
ouvre son monastére a ses sembables, ou va les trouver, du moment qu’il s’agit de leur edification. Son contact fortifie le
clergé; wl entre lut-méme dans les ordres, et devient collaborateur delévéque. Il va aux fetes des martyrs et préche dans les
églises. Il entre dans les matsons, prend part aux conversations. aux repas, et, tout en evitant les longs entretiens et les
Liaisons aux les femmes, et le directeur et le compagnon de piété des ames. . . Lemorne ne dott pas seulement soulager
les meux del’dme. Les matsons des pauvres, dont se couvratt une parlie del’ Aste Mineure, étarent des asiles ouverts ἃ toutes
les souffrances physiques. . . . Pour Basile, ces deux institutions, le monastére et la matsons des pauvres, guoique séparées
et distinctes, n’en formatent qu'une. A ses yeux, les secours corporels n’etatent qu'un moyen darriver a dame. Pendant
que la main du motne servait les voyageurs. nourissait les pauvres. pausait les malades. ses léevres leur disiribuatent une
aumone plus précteuse, celle de se ira de Dieu.” Fialon, Et Historique, pp. 51-53. A high ideal! Perhaps never more
nearly realized than in the Cappadocian ceenobia of the fourth century.


-΄


PROLEGOMENA. lv


IV. HoMILETICAL.


Twenty-four homilies on miscellaneous subjects, published under St. Basil’s name, are
generally accepted as genuine. They are conveniently classified as (1) Dogmatic and


Exegetic, (ii) Moral, and (ili) Panegyric.


To Class (i) will be referred


Il. Ln Lud, Attende tibi tpst.
VI. Ln Lllud, Destruam horrea, etc.
IX. Li Lllud, Quod Deus non est auctor malorum.
XI. Ln principium Proverbiorum.
XV. De fide.
XVI. Ln Llud, In principio erat Verbum.
XXIV. Contra Sabellianos et Arium et Anomeos.
Class (ii) will include
I.and II. De Fejunio.
IV. De gratiarum actione.
VIL. Ln Divites.
VIII. Lx famem et siccitatem.
X. Adversus beatos.
XI. De invidia.
XIII. Ln Sanctum Baptismum.
XIV. ln Hbriosos.
XX. De humilitate.
XXI. Quod rebus mundanis adherendum non sit, et de tncendio extra eccle-
stam facto. ἀν Ν Bi
XXII. Ad adolescentes, de legendis libris Gentilium.


The Panegyric (iii) are
V. Ln martyrem Fulittam.


XVII. Lx Barlaam martyrem.
XVIII. Lx Gordium martyrem.
XIX. Jn sanctos quadraginta martyres.
XXIII. 75 Mamantem martyrem.


-


Homily III. on Deut. xv. 9,’ is one of the eight translated by Rufinus.
begins:

«¢¢ Take heed,’ it is written, ‘to thyself.’ Every living creature possesses within him-
self, by the gift of God, the Ordainer of all things, certain resources for self protection.
Investigate nature with attention, and you will find that the majority of brutes have an
instinctive aversion from what is injurious; while, on the other hand, by a kind of natural
attraction, they are impelled to the enjoyment of what is beneficial to them. Wherefore
also God our Teacher has given us this grand injunction, in order that what brutes possess
by nature may accrue to us by the aid of reason, and that what is performed by brutes un-
’ wittingly may be done by us through careful attention and constant exercise of our reason-
ing faculty. We are to be diligent guardians of the resources given to us by God, ever
shunning sin, as brutes shun poisons, and ever hunting after righteousness, as they seek for
the herbage that is good for food. Take heed to thyself, that thou mayest be able to dis-
cern between the noxious and the wholesome. ‘This taking heed is to be understood in a
twofold sense. Gaze with the eyes of the body at visible objects. Contemplate incor-
poreal objects with the intellectual faculty of the soul. If we say that obedience to the
charge of the text lies in the action of our eyes, we shall see at once that this is impossi-
ble. How can there be apprehension of the whole self through the eye? The eye cannot
turn its sight upon ttself; the head is beyond it; it is ignorant of the back, the counte-
nance, the disposition of the intestines. Yet it were impious to argue that the charge of
the Spirit cannot be obeyed. It follows then that it must be understood of intellectual
action. ‘Take heed to thyself.” Look at thyself round about from every point of view.


Section 2


1LXX. πρόσεχε σεαυτῷ.


ἵν! BASIL.


Keep thy soul’s eye sleepless' in ceaseless watch over thyself. ‘Thou goest in the midst
of snares.’? Hidden nets are set for thee in all directions by the enemy. Look well
around thee, that thou mayest be delivered ‘as a gazelle from the net and a bird from the
snare.’* It is because of her keen sight that the gazelle cannot be caught in the net. It
is her keen sight that gives her her name.* And the bird, if only she take heed, mounts
on her light wing far above the wiles of the hunter.

‘¢ Beware lest in self protection thou prove inferior to brutes, lest haply thou be caught
in the gins and be made the devil's prey, and be taken alive by him to do with thee as he
will.”

A striking passage from the same Homily is thus rendered by Rufinus: ‘* Coxsidera
ergo primo omnium quod homo es, td est solum in terres animal tpsis divinis mantbus
formatum. Nonne sufficeret hoc solum recte atque integre sapienti ad magnum sum-
mumgue solutium, quod tpstus Det manibus qui omnia reliqua precept? solius fecit
auctoritate subsistere, homo fictus es et formatus? Tum deinde quod cum ad imaginem
Creatoris et stmilitudinem sis, potes sponte etiam ad angelorum dignitatem culmenque
remeare. Animam namgue accepistt tntellectualem, et rationalem, per quam Deum
possts agnoscere, et naturam rerum conspicabilt rationts tntelligentia contemplari:
saplentiea dulcissimts fructibus perfrut presto est. Tibi omnium cedit animantium
genus, gue per connexa montium vel prerupta rupium aut opaca silvarum feruntur ;
omne guod vel aquts tegitur, vel prepetibus pennts tnacre suspenditur. Omune,inguam,
guod hujus mundi est, servitis et subjectiont tue liberalis muntficentia conditoris tn-
dulsit. Nonne tu, sensu tibt rationabili suggerente, diversitates artium reperisti?
Nonne tu urbes condere, omnemque earum reliquumusum pernecessartum viventibus in-
venisti? Nonne tibt per rationem que in te est mare pervium fit? Terra, flumina,
Jontesqgue tuts vel ustbus vel voluptatibus famulantur. Nonneaer hic et celum ipsum
atque omnes stellarum chort vite mortalium mintsterio cursus suos atgue ordines
servant? Quid ergo deficts animo, et deesse tibi aliquid putas, si non tibi cquus pro-
ducttur phaleris exornatus et spumanti ore frena mandens argentea? Sed sol tibi
producitur, veloct rapidogue cursu ardentes tibi faces caloris simul ac lumints portans.
Non habes aureos et argenteos discos: sed habes lune discum purtssimo et blandissimo
splendore radiantem. Non ascendis currum, nec rotarum lupsibus veheris, sed habes
pedum tuorum vehiculum tecum natum. Quid ergo beatos censes eos gui aurum quidem
posstsent, alicnis autem pedibus indigent, ad necessarios commeatus? Non recubas
eburnets thoris, sed adjacent fecundi cespites viridantes et herbidi thort, florum
vartetate melius quam fucatis colortbus Tyrti muricis picti, in guibus dulces et salubres
somnt nullis curarum morsibus effugantur. Non te contegunt aurata laquearia ; sed
celum te contegit tneffabilé fulgore stellarum depictum. Hac quidem quantum ad
communem humanitatis attinet vitam. Acctpe vero majora. Propter te Deus in hom-
tnibus, Spiritus sancti distributio, mortis ablatio, resurrectionts spes. Propter te
divina precepta hominibus delata, gue te perfectam doceant vitam, et iter tuum ad
Deum per mandatorum tramitem dirigant. Tibi panduntur regna celorum, tib:
corone justitie preparantur ; 52 tamen labores et erumnas pro justitia ferre non
refugis.” °

Homily VI., on Luke xii. 18, is on selfish wealth and greed.

Beware, says the preacher,® lest the fate of the fool of the text be thine. ‘* These things
are written that we may shun their imitation. Imitate the earth,O man. Bear fruit, as
she does, lest thou prove inferior to that which is without life. She produces her fruits,
not that she may enjoy them, but for thy service. Thou dost gather for thyself whatever
fruit of good works thou hast shewn, because the grace of good works returns to the giver.
Thou hast given to the poor, and the gift becomes thine own, and comes back with in-
crease. Just as grain that has fallen on the earth becomes a gain to the sower, so the loaf
thrown to the hungry man renders abundant fruit thereafter. Be the end of thy husbandry
the beginning of the heavenly sowing. ‘ Sow,’ it is written, ‘to yourselves in righteous-
ness.” Why then art thou distressed? Why dost thou harass thyself in thy efforts to
shut up thy riches in clay and bricks? ‘A good name is rather to be chosen than great
riches.’*° If thou admire riches because of the honour that comes from them, bethink thee
how very much more it tends to thine honour that thou shouldst be called the father of


1 ἀκοίμητον. On the later existence of an order of sleepless monks, known as the Acemete. οἰ Theodoret, Zp. cxli. p.
309, in this series, and note. ᾿

2 Ecclus, ix, 13. 3 Prov. v. 5, LXX. 4 δορκάς, from δέρκομαι, = seer. So Tabitha (Syr.) = keen-sightcd,

δ 6. 6 § 3. 1 Hos. x. 12. 8 Prov. ii. 1.


PROLEGOMENA. ἵν!


innumerable children than that thou shouldst possess innumerable staters in ἃ purse. Thy
wealth thou wilt leave behind thee here, even though thou like it not. The honour won
by thy good deeds thou shalt convey with thee to the Master. Then all people standing
round about thee in the presence of the universal Judge shall hail thee as feeder and bene-
factor, and give thee all the names that tell of loving kindness. Dost thou not see theatre-
goers flinging away their wealth on boxers and bufloons and beast-fighters, fellows whom
it is disgusting even to see, for the sake of the honour of a moment, and the cheers and
clapping of the crowd? And art thou a niggard in thy expenses, when thou art destined
to attain glory so great? God will welcome ‘thee, angels will laud thee, mankind from the
very beginning will call thee blessed. For thy stewardship of these corruptible things thy
reward shall be glory everlasting, a crown of righteousness, the heavenly kingdom. ‘Thou
thinkest nothing of all this. Thy heart is so fixed on the present that thou despisest what
is waited for in. hope. Come then; dispose of thy wealth in various directions. Be gen-
erous and liberal in thy expenditure on the poor. Let it be said of thee, ‘He hath dis-
persed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth for ever.’* Do not press
heavily on necessity and sell for great prices. Do not wait for a famine before thou open-
est thy barns. ‘ He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him.’* Watch not for
a time of want for gold’s sake — for public scarcity to promote thy private profit. Drive
not a huckster’s bargains out of the troubles of mankind. Make not God’s wrathful visita-
tion an opportunity for abundance. Wound not the sores of men smitten by the scourge.
Thou keepest thine eye on thy gold, and wilt not look at thy brother. Thou knowest the
marks on the money, and canst distinguish good from bad. Thou canst not tell who is thy
brother in the day of distress.”

The conclusion 15 ** ‘Ah!’ — it is said —‘ words are all very fine: gold is finer.’ I
make the same impression as I do when I am preaching to libertines against their unchas-
tity. Their mistress is blamed, and the mere mention of her serves but to enkindle their
passions. How can I bring before your eyes the poor man’s sufferings that thou mayest
know out of what deep groanings thou art accumulating thy treasures, and of what high
value will seem to thee in the day of judgment the famous ‘words, * Come, ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the werld: for I
was an hungred and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty and ye gave me drink: . . . I
was naked and ye clothed me.’* What shuddering, what sweat, what darkness will be
shed round thee, as thou hearest the words of condemnation !—‘* Depart from me, ye
cursed, into outer darkness prepared for the devil and his angels: for 1 was an hungred and
ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty and ye gave menodrink: . . . Iwas naked and ye
clothed me not.’*® I have told thee what I have thought profitable To thee now it is
clear and plain what are the good things promised for thee if thou obey. If thou disobey,
for thee the threat is written. I pray that thou mayest change to a better mind and thus
escape its peril. In this way thy own wealth will be thy redemption. ‘Thus thou mayest
advance to the heavenly blessings prepared for thee by the grave of Him who hath called
us all into His own kingdom, to Whom be glory and might for ever and ever, Amen.”

Homily IX. is a demonstration that God is not the Author o of Lvl. It has been con-
jectured that it was delivered shortly after some such public calamity as the destruction of
Nicza in 368. St. Basil naturally touches on passages which have from time to time
cause.] some perplexity on this subject. He asks® if God is not the Author of evil, how
is it said ‘* [ form the light and create darkness, I make peace and create evil,” 7 and again,
‘¢ The evil came down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem,” *° and again, ‘‘ Shall
there be evil in a city and the Lord hath not done it,”® and in the great song of Moses,
*¢ See now that I, even I, am he and there is no god with me: I kill and I make alive, I
woundand I heal”?!? But to any one who understands the meaning of Scripture no one of
these passages accuses God of being the Cause and Creator of evil. He who uses the
words, “1 form the light and create darkness,” describes Himself not as Creator of any
evil, but as Demiurge of creation. ‘It is lest thou shouldst suppose that there is one cause
of light and another of darkness that. He described Himself as being Creator and Artificer
of parts of creation which seem to be mutually opposed. It is to prevent thy seeking one
Demiurge of fire, another of water, one of air and another of earth, these seeming to have
a kind of mutual opposition and contrariety of qualities. By adopting these views many

1 Ps, cxii. 9. 2 Prov. xi. 26. 3§ 8. 4 Matt. xxv.

5 Matt. xxv.41. Withthe variation of‘‘outer darkness” for ‘‘ everlasting fire’? and the omission of the clause about


strangers. In = passage, it is not a robber who is be eral the condemnation falls upon him who has not shared what he
has, 4. 115, xiv. 7. 8 Micah i. 12. 9 Amos iii. 6. 10 Deul, xxxii. 39.


Iviii BASIL.


have ere now fallen into polytheism, but He makes peace and creates evil. Unquestionably
He makes peace in thee when He brings peace into thy mind by His good teaching, and
calms the rebel passions of thy soul. And He creates evil, that is to say, He reduces
those evil passions to order, and brings them to a better state so that they may cease to be
evil and may adopt the nature of good. ‘ Create in me a clean heart, O God.’* This
does not mean Make now for the first time ;* it means Renew the heart that had become old
rom wickedness. The object is that He may make both one.* The word create is used

not to imply the bringing out of nothing, but the bringing into order those which already
existed. So it is said, ‘If any man be in Christ he is a new creature.’* Again, Moses
says, ‘Is not He thy Father that hath bought thee? Hath He not made thee and created
thee?’® Now, the creation put in order after the making evidently teaches us that the
word creation, as is commonly the case, is used with the idea of improvement. And so it
is thus that He makes peace out of creating evil; that is, by transforming and bringing to
improvement. Furthermore, even if you understand peace to be freedom from war, and
evil to mean the troubles which are the lot of those who make war; marches into far
regions, labours, vigils, terrors, sweatings, wounds, slaughters, taking of towns, slavery,
exile, piteous spectacles of captives; and, in a word, all the evils that follow upon war,
all these things, I say, happen by the just judgment of God, Who brings vengeance
through war on those who deserve punishment. Should you have wished that Sodom had
not been burnt after her notorious wickedness? Or that Jerusalem had not been overturned,
nor her temple made desolate after the horrible wickedness of the Jews against the Lord?
How otherwise was it right for these things to come to pass than by the hands of the
Romans to whom our Lord had been delivered by the enemies of His life, the Jews?
Wherefore it does sometimes come to pass that the calamities of war are righteously in-
flicted on those who deserve them — if you like to understand the words ‘I kill and I
make alive’ in their obvious sense. Fear edifies the simple. ‘I wound and I heal’ isat
once perceived to be salutary. The blow strikes terror; the cure attracts to love. But it
is permissible to thee to find a higher meaning in the words, ‘J kill’— by sin; ‘1 make
alive’ —by righteousness. ¢ Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is re-
newed day by day.’® He does not kill one and make another alive, but He makes the
same man alive by the very means by which He kills him; He heals him by the blows
which He inflicts upon him. As the proverb has it, ‘Thou shalt beat him with the rod
and shalt deliver his soul from hell.’7 The flesh is smitten that the soul may be healed;
sin is put to death that righteousness may live. In another passage ® it is argued that death
is not an evil. Deaths come from God. Yet death is not absolutely an evil, except in the
case of the death of the sinner, in which case’departure from this world is a beginning of
the punishments of hell. On the other hand, of the evils of .hell the cause is not God, but
ourselves. ‘The origin and root of sin is what is in our own control and our free will.”

Homily XII. is ‘* on the beginning of the proverbs.” ‘* The proverbs of Solomon, the
son of David, king of Israel.” ὃ

‘¢The name proverbs (παροιμίαι) has been by heathen writers used of common ex-
pressions, and of those which are generally used in the streets. Among them a way is
called οἷμος, whence they define a παροιμία to be a common expression, which has be-
come trite through vulgar usage, and which it is possible to transfer from a limited number
of subjects to many analogous subjects.'? With Christians the παροιμία is a serviceable utter-
ance, conveyed with a certain amount of obscurity, containing an obvious meaning of much
utility, and at the same time involving a depth of meaning in its inner sense. Whence the
Lord says: ‘ These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs, but the time cometh when I
shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew you plainly of the Father.’” ™

On the ““ wisdom and instruction” of verse 2, it is said: Wisdom is the science of
things both human and divine, and of their causes. He, therefore, who is an effective
theologian’? knows wisdom. The quotation of 1 Cor. ii. 6, follows.

On general education it is said,'? ‘* The acquisition of sciences is termed education,"*
as it is written of Moses, that he was learned "δ in all the wisdom of the Egyptians."* But
it is of no small importance, with a view to man’s sound condition,” that he should not


1 Ps_ li. to. 2 δημιούργησον. 8 cf. Eph. ii. 14. 42 Cot. vu TF 5 Deut. xxxii. 6, LXX.

6 2 Cor. iv. 16. 7 Prov. xxiii. 14. 8 § 3. ® Prov. τ.

10 παροιμία is defined by Hesychius the Alexandrian grammarian, who was nearly contemporary with Basil, as a βιωφελὴς
λόγος, παρὰ τὴν ὁδὸν λεγόμενος.

11 John xvi. 25. 12 ἐπιτετευγμένως θεολογεῖς - 13 ὃ 6, 14 ἡ τῶν μαθημάτων ἀνάληψις παιδεία λέγεται.

1ὅ ἐπαιδεύθη. 16 Acts vii. 22. 17 σωτηρία.


PROLEGOMENA. lix


devote himself to any sciences whatsoever, but should become acquainted with the educa-
tion which is most profitable. It has ere now happened that men who have spent their
time in the study of geometry, the discovery of the Egyptians, or of astrology, the favour-
ite pursuit of the Chaldzans, or have been addicted to the loftier natural philosophy ἡ which
is concerned with figures and shadows, have looked with contempt on the education which
is based upon the divine oracles. Numbers of students have been occupied with paltr
rhetoric, and the solution of sophisms, the subject matter of all of which is the false and
unreal. Even poetry is dependent for its existence on its myths.” Rhetoric would not be
but for craft in speech. Sophistics must have their fallacies. Many men for the sake of
these pursuits have disregarded the knowledge of God, and have grown old in the search
for the unreal. It is therefore necessary that we should have a full knowledge of education,
in order to choose the profitable, and to reject the unintelligent and the injurious. Words
of wisdom will be discerned by the attentive reader of the Proverbs, who thence patiently
extracts what is for his good.”

The Homily concludes with an exhortation to rule life by the highest standard.

‘¢ Hold fast, then, to the rudder of life. Guide thine eye, lest haply at any time through
thine eyes there beat upon thee the vehement wave of lust. Guide ear and tongue, lest the
one receive aught harmful, or the other speak forbidden words. Let not the tempest of
passion overwhelm thee. Let no blows of despondency beat thee down; no weight of
sorrow drown thee in its depths. Our feelings are waves. Rise above them, and thou
wilt be a safe steersman of life. Fail to avoid each and all of them skilfully and steadily,
and, like some untrimmed boat, with life’s dangers all round about thee, thou wilt be sunk
in the deep sea of sin. Hear then how thou mayest acquire the steersman’s skill. Men
at sea are wont to lift up their eyes to heaven. It is from heaven that they get guidance
for their cruise; by day from the sun, and by night from the Bear, or from some of the
ever-shining stars. By these they reckon their right course. Do thou too keep thine eye
fixed on heaven, as the Psalmist did who said, ‘ Unto thee lift I up mine eye, O thou that
dwellest in the heavens.’* Keep thine eyes on the Sun of righteousness. Directed by the
commandments of the Lord, as by some bright constellations, keep thine eye ever sleep-
less. Give not sleep to thine eyes or slumber to thine eyelids,’ that the guidance of the
commandments may be unceasing. ‘ Thy word,’ it is said, ‘is a lamp unto my feet, and
a light unto my paths.’® Never slumber at the tiller, so long as thou livest here, amid the
unstable circumstances of this world, and thou shalt receive the help of the Spirit. He
shall conduct thee ever onward. He shall waft thee securely by gentle winds of peace, till
thou come one day safe and sound to yon calm and waveless haven of the will of God, to
Whom be glory and majesty for ever and ever, Amen.”

Homilies XV. and XVI. are more distinctly dogmatic. They do not present the
doctrines of which they treat in any special way. XV., De Fide, is concerned rather with
the frame of mind of the hclder and expounder of the Faith than with any dogmatic formula.

XVI., on John i. 1, begins by asserting that every utterance of the gospels 1s grander
than the rest of the lessons of the Spirit, inasmuch as, while in the latter He has spoken to
us through His servants the prophets, in the gospels the Master has conversed with us face
to face. ‘‘ The most mighty voiced herald of the actual gospel proclamation, who uttered
words loud beyond all hearing and lofty beyond all understanding, is John, the son of
thunder, the prelude of whose gospel is the text.” After repeating the words the preacher
goes on to say that he has known many who are not within the limits of the word of truth,
many of the heathen, that is, ‘* who have prided themselves upon the wisdom of this world,
who in their admiration for these words have ventured to insert them among their own
writings. For the devil is a thief, and carries offour property for the use of his own
prophets.” °


1 μετεωρολογία. The word had already been used by Plato in a certain contemptuous sense. cf. Pal. 299 B.: μετεωρόλογον
ἀδολέσχην τινὰ σοφιστήν. But not always, e.g. Crat. 401, B.: κωδυνεύουσι γοῦν οἱ πρῶτοι τὰ ὀνόματα τιθέμενοι οὐ φαῦλοι εἶναι,
ἀλλὰ μετεωρολόγοι τινὲς καὶ ἀδολέσχαι.

2 Gregory of Nazianzus was publishing verses which formed no unworthy early link in the Catena Poetarum Christian-
orum, in our sense of the word poet. Basil may havein his mind the general idea that the Poetics of the heathen schools
were all concerned with mythical inventions.

ὅ Ps, xxii. 1. Ref. PS. Cexmi. 4. 5 Ps. cxix. 105.

6 There are instances of high admiration of the passage: I have not found one of appropriation. Augustine (De Civ.
Dei x. 29), says: ‘* Quod tnttium Sancti Evangelii, cut nomen est secundum Fohannem, quidam Platonicus, sicut a sancto
sene Simpliciano, qui postea ecclesia epee 58s Chiat solebamus audire, aurets litterts conscribendum et per
omnes ecclesias in locis emtnentissimis proponendum esse dicebat.’? Eusebius (Prep. Evang. xi.17 and 18) reters to the
statements of Plotinus and Numerius on the δεύτερος αἴτιος, and (19) mentions Aurelius (on Aurelius vide Mosheim’s note on
Cudworth’s /nt. System, vol. i. cap. iv. 17), aS quoting the passage in question. Vide also Theodoret, Grec. Aff. 33, and
Bentley’s Remarks on Freethinking, § xlvi.


ke BASIL.


‘¢Tf the wisdom of the flesh has been so smitten with admiration for the force of the
words, what are we to do, who are disciples of the Spirit? . . . Hold fast to the text,
and you will suffer no harm from men of evil arts. Suppose your opponent to argue, ‘ If
He was begotten, He was not,’ do you retort, ‘In the beginning He was.’ But, he will
go on, ‘ Before He was begotten, in what way was He?’ Do not give up the words " He
was.’ Do not abandon the words * In the beginning.’ The highest point of beginning
is beyond comprehension; what is outside beginning is beyond discovery. Do not let any
one deceive you by the fact that the phrase has more than one meaning. ‘There are in this
world many beginnings of many things, yet there is one beginning which is beyond them
all. ‘Beginning of good way,’ says the Proverb. But the beginning of a way is the
first movement whereby we begin the journey of which the earlier part can be discovered.
And, ‘ The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.’’ To this beginning is prefixed
something else, for elementary instruction is the beginning of the comprehension of arts.
The fear of the Lord is then a primary element of wisdom, but there is something anterior
to this beginning —the condition of the soul, before it has been taught wisdom and appre-
hended the fear of the Lord. . . . The point is the beginning of the line, and the
line is the beginning of the surface, and the surface is the beginning of the body, and the
parts of speech are the beginnings of grammatical utterance. But the beginning in the text
is like none of these. . . . 25 the beginning was the Word! Marvellous utterance!
How all the words are found to be combined in mutual equality of force! ‘Was’ has
the same force as ‘In the beginning.’ Where is the blasphemer? Where is the tongue
that fights against Christ? Where is the tongue that said, ‘There was when He was
not’? Hear the gospel: ‘Jz the dcginning was.’ If He was in the beginning, when
was He not? Shall I bewail their impiety or execrate their want of instruction? But,
it is argued, before He was begotten, He was not. Do you know when He was begot-
ten, that you may introduce the idea of priority to the time? For the word ‘before’ is
a word οἵ time, placing one thing before another in antiquity. In what way is it reasona-
ble that the Creator of time should have a generation subjected to terms of time? ‘ lz the
beginning was——’ Never give up the was, and you never give any room for the vile
blasphemy to slip in. Mariners laugh at the storm, when they are riding upon two
anchors. So will you laugh to scorn this vile agitation which is being driven on the world
by the blasts of wickedness, and tosses the faith of many to and fro, if only you will keep
your soul moored safely in the security of these words.”

In ὃ 4 on the force of wth God.’ ‘** Note with admiration the exact appropriateness
of every single word. It is not said * The Word was zz God.’ It runs ‘ was wzth God.’
This is to set forth the proper character of the hypostasis. The Evangelist did not say
‘zn God,’ to avoid giving any pretext for the confusion of the hypostasis. That is the
vile blasphemy of men who are endeavouring to confound all things together, asserting that
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, form one subject matter, and that different appellations are
applied to one thing. The impiety is vile, and no less to be shunned than that of those
who blasphemously maintain that the Son isin essence unlike God the Father. Zhe
Word was with God. Immediately after using the term Word to demo&istrate the impassi-
bility of the generation, he forthwith gives an explanation to do away with the mischief
arising in us from the term Word. As though suddenly rescuing Him from the blas-
phemers’ calumny, he asks, what is the Word? Zhe Word was.God. Do not put before
me any ingenious distinctions of phrase; do not with your wily cleverness blaspheme the
teachings of the Spirit. You have the definitive statement. Submit to the Lord. Zhe
Word was God.”

Homily XXIV., against the Sabellians, Arians, and Anomeeans, repeats points which
are brought out again and again in the De Spzrztu Sancto, in the work Against Eunomius,
and in some of the Leffers.

Arianism is practical paganism, for to make the Son a creature, and at the same time
to offer Him worship, is to reintroduce polytheism. Sabellianism is practical Judaism, —
a denial of the Son.* Johni. 1, xiv. 9, 7, xvi. 28, and viii. 16 are quoted against both
extremes. There may be a note of time in the admitted impatience of the auditory at
hearing of every other subject than the Holy Spirit. The preacher is constrained to speak
upon this topic, and he speaks with the combined caution and completeness which char-
acterize the De Spiritu Sancto. ‘* Your ears,” he says, ‘‘ are all eager to hear something
concerning the Holy Ghost. My wish would be, as I have received in all simplicity, as I


1 Prov. i. 7. 2 πρὸς τὸν Θεόν. 3 of. CCX. P. 240.
7 x


PROLEGOMENA. xi


have assented with guileless agreement, so to deliver the doctrine to you my hearers. I
would if I could avoid being constantly questioned on the same point. I would have my
disciples convinced of one consent. But you stand round me rather as judges than as
learners. Your desire is rather to test and try me than to acquire anything for yourselves.
I must therefore, as it were, make my defence before the court, again and again giving
answer, and again and again saying what I have received. And you I exhort not to be
specially anxious to hear from me what is pleasing to yourselves, but rather what is pleas-
ing to the Lord, what is in harmony with the Scriptures, what is not in opposition to the
Fathers. What, then, I asserted concerning the Son, that we ought to acknowledge His
proper Person, this I have also to say concerning the Holy Spirit. The Spirit is not
identical with the Father, because of its being written ‘God is a Spirit.’* Nor on the
other hand is there one Person of Son and of Spirit, because it is said, ‘If any man have
not the spirit of Christ he is none of his. . . . Christ is in you.’* From this passage
some persons have been deceived into the opinion that the Spirit and Christ are identical.
But what do we assert? That in this passage is declared the intimate relation of nature
and not a confusion of persons. For there exists the Father having His existence perfect
and independent, root and fountain of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. There exists also
the Son living in full Godhead, Word and begotten offspring of the Father, independent.
Full too is the Spirit, not part of another, but contemplated whole and perfect in Himself.
The Son is inseparably conjoined with the Father and the Spirit with the Son. For there
is nothing to divide nor to cut asunder the eternal conjunction. No age intervenes, nor
yet can our soul entertain a thought of separation as though the Only-begotten were ποῖ᾽
ever with the Father, or the Holy Ghost not co-existent with the Son. Whenever then
we conjoin the Trinity, be careful not to imagine the Three as parts of one undivided thing,
but receive the idea of the undivided and common essence of three perfect incorporeal
[existences]. Wherever is the presence of the Hely Spirit, there is the indwelling of
Christ: wherever Christ is, there the Father is present. ‘Know ye not that your body
is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you ?’” °

First of the Homilies'on moral topics come I. and II. on Fasting. The former is of
uncontested genuineness. Erasmus rejected the latter, but it is accepted without hesitation
_ by Garnier, Maran and Ceillier, and is said by the last named to be quoted as Basil’s by
John of Damascus and Symeon Logothetes. From Homily I. two passages are cited
by St. Augustine against the Pelagians.* The text is Ps. ]xxx. 3. ‘¢ Reverence,” says one
passage,° *¢ the hoary head of fasting. It is coeval with mankind. Fasting was ordained
in Paradise. The first injunction was delivered to Adam, ‘ Of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil thou shalt not eat.’® ‘Thou shalt not eat’ is a law of fasting and
abstinence.” The general argument is rather against excess than in support of ceremonial
abstinence. In Paradise there was no wine, no butchery of beasts, no eating of flesh.
Wine came in after the flood. Noah became drunk because wine was new to him. So
fasting is older than drunkenness. Esau was defiled, and made his brother’s slave, for the
sake of a single meal. It was fasting and prayer which gave Samuel to Hannah. Fasting
brought forth Samson. Fasting begets prophets, strengthens strong men. Fasting
makes lawgivers wise, is the soul’s safeguard, the body’s trusty comrade, the armour ot
the champion, the training of the athlete.

The conclusion is a warning against mere carnal abstinence.” ‘** Beware of limiting the
good of fasting to mere abstinence from meats. Real fasting is alienation from evil.
‘Loose the bands of wickedness.’* Forgive your neighbour the mischief he has done
you. Forgive him his trespasses against you. Do not ‘fast for strife and debate.’ ὃ
You do not devour flesh, but you devour your brother. You abstain from wine, but you
indulge in outrages. You wait for evening before you take food, but you spend the day in
the law courts. Wo to those who are ‘drunken, but not with wine.’*® Anger is the
intoxication of the soul, and makes it out of its wits like wine. Drunkenness, too, is
sorrow, and drowns our intelligence. Another drunkenness is needless fear. In a word,
whatever passion makes the soul beside herself may be called drunkenness. . . .
Dost thou know Whom thou art ordained to receive as thy guest? He Who has promised
that He and His Father will come and make their abode with thee.*’ Why do you allow
drunkenness to enter in, and shut the door on the Lord? Why allow the foe to come in
and occupy your strongholds? Drunkenness dare not receive the Lord; it drives away the


1 John iv. 24. 3.1 Cor, vi. 19. 5§ 3, 7§ 10. 9Ts. Iviii. 4. 11 cf, John xiv. 23.
2Rom. viii.gandio. August.in FJulian.i.18. °Gen.iii. 17. 8 Is. lviii.6. 1 Is. li. ἐπῆν


Ixii BASIL.


Spirit. Smoke drives away bees, and debauch drives away the gifts ofthe Spirit, . . .
Wilt thou see the nobility of fasting? Compare this evening with to-morrow evening:
thou wilt see the town turned from riot and disturbance to profound calm. Would that
to-day might be like to-morrow in solemnity, and the morrow no less cheerful than to-day.
May the Lord Who has brought us to this period of time grant to us, as to gladiators and
wrestlers, that we may shew firmness and constancy in the beginning of contests, and may
reach that day which is the Queen of Crowns; that we may remember now the passion of
salvation, and in the age to come enjoy the requital of our deeds in this life, in the just
judgment of Christ.” "ὦ

Homily IV. on the giving of thanks (περὶ εὐχαριστίας), is on text 1 Thess. v. 16.
Our Lord, it is remarked, wept over Lazarus, and He called them that mourn
blessed. How ? is this to be reconciled with the charge ** Rejoice alway”? §* Tears and
joy have not a common origin. On the one hand, while the breath is held in round the
heart, tears spontaneously gush forth, as at some blow, when an unforeseen calamity smites
upon the soul. Joy on the other hand is like a leaping up of the soul rejoicing when things
go well. Hence come different appearances of the body. The sorrowful are pale, livid,
chilly. The habit of the joyous and cheerful is blooming and ruddy; their soul all but leaps
out of their body for gladness. On all this I shall say that the lamentations and tears of the
saints were caused by their love to God. So, with their eyes ever fixed on the object of
their love, and from hence gathering greater joy for themselves, they devoted themselves
to the interests of their fellow-servants. Weeping over sinners, they brought them to better
ways by their tears. But just as men standing safe on the seashore, while they feel for
those who are drowning in the deep, do not lose their own safety in their anxiety for those
in peril, so those who groan over the sins of their neighbours do not destroy their own
proper cheerfulness. Nay, they rather increase it, in that, through their tears over their
brother, they are made worthy of the joy of the Lord. Wherefore, blessed are they that
weep; blessed are they that mourn; for they shall themselves be comforted; they them-
selves shall laugh. But by laughter is meant not the noise that comes out through the
cheeks from the boiling of the blood, but cheerfulness pure and untainted with despondency.
The Apostle allows us to weep with weepers, for this tear is made, as it were, a seed and
loan to be repaid with everlasting joy. Mount in mind with me, and contemplate the con-
dition of the angels; see if any other condition becomes them but one of joy and gladness.
It is for that they are counted worthy to stand beside God, and to enjoy the ineffable beauty
and glory of our Creator. It is in urging us on to that life that the Apostle bids us always
rejoice.”

The Homily contains an eloquent exhortation to Christian fortitude in calamity, and
concludes with the charge to look beyond present grief to future felicity. ‘‘ Hast thou
suffered dishonour? Look to the glory which through patience is laid up for thee in
heaven. Hast thou suffered loss? Fix thine eyes on the heavenly riches, and on the treasure
which thou hast put by for thyself through thy good works. Hast thou suffered exile?
Thy fatherland is the heavenly Jerusalem. Hast thou lost a child? Thou hast angels,
with whom thou shalt dance about the throne of God, and shalt be glad with everlasting
joy. Set expected joys over against present griefs, and thus thou wilt preserve for thyself
that calm and quiet of the soul whither the injunction of the Apostle calls us. Let not the
brightness of humaa success fill thy soul with immoderate joy; let not grief bring low thy
soul’s high and lofty exaltation through sadness and anguish. ‘Thou must be trained in the
lessons of this life before thou canst live the calm and quiet life to come. Thou wilt
achieve this without difficulty, if thou keep ever with thee the charge to rejoice alway.
Dismiss the worries of the flesh. Gather together the joys of the soul. Rise above the
sensible perception of present things. Fix thy mind on the hope of things eternal. Of
these the mere thought suffices to fill the soul with gladness, and to plant in our hearts the
happiness of angels.”

_ Homily VI., against the rich, follows much the same line of argument as VI. Two
main considerations are urged against the love of worldly wealth; firstly, the thought of
the day of judgment; secondly, the fleeting and unstable nature of the riches themselves.
The luxury of the fourth century, as represented by Basil, is much the same as the
luxury of the nineteenth.


66 ΑἹ 7 e . Φ,
I am filled with amazement,” says the preacher, ‘‘ at the invention of stiperfluities.


*The sermon seems to have been preached at the beginni i ing from Carnival
: : é Ι ginning of Lent, when Cesarea was still suffering from Carnival
indulgences. Homily 11. may be placed at a similar season in another year. 2§ 4. Ἢ


PROLEGOMENA. Ixili


The vehicles are countless, some for conveying goods, others for carrying their owners; all
covered with brass and with silver. There are a vast number of horses, whose pedigrees
are kept like men’s, and their descent from noble sires recorded. Some are for carrying
their haughty owners about the town, some are hunters, some are hacks. Bits, girths,
collars, are all of silver, all decked with gold. Scarlet cloths make the horses as gay as
bridegrooms. There is a host of mules, distinguished by their colours, and their muleteers
with them, one after another, some before and some behind. Of other household servants
the number is endless, who satisfy all the requirements of men’s extravagance; agents,
stewards, gardeners, and craftsmen, skilled in every art that can minister to necessity or
to enjoyment and luxury; cooks, confectioners, butlers, huntsmen, sculptors, painters,
devisers and creators of pleasure of every kind. Look at the herds of camels, some for
carriage, some for pasture; troops of horses, droves of oxen, flocks of sheep, herds of
swine, with their keepers, land to feed all these, and to increase men’s riches by its pro-
duce; baths in town, baths in the country; houses shining all over with every variety of
marble,— some with stone of Phrygia, others with slabs of Spartan or Thessalian.' There
must be some houses warm in winter,’ and others cool in summer. The pavement is of
mosaic, the ceiling gilded. If any part of the wall escapes the slabs, it is embellished with
painted flowers. . . . You who dress your walls, and let your fellow-creatures go
bare, what will you answer to the Judge? You who harness your horses with splendour,
and despise your brother if he is ill-dressed ; who let your wheat rot, and will not feed the
hungry; who hide your gold, and despise the distressed? And, if you have a wealth-
loving wife, the plague is twice as bad. She keeps your luxury ablaze; she increases your
love of pleasure; she gives the goad to your superfluous appetites; her heart is set on stones,
— pearls, emeralds, and sapphires.* Gold she works and gold she weaves,‘ and increases
the mischief with never-ending frivolities. And her interest in all these things is no mere
by-play: it is the care of night and day. Then what innumerable flatterers wait upon their
idle wants! They must have their dyers of bright colours, their goldsmiths, their per-
fumers, their weavers, their embroiderers. With all their behests they do not leave their
husbands breathing time. No fortune is vast enough to satisfy a woman’s wants, — no,
-not if it were to flow like ariver! They are as eager for foreign perfumes as for oil from
the market. They must have the treasures of the sea, shells and pinnas,® and more of
them than wool from the sheep’s back. Gold encircling precious stones serves now for an
ornament for their foreheads, now for their necks. There is more gold in their girdles ;
more gold fastens hands and feet. These gold-loving ladies are delighted to be bound by
golden fetters, — only let the chain be gold! When will the man have time to care for his
soul, who has to serve a woman’s fancies?”

Homily VIII., on the Famine and Drought, belongs to the disastrous year 368.
The circumstances of its delivery have already been referred to. The text is Amos iii.
8, ‘* The lion hath roared: who will not fear?” National calamity is traced to national
sin, specially to neglect of the poor. Children, it appears,’ were allowed a holiday from
school to attend the public services held to deprecate the divine wrath. Crowds of men,
to whose sins the distress was more due than to the innocent children, wandered cheerfully
about the town instead of coming to church.

Homily X. is against the angry. Section 2 contains a description of the outward ap-
pearance of the angry men. ‘* About the heart of those who are eager to requite evil for
evil, the blood boils as though it were stirred and sputtering by the force of fire. On the
surface it breaks out and shews the angry man in other form, familiar and well known to
all, as though it were changing a mask upon the stage. The proper and usual eyes of the
angry man are recognized no more; his gaze is unsteady, and fires up ina moment. He
whets his teeth like boars joining battle. His countenance is livid and suffused with
blood. His body seems to swell. His veins are ruptured, as his breath struggles under
the storm within. His voice is rough and strained. His speech — broken and falling from
him at random — proceeds without distinction, without arrangement. and without meaning.
When he is roused by those who are irritating him, like a flame with plenty of fuel, to an
inextinguishable pitch, then, ah! then indeed the spectacle is indescribable and unen-
durable. See the hands lifted against his fellows, and attacking every part of their bodies ;
antico. cf. Bekker, Gallus. p.16,n. The taste for the ‘* Phrygian stone”? was an old one. cf. Hor., Carm. III. i. 41.

2 The Cappadocian winters were severe. cf. Ep. cxxi., cxcviii., cccxlix.

8 ὑακίνθους. See L. and S., s.v., and King’s Antigue Gems, 46


4 7.6. she must have ornaments of wrought gold and stuff embroidered with gold.
5 of. Hexaemeron, Ὁ. 94. 6 p. xxi. 7 § 3.


Ixiv BASIL.


——————— re jn a i ia a haan τ τ OT) ih) |


see the feet jumping without restraint on dangerous parts. See whatever comes to hand
turned into a weapon for his mad frenzy. lhe record of the progress from words to
wounds recalls familiar lines which probably Basil never read.1 Rage rouses strife ; strife
begets abuse; abuse, blows; blows, wounds; and from wounds often comes death.”

St. Basil, however, does not omit to notice * that there is such a thing as righteous in-
dignation, and that we may ‘‘ be angry and sin θῖν τε God forbid that we should turn into
occasions for sin gifts given to us by the Creator for our salvation ! Anger, stirred at the
proper time and in the proper manner, 1s an efficient cause of manliness, patience, and
endurance. . . - Anger is to be used as a weapon. So Moses, meekest of men,
armed the hands of the Levites for the slaughter of their brethren, to punish idolatry. The
wrath of Phinehas was justifiable. So was the wrath of Samuel against Agag. Thus,
anger very often is made the minister of good deeds.”

Homily XI., against Envy, adduces the instances of Saul’s envy of David, and that of
the patriarchs against Joseph. It is pointed out that envy grows out of familiarity and
proximity. ‘A man is envied of his neighbour.” * The Scythian does not envy the
Egyptian. Envy arises among fellow-countrymen. The remedy for this vice 1s to recog-
nise the pettiness of the common objects of human ambition, and to aspire to eternal joys.
If riches are a mere means to unrightcousness,* wo be to the rich man! If they area
ministering to virtue, there is no room for envy, since the common advantages proceeding
from them are open to all, — unless any one out of superfluity of wickedness envies himself
his own good things!

In Homily XIII., on Holy Baptism, St. Basil combats an error which had naturally
arisen out of the practice of postponing baptism. The delay was made an occasion of
license and indulgence. St. Augustine® cites the homily as St. Chrysostom’s, but the
quotation has not weakened the general acceptance of the composition as Basil’s, and as
one of those referred to by Amphilochius.*® Ceillier mentions its citation by the emperor
Justinian.” It was apparently delivered at Easter. Baptism is good at all times.® ‘Art
thou a young man? Secure thy youth by the bridle of baptism. Has thy prime passed
by? Do not be deprived of thy viaticum. Do not lose thy safeguard. Do not think of
the eleventh hour as of the first. It is fitting that even at the beginning of life we should
have the end in view.’ |

‘‘Tmitate® the eunuch.’® He found one to teach him. He did not despise instruction.
The rich man made the poor man mount into his chariot. The illustrious and the great
welcomed the undistinguished and the small. When he had been taught the gospel of the
kingdom, he received the faith in his heart, and did not put off the seal of the Spirit.”

Homily XIV., against Drunkards, has the special interest of being originated by a
painful incident which it narrates. The circumstances may well be compared with those
of the scandal caused by the deacon Glycerius."' Easter day, remarks St. Basil, is a day
when decent women ought to have been sitting in their homes, piously reflecting on future
judgment. Instead of this, certain wanton women, forgetful of the fear of God, flung their
coverings from their heads, despising God, and in contempt of His angels, lost to all shame
before the gaze of men, shaking their hair, trailing their tunics, sporting with their feet,
with immodest glances and unrestrained laughter, went off into a wild dance. They in-
vited all the riotous youth to follow them, and kept up their dances in the Basilica of the
Martyrs, before the walls of Casarea, turning hallowed places into the workshop of their
unseemliness. They sang indecent songs, and befouled the ground with their unhallowed
tread. They got a crowd of lads to stare at them, and left no madness undone. On this
St. Basil builds a stirring temperance sermon. Section 6 contains a vivid picture of a
drinking bout, and Section 7 describes the sequel. The details are evidently not imaginary.

‘* Sorrowful sight for Christian eyes!) A man in the prime of life, of powerful frame,
of high rank in the army, is carried furtively home, because he cannot stand upright, and
travel on his own feet. A man who ought to be a terror to our enemies is a laughing
stock to the lads in the streets. He is smitten down by no sword —slain by no foe. A
military man, in the bloom of manhood, the prey of wine, and ready to suffer any fate his
foes may choose! Drunkenness is the ruin of reason, the destruction of strength; it is un-
timely old age; it is, for a short time, death.

‘6 What are drunkards but the idols of the heathen ? They have eyes and see not, ears and


1 Furgia proludunt ; sed mox et pocula torques
; Saucius, et rubra deterges vulnera mappa. uv., Sat. v. 26.
3§6. δΈςς, iv. 4. “ὃς, 5 In Fulian. vi. 6 Orat, ii. Conc. v. p. 668. 8§>5. 9§ 6.
10 Acts viii. 27. 11 cf, Letter clxix, and observations in Prolegomena, p. xxix.


PROLEGOMENA. Ixv


hear not."| Their hands are helpless; their feet dead.” The whole Homily is forcible. It
is quoted by Isidore of Pelusium,’ and St. Ambrose seems to have been acquainted with it.’

Homily XX., on Humility, urges the folly of Adam, in sacrificing eternal blessings to
his ambition, and the example of St. Paul in glorying only in the Lord.‘

Pharaoh, Goliath, and Abimelech are instanced. St. Peter is cited for lack of
humility in being sure that he of all men will be true to the death.

‘¢ No detail can be neglected ° as too insignificant to help us in ridding ourselves of pride.
The soul grows like its practices, and is formed and fashioned in accordance with its con-
duct. Your appearance, your dress, your gait, your chair, your style of meals, your bed
and bedding, your house and its contents, should be all arranged with a view to cheapness.
Your talk, your songs, your mode of greeting your neighbour, should look rather to
moderation than to ostentation. Give me, I beg, no elaborate arguments in your talk, no
surpassing sweetness in your singing, no vaunting and wearisome discussions. In all
things try to avoid d¢gzess. Be kind to your friend, gentle to your servant, patient with
the impudent, amiable to the lowly. Console the afflicted, visit the distressed, despise
none. Be agreeable in address, cheerful in reply, ready, accessible to all. Never sing
your own praises, nor get other people to sing them. Never allowing any uncivil com-
munication, conceal as far as possible your own superiority.” °

Homily XXI., on disregard of the things of this world. was preached out of St. Basil’s
diocese, very probably at Satala in 372.7. The second part® is in reference to a fire which
occurred in the near neighbourhood of the church on the previous evening.

‘‘Once more the fiend has shewn his fury against us, has armed himself with flame of
fire, and has attacked the precincts of the church. Once more our common mother has
won the day, and turned back his devices on himself. He has done nothing but advertise
his hatred. . . . How do you not suppose the devil must be groaning to-day at the
failure of his projected attempt? Our enemy lighted his fire close to the church that he
might wreck our prosperity. The flames raised on every side by his furious blasts were
streaming over all they could reach; they fed on the air round about; they were being
driven to touch the shrine, and to involve us in the common ruin; but our Saviour turned
them back on him who had kindled them, and ordered his madness to fall on himself.
The congregation who have happily escaped are urged to live worthily of their pre-
servation, shining like pure gold out of the furnace.”

Homily XXII., which is of considerable interest, on the study of pagan literature, is
really not a homily at all.® It is a short treatise addressed to the young on their educa-
tion. It would seem to have been written in the Archbishop’s later years, unless the
experience of which he speaks may refer rather to his earlier experience, alike as a student
and a teacher.

No source of instruction can be overlooked in the preparation for the great battle
of life,!° and there is a certain advantage to be derived from the right use of heathen
writers. The illustrious Moses is described as training his intellect in the science of the
Egyptians, and so arriving at the contemplation of Him Who is."’ So in later days Daniel
at Babylon was wise in the Chaldean philosophy, and ultimately apprehended the divine
instruction. But granted that such heathen learning is not useless, the question remains
how you are to participate in it. To begin with the poets. Their utterances are of very
various kinds, and it will not be well to give attention to all without exception. When
they narrate to you the deeds and the words of good men, admire and copy them, and
strive diligently to be like them. When they come to bad men, shut your ears, and avoid
imitating them, like Ulysses fleeing from the sirens’ songs.'* Familiarity with evil words
is a sure road to evil deeds, wherefore every possible precaution must be taken to prevent
our souls from unconsciously imbibing evil influences through literary gratification, like
men who take poison in honey. We shall not therefore praise the poets when they revile
and mock, or when they describe licentious, intoxicated characters, when they define happi-
ness as consisting in a laden table and dissolute ditties. Least of all shall we attend to the


1 Ps. ckv. 5. 21 Ep. \xi. 3 De Eb. et Fejunio, c. 18. 4 5 Cor. i.:30, 31. 5§ 4,

6 Here several touches remind us of Theophrastus. cf. Char. xxiii. and xxiv.

7 Ceillier, VI. viii. 2. 9.

9It has often been separately published. In τόοο it was included by Martin Haynoccius in an Enchiridion Ethicum,
containing also Plutarch’s two tracts on the education of boys and the study of the poets, with which it is interesting to com-
pare it. Grotius published it with Plutarch’s De Legends Poetis at Paris in 1623. They were also published together by
Archbishop Potter at Oxford in 1694. 10 § 2, ᾿

11 τοῦ ὄντος. The highest heathen philosophy strove to reach the neuter τὸ ὄν. The revelation of Jehovah is of the
masculine ὁ ὧν, who communicates with his creatures, and says ἐγὼ εἰμί.

12 Hom.,, Od. xii. 158. cf. Letter i. p. 109.


Ixvi BASIL.

We eee
poets when they are talking about the gods, specially when their talk is of many gods,
and those in mutual disagreement. For among them brother is at variance with brother,
parent against children, and children wage a truceless war against parents. The gods
adulteries and amours and unabashed embraces, and specially those of Zeus, whom they
describe as the chief and highest of them all, — things which could not be told without
a blush of brutes, —all this let us leave to actors on the stage.’

I must make the same remark about historians, specially when they write merely to
please. And we certainly shall not follow rhetoricians in the art of lying. Jt aa a
have been taught by one well able to understand a poet’s mind that with Homer all his
poetry is praise of virtue, and that in him all that is not mere accessory tends to this end.
A marked instance of this is his description of the prince of the Kephallenians saved
naked from shipwreck. No sooner did he appear than the princess viewed him with
reverence; so far was she from feeling anything like shame at seeing him naked and
alone, since his virtue stood him in the stead of clothes.” Afterwards he was of so much
estimation among the rest of the Phzacians that they abandoned the pleasures amid
which they lived, all looked up to him and imitated him, and not a man of the Pheacians
prayed for anything more eagerly than that he might be Ulysses, —a mere waif saved from
shipwreck. Herein my friend said that he was the interpreter of the poet’s mind; that
Homer all but said aloud, Virtue, O men, is what you have to care for. Virtue swims
out with the shipwrecked sailor, and when he is cast naked on the coast, virtue makes him
more noble than the happy Pheacians. And truly this is so. Other belongings are
not more the property of their possessors than of any one else. They are like dice flung
hither and thither in a game. Virtue is the one possession which cannot be taken away,
and remains with us alike alive and dead.

It is in this sense that I think Solon said to the rich,


"AAW ἡμεῖς αὐτοῖς ov διαμειψόμεθα
Τῆς ἀρετῆς τὸν πλοῦτον" ἐπεὶ τὸ μὲν ἔμπεδον αἰεί,
Χρήματα δ' ἀνθρώπων ἄλλοτε ἄλλος ἔχει.


Similar to these are the lines of Theognis,* in which he says that God (whatever
he means by ‘* God”’) inclines the scale to men now one. way and now another, and so at
one moment they are rich, and at another penniless. Somewhere too in his writings
Prodicus, the Sophist of Chios, has made similar reflexions on vice and virtue, to
whom attention may well be paid, for he is a man by no means to be despised. So far as
I recollect his sentiments, they are something to this effect. I do not remember the exact
words, but the sense, in plain prose, was as follows: ἢ

Once upon a time, when Hercules was quite young, and of just about the same age as
yourselves, he was debating within himself which of the two ways he should choose, the one
leading through toil to virtue, the other which is the easiest of all. There approached him
two women. They were Virtue and Vice, and though they said not a word they straight-
way shewed by their appearance what was the difference between them. One was tricked
out to present a fair appearance with every beautifying art. Pleasure and delights were
shed around her and she led close after her innumerable enjoyments like a swarm of bees.
She showed them to Hercules, and, promising him yet more and more, endeavoured to
attract him to her side. The other, all emaciated and squalid, looked earnestly at the lad,
and spoke in quite another tone. She promised him no ease, no pleasure, but toils, labours,
and perils without number, in every land and sea. She told him that the reward of all
this would be that he should become a god (so the narrator tells it). This latter Her-
cules followed even to the death. Perhaps all those who have written anything about
wisdom, less or more, each according to his ability, have praised Virtue in their writings.


1 This shews that the shameless and cruel exhibitions of earlier days had not died out even in the fourth century. cf.
Suetonius, Nero xi., xii., Tertullian, Apol.15. On the whole subject, see Bp. Lightfoot’s note on St. Clem. Rom., Ep. ad
Cor. vi., where Aavaides kai Aipxat is probably a misreading for νεάνιδες παιδίσκαι. He refers for illustrations to Friedlander,
Sittengeschichte Roms, ii. 234. 2 Od. vi. 135 x.T.A.

3 These lines are attributed to Solon by Plutarch, in the tract πῶς ἄν τις ὑπ᾽ ἐχθρῶν ὠφελοῖτο, but they occur among the
elegiac ** gnome” of Theognis, lines 316-318. Fronton du Duc in his notes on the Homilies points out that they are also
quoted + Ante τράβα life of Solon. Basil was well acquainted with Plutarch. (cf. references in the notes to the Hexaemeron.)

e lines are:
Ζεὺς yap τοι τὸ τάλαντον ἐπιρρέπει ἄλλοτε ἄλλως
[Ἄλλοτε μὲν πλουτεῖν, ἄλλοτε δ᾽ οὐδὲν ἔχεω. Theog. 157.


_. 5 The story of The Choice of Hercules used to be called, from Prodicus (of Ceos, not Chios) Hercules Prodicius.
Suidas says that the title of the work quoted was Qoat. The allegory is given at length in Xenophon’s Memorabilia (11. i. 21)


inten Chrysostom’s Regnum, and in Cicero (De Offciis i. 32), who refers to Xenophon. Itis imitated in the Somnuium of
ian.


PROLEGOMENA. Ixvii


These must be obeyed, and the effort made to show forth their teaching in the conduct of
life. For he alone is wise who confirms in act the philosophy which in the rest goes no
farther than words. They do but flit like shadows '

It is as though some painter had represented a sitter as a marvel of manly beauty, and
then he were to be in reality what the artist had painted on the panel. But to utter
glorious eulogies on virtue in public, and make long speeches about it, while in private
putting pleasure before continence and giving gain higher honour than righteousness, is
conduct which seems to me illustrated by actors on the stage: they enter as monarchs and
magnates, when they are neither monarchs nor magnates, and perhaps even are only
slaves. A singer could never tolerate a lyre that did not match his voice, nor a corypheus
a chorus that did not chant in tune. Yet every one will be inconsistent with himself, and
will fail to make his conduct agree with his words. The tongue has sworn, but the heart
has never sworn, as Euripides? has it; and a man will aim at seeming, rather than at being,
good. Nevertheless, if we may believe Plato, the last extreme of iniquity is for one to seem
just without being just.* This then is the way in which we are to receive writings which
contain suggestions of good deeds. And since the noble deeds of men of old are preserved
for our benefit either by tradition, or in the works of poets and historians, do not let us
miss the good we may get from them. For instance: a man in the street once pursued
Pericles with abuse, and persisted in it all day. Pericles took not the slightest notice.
Evening fell, and darkness came on, and even then he could hardly be persuaded to
give over. Pericles lighted him home, for fear this exercise in philosophy might be
lost.4 Again: once upon a time a fellow who was angry with Euclid of Megara threatened
him with death, and swore at him. Euclid swore back that he would appease him,
and calm him in spite of his rage.» A man once attacked Socrates the son of Sophro-
niscus and struck him again and again in the face. Socrates made no resistance, but
allowed the drunken fellow to take his fill of frenzy, so that his face was all swollen
and bloody from the blows. When the assault was done, Socrates, according to the story,
did nothing besides writing on his forehead, as a sculptor might on a statue, ‘¢ This is so
and so’s doing.” ®

This was his revenge. Where conduct, as in this case, is so much on a par with
Christian conduct,’ I maintain that it is well worth our while to copy these great men.
The behaviour of Socrates on this occasion is akin to the, precept that we are by no
means to take revenge, but to turn the other cheek to the smiter. So the conduct of
Pericles and Euclid matches the commands to put up with persecutors, and to

ear their wrath with meekness, and to invoke not cursing but blessing on our enemies.
He who has been previously instructed in these examples will no longer regard the precepts
as impracticable. I should like, too, to instance the conduct of Alexander, when he had
captured the daughters of Darius. Their beauty is described as extraordinary, and
Alexander would not so much as look at them, for he thought it shameful that a conqueror
of men should be vanquished by women. This is of a piece with the statement that he
who looks at a woman impurely, even though he do not actually commit the act of adultery
with her, is not free from its guilt, because he has allowed lust to enter his heart. Then
there is the case of Clinias, the follower of Pythagoras; it is difficult to believe this 1s a case
of accidental, and not intentional, imitation of our principles. What of him? He might
have escaped a fine of three talents by taking an oath, but he preferred to pay rather than
swear, and this when he would have sworn truly. He appears to me to have heard of the
precept which orders us to swear not at all.'? To return to the point with which I began.
We must not take everything indiscriminately, but only what is profitable. It would be


1 cf. Hom., Od. x. 494, where it is said of Teiresias:


Τῷ καὶ τεθνηῶτι νόον πόρε Περσεφόνεια,
Οἴῳ πεπνῦσθαι" τοὶ δὲ σκιαὶ ἀΐσσουσι.

2Eur., Hippolytus, 612: ἡ γλῶσσ᾽ ὀμώμοχ᾽ ἡ δὲ φρὴν ἀνώμοτος, the famous line which Aristophanes made fun of in
Thesmophoriazus@, 275.

8 Fronton du Duc notes that Basil has taken this allusion to Plato from Plutarch’s tract, How to distinguish between
Flatterer and Friend, p. 50: ws yao ὁ Πλάτων φησὶν ἐσχάτη- ἀδικίας εἶναι δοκεῖν δίκαιον μὴ ὄντα. 4Plut., Pericles.

5 Plut., De Ira Cohibenda, where the story is told of a brother. The aggressor says ἀπολοίμην εἰ μή σε τιμωρησαίμην.
The rejoinder is ἐγὼ δὲ ἀπολοίμην εἰ μή σε πείσαιμι.

6 ἐποίει in Greek will of course stand for “" made it,’’ like our “ hoc fecit,” or " did 11, Du Duc gives authority for the
use of the Imp. from Politian.

T τοῖς ἡμετέροις. 8 cf. Plutarch, Alex. and Arrian. II. xii.
9 Clinias was a contemporary of Plato (Diog. Laert. ix. 40).

10 St. Basil can hardly imagine that Clinias lived after Christ; yet Old Testament prohibitions are against false swearing
only. Possibly the third commandment and such a passage as Lev. xix. 12, may have been in his mind. If Clinias had lived
some half a millennium later there seems no reason why he should not have saved himself three talents by using the words of
the Apostle in 2 Cor. xi. 31.


rent BASIL.


ES


shameful for us in the case of food to reject the injurious, and at the same time, in the
case of lessons, to take no account of what keeps the soul alive, but, like mountain
streams, to sweep in everything that happens to be in our way. The sailor does not trust
himself to the mercy of the winds, but steers his boat to the port; the archer aims at his
mark; the smith and the carpenter keep the end of the crafts in view. What sense is
there in our shewing ourselves inferior to these craftsmen, though we are quite able to
understand our own affairs? In mere handicrafts is there some object and end in labour,
and is there no aim in the life of man, to which any one ought to look who means to
live a life better than the brutes’? Were no intelligence to be sitting at the tiller of
our souls, we should be dashed up and down in the voyage of life like boats that have
no ballast. It is just as with competitions in athletics, or, if you like, in music. In
competitions mere crowns are offered for prizes, there is always training, and no one in
training for wrestling or the pancration ἡ practises the harp or flute. Certainly not Poly-
damas, who before his contests at the Olympic games used to make chariots at full speed
stand still, and so kept up his streneth.? Milo, too, could not be pushed off his greased
shield, but, pushed as he was, held on as tightly as statues fastened by lead.’ In one
word, training was the preparation for these feats. Suppose they had neglected the dust and
the gymnasia, and had given their minds to the strains of Marsyas or Olympus, the Phry-
gians,* they would never have won crowns or glory, nor escaped ridicule for their bodily
incapacity. On the other hand Timotheus did not neglect harmony and spend his time in
the wrestling schools. Had he done so it would never have been his lot to surpass all the
world in music, and to have attained such extraordinary skill in his art as to be able to
rouse the soul by his sustained and serious melody, and then again relieve and sooth it
by his softer strains at his good pleasure. By this skill, when once he sang in
Phrygian strains to Alexander, he is said to have roused the king to arms in the
middle of a banquet, and then by gentler music to have restored him to his boon com-
panions.® So great is the importance, alike in music and in athletics, in view of the
object to be attained, of training. ὃ : :


To us are held out prizes whereof the marvellous number and splendour are beyond
the power of words to tell. Will it be possible for those who are fast asleep, and live a
life of indulgence, to seize them without an effort?® If so, sloth would have been of great
price, and Sardanapalus would have been esteemed especially happy, or even Mar-
gites, if you like, who is said by Homer to have neither ploughed nor dug, nor done any
useful work, — if indeed Homer wrote this. Is there not rather truth in the saying of
Pittacus,’ who said that ‘* It is hard to be good? ” : : ᾿


We must not be the slaves of our bodies, except where we are compelled. Our best
provision must be for the soul. We ought by means of philosophy to release her from
fellowship with all bodily appetites as we might from a dungeon, and at the same time
make our bodies superior to our appetites. We should, for instance, supply our bellies
with necessaries, not with dainties like men whose minds are set on cooks and table
arrangers, and who search through every land and sea, like the tributaries of some stern
despot, much to be pitied for their toil. Such men are really suffering pains as intolerable
as the torments of hell, carding into a fire,* fetching water in a sieve, pouring into a tub
with holes in it, and getting nothing for their pains. To pay more than necessary attention
to our hair and dress is, as Diogenes phrases it, the part either of the unfortunate or of the
wicked. ‘To be finely dressed, and to have the reputation of being so, is to my mind quite
as disgraceful as to play the harlot or to plot against a neighbour’s wedlock. What does
it matter to a man with any sense, whether he wears a grand state robe, or a common cloak,


1 7.e, wrestling and boxing together. 2 Paus. Viiv. εἴ. Pers; Sar,3. - 3 Paus. VI. xiv.

* Marsyas, the unhappy rival of Apollo, was said to be a native of Celenz in Phrygia. Olympus was a pupil of Marsyas
ala με Aristoph. Ἐφ. 9). By Plutarch (Mus. xi.) he is called ἀρχηγὸς τῆς Ἑλληνικῆς καὶ καλῆς μουσικῆς. cf. Arist., 2 οἱ.

. Vv. 16.

5 cf, Cic., Legg. ii. 15, Plutarch, De Mus. There are two Timothei of musical fame, one anterior to Alexander. It will be
remembered that in Dryden’s Alexander's Feast ‘‘the king seized a flambeau with zeal to destroy,” after the ** Lydian
measures ’”’ had * soothed his soul to pleasures.” ’


_. ®Lit., who sleep with both ears, to seize with one hand (idiom for sleeping soundly. cf. Aul. Gell. ii. h t
ἐπ᾽ Autoréoay καθεύδειν from Menander). ( προ ον ἀν ο deine τ Fee TS


7 Of Mitylene, cf. Arist., Po/. 111. xiv. 9, and Diog. Laert. I. iv., who mentions Simonides’ quotation of the maxim of
the text "Avépa ἀγαθὸν ἀλαθέως γενέσθαι χαλεπὸν, To Πιττάκειον.


Seis mip ξαίνοντες, t.e. labouring ἰπ vain. cf. Plat., Legg. 780 c. The ordinary rendering to “flog fire,” adopted b
Erasmus (Adag. Chil. i., Centur. iv.), seems wrong. oy Beker on the phrase in Plato. i i : ᾿ Ἶ


PROLEGOMENA. Ixix


so long as it serves to keep off heat and cold? In other matters necessity is to be the rule,
and the body is only to be so far regarded as is good for the soul.”


Similar precepts are urged, with further references and allusions to Pythagoras, the
Corybantes, Solon, Diogenes, Pythius, the rich man who feasted Xerxes on his way to
Greece, Pheidias, Bias, ‘Polycletiss, Archilochus, and Tithonus."

It is suggestive to compare the wealth of literary illustration in this little tract with
the severe restrictions which Basil imposes on himself in his homilies for delivery in church,
where nothing but Scripture is allowed to appear. In studying the sermons, it might be
supposed that F Basil read nothing but the Bible. In reading the treatise on heathen authors,
but for an incidental allusion to David and Methuselah, it might be supposed that he spent
all his spare time over his old school and college authors.

(iii) The Panegyrical Homilies are five in number.

Homily V. is on Julitta, a lady of Caesarea martyred in 306, and commemorated on
July 30. (In the Basilian menology, July 21.) Her property being seized by an _iniqui-
tous magistrate, she was refused permission to proceed with a suit for restitution unless she
abjured Christianity. On her refusal to do this she was arraigned and burned. She is
described as having said that women no less than men were made after the image of God ;
that women as well as men were made by their Creator capable of manly virtue ;. that it
took bone as well as flesh to make the woman, and that constancy, fortitude, and endurance
are as womanly as they are manly.

The homily, which recommends patience and cheerfulness in adversity, contains a pas-
sage of great beauty upon prayer. ‘* Ought we to pray without ceasing? Is it possible to
obey such acommand? ‘These are questions which I see you are ready to ask. I will
endeavour, to the best of my ability, to defend the charge. Prayer is a petition for good
addressed by the pious to God. But we do not rigidly confine our petition to words. Nor
yet do we imagine that God requires to be reminded by speech. He knows our needs even
though we ask Him not. What dolIsay then? I say that we must not think to make our
prayer complete by syllables. The strength of prayer lies rather in the purpose of our
soul and in deeds of virtue reaching every part and moment of our life. ‘Whether ye
eat,’ it is said, ‘or drinky or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.’? As thou takest

thy seat at table, pray. As thou liftest the loaf, offer thanks to the Giver. When thou
sustainest thy bodily weakness with wine, remember Him Who supplies thee with this gift,
to make thy heart glad and to comfort thy infirmity. Has thy need for taking food passed
away? Let not the thought of thy Benefactor pass away too. As thou art putting on thy
tunic, thank the Giver of “it. As thou wrappest thy cloak about thee, feel yet greater love
to God, Who alike in summer and in winter has given us coverings convenient for us, at
once to preserve our life, and to cover what is unseemly. Is the day done? Give thanks
to Him Who has given us the sun for our daily work, and has provided for us a fire to light
up the night, and to serve the rest of the needs of life. Let night give the other occasions
of prayer. When thou lookest up to heaven and gazest at the beauty of the stars, pray to
the Lord of the visible world; pray to God the Arch-artificer of the universe, Who in wisdom
hath made them all. When thou seest all nature sunk in sleep, then again worship Him
Who gives us even against our wills release from the continuous strain of toil, and by a
short refreshment restores us once again to the vigour of our strength. Let not night her-
self be all, as it were, the special and peculiar property of sleep. Let not half thy life be
useless thr. ough the senselessness of slumber. Divide the time of night between sleep and
prayer. Nay, let thy slumbers be themselves experiences in piety; for it is only natural
that our sleeping dreams should be for the most part echoes of the anxieties of the day.
As have been our conduct and pursuits, so will inevitably be our dreams. Thus wilt thou
pray without ceasing; if thou prayest not only in words, but unitest thyself to God through
all the course of life and so thy life be made one ceaseless and uninterrupted prayer.

Barlaam, the subject of Homily XVII.,? was martyred under Diocletian, either at
Antioch or at Cesarea. The ingenuity of his tormentors conceived the idea of compel-
ling him to fling the pinch of incense to the gods by putting it, while burning, into his
hand, and forcing him to hold it over the altar. The fire fought with the right “hand, and
the fire proved the weaker. The fire burned through the hand, but the hand was firm.
The martyr might say, “Ἢ Thou hast holden me by my right hand. Thou shalt guide me


1 Herod. vii. 21. 2) Cor. x.
8 Supposed by some to be not Basil’s, but Chrysostom’s. cf. Ceillier, i iv. p. 53-


Ixx BASIL.
eh ae a τ΄’ ες υυθθΘθσΝ


with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.”* The homily concludes with an
apostrophe to the painters of such scenes. “Πρ, I charge you, ye famous painters sig:
martyrs’ struggles! Adorn by your art the mutilated figure of this officer of our army! I
have made but a sorry picture of the crowned hero. Use all your skill and all your
colours in his honour.”’ | Hat

This was taken at the second Council of Nicza as proof of an actual painting.’

Homily XVIII. is on the martyr Gordius, who was a native of Cesarea, and was
deeraded from his rank of centurion when Licinius removed Christians from the army.
Gordius retired into the wilderness, and led the life of an anchorite. One day there was a
creat festival at Casarea in honour of Mars. There were to be races in the theatre, and
thither the whole population trooped. Not a Jew, not a heathen, was wanting. No small
company of Christians had joined the crowd, men of careless life, sitting in the assembly
of folly, and not shunning the counsel of the evil-doers, to see the speed of the horses and the
skill of the charioteers. Masters had given their slaves a holiday. Even boys ran from
their schools to the show. There was a multitude of common women of the lower ranks.
The stadium was packed, and every one was gazing intently on the races. Then that
noble man, great of heart and great of courage, came down from the uplands into the
theatre. He took no thought of the mob. He did not heed how many hostile hands he
met. . . . Ina moment the whole theatre turned to stare at the extraordinary sight.
The man looked wild and savage. From his long sojourn in the mountains his head was
squalid, his beard long, his dress filthy. His body was like a skeleton. He carried a
stick and a wallet. Yet there was a certain grace about him, shining from the unseen all
around him. He was recognised. A great shout arose. Those who shared his faith
clapped for joy, but the enemies of the truth urged the magistrate to put in force the
penalty he had incurred, and condemned him beforehand to die. Then an universal
shouting arose all round. Nobody looked at the horses— nobody at the charioteers. The
exhibition of the chariots was mere idle noise. Not an eye but was wholly occupied with
looking at Gordius, not an ear wanted to hear anything but his words. Then a confused
murmur, running like a wind through all the theatre, sounded above the din of the course.
Heralds were told to proclaim silence. The pipes were hushed, and all the band stopped
ina moment. Gordius was being listened to; Gordius was the eentre of all eyes, and in
a moment he was dragged before the magistrate who presided over the games. With a
mild and gentle voice the magistrate asked him his name, and whence he came. He told
his country, his family, the rank he had held, the reason for his flight, and his return.
‘¢ Here Tam,” he cried; ‘‘ ready to testify by deed to the contempt in which I hold your
orders, and my faith in the God in whom I have trusted. For I have heard that you are
inferior to few in cruelty. This is why I have chosen this time in order to carry out my
wishes.” With these words he kindled the wrath of the governor like a fire, and roused
all his fury against himself. The order was given, ‘* Call the lictors; where are the plates
of lead? Where are the scourges? Let him be stretched upon a wheel; let him be
wrenched upon the rack; let the instruments of torture be brought in; make ready the
beasts, the fire, the sword, the cross. What a good thing for the villain that he can die
only once!” * ‘+ Nay,” replied Gordius, ‘* what a bad thing for me that I cannot die for
Christ again and again! ” ; : :

All the town crowded to the spot where the martrydom was to be consummated.
Gordius uttered his last words. Death is the common lot of man. As we must all die,
let us through death win life. Make the necessary voluntary. Exchange the earthly for
the heavenly. He then crossed himself, he stepped forward for the fatal blow, without
changing colour or losing his cheerful mien. It seemed as though he were not going to
meet an executioner, but to yield himself into the hands of angels.‘

Homily XIX. is on the Forty Soldier Martyrs of Sebaste, who were ordered by the
officers of Licinius, A.D. 320, to offer sacrifice to the heathen idols, and, at their refusal,
were plunged for a whole night into a frozen pond in the city, in sight of a hot bath on the
brink. One man’s faith and fortitude failed him. He rushed to the relief of the shore,


1 Ps. xxiii. 23, 24. 2 Labbe vii. 272. cf. Chrys. Hom. Ixxiii.

S ἀλλὰ yap ola κερδαίνει, φησὶν, ἅπαξ μόνον ἀποθνήσκων. Garnier seems to have completely missed the force of this
exclamation in the explanation in a note, "" Fudex hoc dicere volebat, quem fructum referet ex sua pertinacia, st semel mor-
tuus fuerit; neque enim in hanc vitam rursus redibit, ejus ut gaudiis perfruatur, neque tamen ulla alia vita est.”


4 For the tortures and modes of execution enumerated, Du Duc compares Aristoph., Pax. 4:2, Chrysost., De Luciano
Martyre, and Nicephorus vi. 14. 3 ἽΝ ed i


PROLEGOMENA. Ixxi


plunged into the hot water, and died on the spot. One of the executioners had stood
warming himself and watching the strange scene. He had seemed to see angels coming
down from heaven and distributing gifts to all the band but one. When the sacred number
of forty was for the moment broken the officer flung off his clothes, and sprang into the
freezing pond with the cry, “1 am a Christian.” Judas departed. Matthias took his
place. : . °


What trouble wouldst thou not have taken to find one to pray for thee to the Lord!
Here are forty, praying with one voice. Where two or three are gathered together in the
name of the Lord, there is He in the midst. Who doubts His presence in the midst of
forty? The afflicted flees to the Forty; the joyous hurries to them; the former, that he
may find relief from his troubles; the latter, that his blessings may be preserved. Here a
pious woman is found beseeching for her children; she begs for the return of her absent
husband, or for his health if he be sick. Let your supplications be made with the martyrs.
Let young men imitate their fellows. Let fathers pray to be fathers of like sons. Let
mothers learn from a good mother. The mother of one of these saints saw the rest over-
come by the cold, and her son, from his strength or his constancy, yet alive. The execu-
tioners had left him, on the chance of his having changed his mind. She herself lifted
him in her arms, and placed him on the car in which the rest were being drawn to the
pyre, a veritable martyr’s mother.’ 7

The last of the Panegyrical Homilies (X XIII.) is on Saint Mamas, commemorated on
September 2 by the Greeks, and on August 17 by the Latins. He is said to have been a
shepherd martyred at Casarea in 274 in the persecution of Aurelian. Sozomen (v. 2)
relates that when the young princes Julian and Gallus were at the castle of Macellum ”
they were engaged in building a church in the martyr’s honour, and that Julian’s share in
the work never prospered.” The homily narrates no details concerning the saint, and
none seem to be known. It does contain a more direct mention of a practice of invoca-
tion. Thereis a charge to all who have enjoyed the martyr in dreams toremember him ; to
all who have met with him in the church, and have found him a helper in their prayers;
to all those whom he has aided in their doings, whexz called on by name.* The conclusion
contains a summary of the Catholic doctrine concerning the Son. ‘* You have been told
before, and now you are being told again, ‘ In the beginning was the Word,’® to prevent
your supposing that the Son was a being generated after the manner of men,* from His hay-
ing come forth out of the non-existent. ‘Word’ is said to you, because of His impassi-
bility. ‘Was’ is said because of His being beyond time. He says ‘beginning’ to
conjoin the Begotten with His Father. You have seen how the obedient sheep hears
a master’s voice. ‘In the beginning,’ and ‘was,’ and ‘Word.’ Do not go on to say,


1 The name of this youngest of the Forty is given as Mclito (D.C.B.s.v.). They are commemorated on March g in the
Roman Kalendar of Gregory XIII. and the Menology of Basil; on March τὸ in the Roman Mart. of Bened. ΧΙ ΙΝ; on the 11th
in the old Roman Kal., and on March 16 in the Armenian. The legend of the discovery of some of their relics is given in
Sozomen ix, 2. Others were obtained for the church built in their honour at Annesi. (cf. p. xiv.) Two doctrinal points come
out in this homily, (@) The officer who took the place of Melito is said to have been baptized, not in water but in his own blood
(§ 7). Here is martyrdom represented as the equivalent of baptism. (6) The stage arrived at in the progress of Christian senti-
ment towards the invocation of departed saints is indicated. Garnier, the Jesuit, writes in the margin of the passage quoted
above, /nvocantur martyres ; and Ceillier notes, // reconnait que les prieres des martyrs peuvent beaucoup nous aider auprés
de Dieu. Butin this particular passage the idea of ‘ fleeing to the Forty” seems to be not fleeing to them to ask for their
prayers, but fleeing to the shrine to pray in company withthem. Itis rather the fellowship than the intercession of the saints
which is sought. μετὰ μαρτύρων γιγνέσθω τὰ αἰτήματα ὑμῶν. Let your requests be made not fo but withthe martyrs. In the
Homily on St. Mamas, the next in order, the expressions are less equivocal. At the same time it must be remarked that with St.
Basil the invocation and the intercession are local. In the De Sp. Scto. (chap. xxili. p. 34) a significant contrast is drawn
between the ubiquity of the Holy Ghost and the limited and local action of angels. And if of angels, so of saints. The saints
who have departed this life are thouzht of as accessible at the shrines where their relics rest, but. if we apply the analogy of
the De Sp. Scto., not everywhere. It has been said that this is the period when requests for the prayers of the holy dead begin
to appear, and Archbishop Ussher (Address to a Fesuit, chap.ix.) cites Gregory of Nazianzus for the earliest instance within his
knowledge of a plain invocation of the departed. But, as bishop Harold Browne points out, his invocation is rather rhetorical
than supplicatory. Gregory ‘‘ had even a pious persuasion that they still continued as much as ever to aid with their prayers
those for whom they had been wont to pray on earth (Orat. xxiv. p. 425). And he ventures to think, if it be not too bold to
Say So (ci μὴ τολαηρὸν τοῦτο εἰπεῖν), that the saints, being nearer to God and having put off the fetters of the flesh, have more
avail with Him than when on earth (Orat. xix. p. 228). In all these he does not appear to have gone further than some who
preceded him, nor is there anything in such speculations beyond what might be consistent with the most Protestant abhorrence
of saint worship and Mariolatry ” (Bp. Harold Browne in Art. xxii.). Romish authorities in support of a yet earlier develop-
ment, point to Ireneus (Adv. Her. v.19), where in a highly rhetorical passage the Virgin Mury is said to have become the
“« advocate’ of the Virgin Eve, and to Origen, who “invoked ” his guardian angel (Hom. ¢. in Ezek.7). The later medixval
invocation Bp. Jeremy Taylor (vol. vi. Eden’s ed. p. 489) ingeniously shews to be of a piece rather with early heresy than with
early Catholicity : ‘* It pretends to know their present state, which is hid from our eyes; and it proceeds upon the very reason
upon which the Gnostics and Valentinians went; that is, that it is fit to have mediators between God and us; that we may pre-
sent our prayers to them, and theyto God. To which add that the Church of Rome presenting candles and other donaries to the
Virgin Mary as to the Queen of heaven, do that which the Collyridians did (Epiphan. Her, |xxix, vol.i. p. 1057). The gift is
only differing, as candle and cake, gold and garments, this vow or that vow.”

2 ς΄. Pv χν., π. 8 cf. Greg. Naz., Or. iv. § 25.

€ ogous, ὀνόματι, κληθεὶς, ἐπὶ τῶν ἔργων παρέστη. On the reverence for relics cf. Letters cxcvii., cclii., and cclvii.

5 Johni. 1, 6 γέννημα ἀνθρώπινον.


Ixxil BASIL.
Pe eee


‘How was He?’ and ‘If He was, He was not begotten ; ’ and ‘If He was begotten, He
was not.’ It is not a sheep who says these things. The skin is a sheep’s; but the speaker
within is a wolf. Let him be recognised as an enemy. ‘My sheep hear my voice.’?*
You have heard the Son. Understand His likeness to His Father. I say /¢keness because
of the weakness of the stronger bodies: In truth, and I am not afraid of approaching the
truth, I arn no ready deceiver: I say zdendity, always preserving the distinct existence of
Son and Father. In the hypostasis of Son understand the Father’s Form, that you may
hold the exact doctrine of this Image, —that you may understand consistently with true
religion the words, ‘I am in the Father and the Father in me.’* Understand not con-


mart
fusion of essences, but identity of characters.


Vi. “ERT TEeRs;


Under this head I will add nothing to the notes, however inadequate, appended to
the text.
VI... «LITURGICAL.


It is beyond the scope of the present work to discuss at length the history and relation
of the extant Liturgies, which go by the name of St. Basil. St. Basil’s precise share in
their composition, as we possess them, must be conjectural.

(i) The Liturgy, which St. Basil himself used and gave to his clergy and monks,
preserved the traditional form in use in the archdiocese of Cesarea.* It is mentioned in
the xxxii®? canon of the council ‘¢in Trullo” of 692. This is no doubt the basis of the
Greek Liturgy known as St. Basil’s, and used in the East as well as the Liturgy of St.
Chrysostom. The form in use is contained in Neale’s Przmetive Liturgies (1875). Dr.
Swainson (Greek Liturgies chiefly from Oriental Sources, p. 75) printed an edition
of it from the Barberini MS. in 1884.

(ii) There is an Alexandrine Liturgy in Coptic, Arabic, and Greek form, called St.
Basil’s, and used on fast days by the Monophysites (Renaudot, Zzt. Orient. Collectio, i.
154). This differs entirely from the first named.

(iii) Yet again there isa Syriac Liturgy called St. Basil’s, translated by Masius,
and given by Renaudot in his second volume.‘


VII. Wruitincs Spurious AND DUBIOUS.


Under this head will be ranked, besides writings objections against which have been
already noticed:
1. Constitutiones monastice (᾿Ασκητικαὶ διατάξεις. in number thirty-four.


2 Ponez in monachos delinquentes, and Poene in Canonicas (ἐπιτίμια).
3. Libri duo de Baptismo.

4. Sermones duo ascetici. '

δ. Various Homilies:


Adversus Calumniatores SS. Trinitatis,
Altera de Sp. Scto.,
In Sanctam Christi Generationem,
De Libero Arbitrio,
In aliquot Scripture locis, dicta in Lacizis. ἡ
III. De Jejunio.
De Peenitentia.
6. A book On True Virginity.
7. <A treatise On consolation in adversity.


1 cf. John x. 16. 2John xiv.10. cf. De Sp. Scto. ὃ 45, p. 28.

8cf. De Sp. Scto. chap. xxvii. p. 41.

* cf. Dict. Christ. Ant. s.v. ‘ Liturgy,” and C, Hole, Manual of the Book of Common Prayer, chap. ii. Fessler notes:
“ Extat Liturgia 5. Basilit tam fusior quam brevior gr. et lat. in Eucholog. Gr. ed. F. Goar Venettts 1730 et alia gr. et lat.
in E. Kenaudot Coll. Lit. Or. Paris, 1716, item alia latine tantum conversa ex Coplico Facobitarum itn eadem collect, ac
rursus alia latine tantum ex Syriaco conversa. . . . De forme varietate hec optime monet Kenaudot: " Liturgia illa, quod
extra dubium est, usurpatur in Greca ecclesia ab annis plus mille ducentis ; atque inde ortginem habuerunt leves aliquot
discrepantia in precibus preparatortis aut in aliis orationibus. Quedam exemplaria ceremoniales rubricas habent, gue in
alits non reperiuntur ; αὐ alicujus momenti discrimen in illis partibus que canonem sacre Actionts constituunt, non
reperttur. ._. . Varietates tn codicibus omnes prope ad ritus spectant, gui enucleatius in aliquibus, in alits brevius
explicantur, in nonnullis omittuntur, guia aliunde peti debebant.’ Eo autem sensu Liturgi@ hujus auctor dicitur Basilius,
non quod proprio ingento eam excogttaverit, sed quod preces publicas, eisque contiguos ritus, quoad ret essentiam ex communi
tradttionis Afostolice fonte manantes, ordinaverit et in scriptis codicibus ad certam formam vedegerit,”


PROLEGOMENA. Ixxiii


8. <A treatise De laude solitariz vite.
9. Admonitio ad filium spiritualem (extant only in Latin).
10. Sermones de moribus XXIV. (ὐθικοὶ λόγοι), a cento of extracts made by Simeon
Metaphrastes.


VIII. Wruitincs MENTIONED, BUT LosT.


A book against the Manicheans (Augustine, c. Julian. i. 16-17). Tuillemont (Art.
cxlv. p. 303) mentions authors in which lost fragments of St. Basil are to be found, and
(Art. cxxxvii. p. 290) refers to the lost Commentary on the Book of Job.


IX. AppITIONAL NoTES ON SOME PorIntTs IN ST. BAsiu’s DoctTRINAL AND ECCLE-
SIASTICAL POSITION.


It has been claimed with reason that the doctrinal standpoint of St. Baégil is identical
with that of the English Church, with the one exception of the veneration of relics and the
invocation of saints.’

In confirmation of this view, the following points may be noted:

1. Zhe Holy Eucharist. Theremarkable passage on the spiritual manducation of the
elements in Letter VIII. is commented on on p. 118. His custom as to frequent commun-
ion and his opinion as to the reserved sacrament are remarked on on p. 179.

A significant passage is to be found in the Moralza, Rule XXI., that participation in
the Body and Blood of Christ is necessary to eternal life. John vi. 54, is then quoted.
That no benefit is derived by him who comes to communion without consideration of the
method whereby participation of the Body and Blood of Christ is given; and that he who
receives unworthily is condemned. On this John vi. 54 and 62, and 1 Cor. xiii. 27, are
quoted. By what method (ποίῳ λόγῳ) we must eat the Body and drink the Blood of the
Lord, in remembrance of the Lord’s obedience unto death, that they who live may no longer
live unto themselves, but to Him who died and rose again for them. In answer, the
quotations are Luke.xxil. 29,1 Cor. xi. 23,)2\Cor. vy. 14, and 1 .Cor., xs τό,

2. Mariolatry. Even Letter CCCLX., which bears obvious marks of spuriousness,
_and of proceeding from a later age, does not go beyond a recognition of the Blessed Virgin
aS Θεοτόκος, in which the Catholic Church is agreed, and a general invocation of apostles,
prophets, and martyrs, the Virgin not being set above these. The argument of Letter
CCLXI. (p. 300) that ‘* if the Godbearing flesh was not ordained to be assumed of the lump
of Adam, what need was there of the Blessed Virgin?” seems quite inconsistent with
the modern doctrine of the Immaculate Conception. Of any cultus of the Virgin, St.
Basil’s writings shew no trace.

3. Lelations to the Roman Church.

In order to say something under this head, Ceillier, the Benedictine, is driven to such
straits as to quote the application of the term ** Coryphzus ”’ to Damasus in Letter CCX XXIX.
Certainly St. Basil saw no reason to congratulate the Westerns on their ‘* Coryphzus,” so
far as intelligent interest in the East was involved. Fialon® sees the position more
clearly, so far as Basil is concerned, though he assumes the Councils to have given more
authority to the patriarch of the ancient capital than was in fact conceded. ‘*Sz Baszle ne
va pas, comme la majorité du Concile de Constantinople, jusqwa traiter P Occident
comme étranger; Sil ne pretend pas que empire appartienne al Orient, parce que
Zl’ Orient vott nattre le Soleil, et que Cest en Orient que Dieu brilla dans une enveloppe
charnelle,* ne voudratt tl pas, dans lordre religieux, Vunion indépendante, gut, depuis
Constantin, rattache, dans lordre politique, ces deux parties du monde Romain?
ses yeux 0 Orient et ’ Occident ne sont ils pas deux freres, dont les droit sont égaux, sans
suprématie, sans atnesse?”

In truth Basil appealed to Damasus as Theodoret to Leo, and as Chrysostom to Inno-
cent, not as vassal to liege lord, but as brother to brother. In Basil’s case, even the broth-
erhood was barely recognised, if recognised at all, by the western prelate.


1 ¢f, Dr. Travers Smith, St. Basil, p. 125. 2 Etude Hist. p. 133-


8 Ξένον yap έστιν, ws ὁρῶ, viv ἡ δύσις,
Kai τὸν λογισμὸν, ὡς ἐπαίνετος σκόπει,
Δεῖν γὰρ συνάλλεσθαι ἡλίῳ τὰ πράγματα,
Ἐντεῦθεν ἀρχὴν λαμβάνοντ᾽ ὅθεν Θεὸς
ἼἜλαμψεν ἡμῖν σαρκικῷ προβλήματι. Greg. Naz., Carm.


Ixxiv BASIL.


ee Ee TMS


X. Epirrions AND MANUSCRIPTS.


Among the chief editions and MSS. the following may be mentioned :

The Editio Princeps of the complete extant works of Basil in the original Greek is
that which Froben published for Janus Cornarius at Bale in 1551. But Froben had
already published in 1532, under the editorship of Erasmus, an edition containing the De
Spiritu Sancto, the Hexaemeron, the Homilies on the Psalms, twenty-nine different Hlom-
tlies and some Leéters.

A Venetian edition, published by Fabius in 1535, comprised the Moralza, as weil as
the dubious book on Virginity, three books against Eunomius, and the tract against the
Sabellians, Arians, and Anomeeans.

The Greek editions had been preceded by a Latin version at Rome, by Raphael Volater-
ranus in 1515, of which the autograph manuscript is in the British Museum, and by another
at Paris in 1525, and by a third Latin edition issued at Cologne in 1531. These were fol-
lowed by other editions printed at Paris, Antwerp, and Cologne. In1618 Fronton du Duc,
commonly known as Duceus, published, in conjunction with Frederic Morel, an edition in
two folio volumes containing a Latin version as well as the Greek. The edition of the French
Dominican Father, Francis Combefis, was published shortly after his death in 1679. The
most important step in the direction of accuracy and completeness was taken by Julian
Garnier, a Benedictine Father of the Congregation of St. Maur. He revised and corrected
the Greek text of earlier editions on the authority of a number of manuscripts in Paris,
Italy, and England, and issued the first of his three folio volumes at Paris, at the press of
John Baptist Coignard, in 1721. Thethird volume did not appear till 1730, five years after
Garnier’s death. In the meanwhile the editorial work had been taken up by Prudent
Maran, another Benedictine, to whom are due a careful and voluminous biographical
notice, many notes, and a chronological arrangement of the Letters. This was reissued in
three 4° volumes in Paris in 1889, and is the basis of the edition published, with
additions, by the Abbé Jacques Paul Migne, in the Patrologia Greca, in 1857.

An important edition of a separate work is the revised text, with notes and introduc-
tion, of the De Spzritu Sancto, by the Rev. C. F. H. Johnston, published at the Claren-
don Press in 1892.

German translations were published by Count Schweikhard at Ingolstadt in 1591
(Ceillier VI. viii. 8), and by J. von Wendel at Vienna in 1776-78. There have also been
issued Bastlius des Grossen auserlesenes Homitlien, tibersetzt und mit Ammerkungen
versehen von 7. G. Krabinger, Landshut, 1839, and Azserlesene Schriften, tibersetzt
voz Grone, Kempten, 1875.

Homilies and Orations were published in Italian in 1711 by Gio. Maria Lucchini.
Omelie Scelte, translated by A. M. Ricci, were published in Florence in 1732.

Many important extracts are translated into French in the Aéstozre Générale des
Auteurs Sacrés of the Benedictine Remy Ceillier (Paris, 1737).

E. Fialon, in his £¢. A/ést. (1869) has translated the Hexaemeron; and in 1889 the
Panégyrique du Martyr Gordius was published in French by J. Genouille.

. A complete account of the bibliography of St. Basil is given in the Wo¢ct2a ex Biblio-
theca Fabricté (Ed. Harles, tom. ix. 1804), in Migne’s ed. vol. i., Prolegomena p. ccxli.

In 1888 a translation of the De Spirdtu Sancto, by G. Lewis, was included in the
Christian Classic Series.

Of all the smaller works a great popularity, as far as popularity can be gauged by the
number of editions and translations, has belonged to the Advzce to the Young and the
flomily on the Forty Martyrs. ,

The MSS. collated by the Ben. Edd. for their edition of the De Spirttu Sancto are
five entitled Regz?, and a sixth known as Colberténus, now in the national library at Paris.
The Ben. Regius Secundus (2293) is described by Omont (/zventatre Sommaire des
MSS. Grecs) as of the Xthc., the Coléertinus (4529) and the Regius Tertius (2893)
as of the XIthc., and the Regzus Primus (2286), fregius Quartus (2896), and Regzus
Quintus (3430) as of the XIVth c.

For his edition, Mr. C. F. H. Johnston also collated or had collated 22,509 Add.
MSS., Xthc., in the British Museum ; Codd. Misc. xxxvii., XIth c., in the Bodleian Library
at Oxford ; Cod. Theol. 142, XIIth c., in the Imperial Library at Vienna; Cod. Theol. 18,
XIVth c., also at Vienna; Cod. xxiii., XIthc., in the Library of the Holy Synod at Moscow ;


PROLEGOMENA. | Ixxv


Boo (Ree. 1524, 3) G, XIth c., at Paris; Cod. lviii., Xth c., at St. Mark's, Venice; , Cod.
Ixvi., XI Ith c., also at St. Mark’s, Venice; Codd. Regin. Suaecor. 35, X1Vthc., in the Vat-
ican at Rome.

For the Hexaemeron the Ben. Edd. used eight MSS. styled Aegzz, and numbered
respectively 1824, 2286 (originally in the collection of Henry II. at Fontainebleau, the
Regius Primus of the enumeration for the De Spcrztu Sancto, but the Secundus for that of
the Hexaemeron), 2287 (1°), 2287 (2°), 2349, 2892, 2896 (the Regius Quartus of the De
Spirttu Sancto),and 2989; two MSS. entitled Colbertinus, 3069 and 4721 ; two Coistiniani,
229, [Xth c., and 235; and a MS. in the Bodleian, ‘‘a doctissimo viro Joanne Wolf
collatus.”’

The sources of the Ben. Ed. of the Ze¢ters were Coislinianus 237, ΧΙ c., a Codex
Harleanus of the Xth or XIth c., and a Codex Mediceus, Codex Regius 2293, Codex
Regius es Codex Regius 2896, Codex Regius 2502, Codex Regius 1824, Codex Regius
1906, and Codex Regius 1908.


The following MSS. of St. Basil are in the library of the Bodleian at Oxford :


Homiliz et Epistole. Codex membranaceus, in 4to majori ff. 250, sec. xii. Epistola
ad Optimum, episcopum, in septem ultiones. Cain. fol. iii.

Epistola ad virginem lapsam, fol. 211b.

Ejusdem Basilii epistola ad monachum lapsum, fol. 215b.

Epistole canonice. Buarocciani. xxvi. 285b (z.e. pt. 1, p. 36).

Codex membranaceus, in 4to minori, ff. 370, sec. xi. fol. 285b.

Epist canon. Baroc. xxxvi. 121 (2.e. pt. I, p, 147).

Codex membranaceus, in 4to minori, ff. 12 et 161, sec. xii. exeuntis.

Ejusdem epistole canonice tertie prologus, fol. 125b.

CLVIII. 202 (z.e. pt. 1, p. 268). Codex chartaceus, in 4to majori, ff. 374, sec. xv.

S. Basilii ad Amphilochium, Iconii episcopum, et alias epistole quinque canonice,
fol. 202.

CLXXXV. 129b (z.e. pt. 1, p. 307). Membranaceus, in folio, ff. 83.et 312, sec. xi.
- exeuntis, bene exaratus et servatus.

S. Basilii magni epistola canonicz, cum scholius nonnullis, fol. 129b.

Ejusdem epistole septem alia, fol. 141.

Epist. Canon. Baroc. cxcvi. 184b (2.6. pt. 1, p. 336). Membranaceus, in 4to majori,
ff. 313, sec. ΧΙ. anno scilicet 1043 exaratus.

S. Basilii expositio de jejunio quadragesimali, f. 6b.

CCV. 4oob (2.6. pt. 1, p. 361). Codex chartaceus, in folio, ff. 520, sec. xiv. mutilus
et madore corruptus.

Dionysii Alexandrini, Petri Alexandrini, Gregorii Thaumaturgi, Athanasii, Basilii,
Gregorii Nysseni, Timothei Alexandrini, Theophili Alexandrini, Cyrilli Alexandrini, et
Gennadii epistole encyclice ; interpretatione Balsamonis illustrate, fol. 378b.

Epistole canonice. Laudiani. xxxix. 200 (Ζ.6. pt. 1, p. 519). Codex membrana--
ceus in 4to maj. ff. 347, sec. forsan. xi. ineuntis, etc.

S. Basilii Casareensis octo, subnexis capitulis duobus ex opere de 5. Spiritu,
fol. 200.

Seld. xlviii. 151 (2.6. pt. 1, p. 611). Codex membranaceus, in 4to ff. 189, sec. xiii.
nitide exaratus; quandam monasterii S. Trinitatis apud Chalcem insulam [ol. 3385 ].

S. Basilii ad Amphilochium, Diodorum et Gregorium canones, fol. 151.

Misc. clxx. 181, 263, 284b (¢.e. pt. 1, p. 717). Codex membranaceus, in 4to majori,
ff. 363, secc. si tabulam sec. xi. excipiamus, xiv. et xv.; initio et fine mutilus. Rawl.
BAuct. G. 158.

S. Basilii, archiep. Cesareensis, ad Amphilochium epistole tres canonice, fol. 181.

5. Basilii epistole duz, scilicet, ad chorepiscopos, ad episcopos 5101 subjectos, cum
excerptis duobus ex capp. xxvii. et xxix. ad Amphilochium de S. Spiritu, fol. 263.

S. Basilii epistole due, ad Diodorum et ad Gregorium, fol. 284b.

Epist. Canon. misc. ccvi. 171 (¢.e. pt. 1, p. 763). Codex membranaceus, in folio
minori, ff. 242. sec. forsan xi. exeuntis; bene exaratus et servatus. Meerm. Auct. T. 2. 6.

S. Basilii, archiep. Casareensis, ad Amphilochium ep. Icon. epistole tres canonice
cum scholiis hic illic margini adpositis, fol. 171.


Ixxvi BASIL. *’


i a 8 Ὁ ΘΟ


Epistole ccexxxiv. Misc. xxxviii. 1 (2.6. pt. 1, p. 642). Codex chartaceus, in folio,
ff, 196, sec. xvi. anno 1547 scriptus [ol. 3091]. Auct. E. 2. 10.

S. Basilii epistolea, ut e numeris marginalibus apparet, cccxxxtv. fol. I.

Ult. est ad eundem Eusebium, et exstat in ed. cit. tom. Hl. Ρ. 257.

Epistola ccxlv. Baroc cxxi. [Ζ.6. pt. 1, p. 199]. Membranaceus, in 410 ff. 226, sec.
xii. exeuntis, bene exaratus; in calce mutilus.

S. Basilii, archiepiscopi Cesareensis, epistole ad diversos, numero ducente quadra-
ginta quinque.

Epist. clxxvii. Roc. xviii. 314 (2.6. pt. 1, p. 471). Codex chartaceus, in folio, ff.
475, hodie in duo volumina distinctus, anno 1349 manu _Constantini Sapientis binis
columnis scriptus; olim ecclesie S. Trinitatis apud insulam Chalcem [0]. 264].

S. Basilii Casareensis epistole circiter centum septuaginta septem, fol. 314.

Epistole varia. Baroc. lvi. 28b et passim (z.e. pt. 1, p. 83). Codex bomby-
cinus, ff. £75, sec. xiv. exeuntis; initio mutilus, et madore corruptus.

S. Basilii adversus Eunomium epistola, fol. 28b.

Epist. xiii. ad diversos. Baroc. ccxxviil 118b (¢.e. pt. 1, p. 392). Membranaceus,
in folio, ff. 206, sec. forsan xii. ineuntis; foliis aliquot chartaceis a manu recentiori hic
illic suppletis. 8. Basilii et Libanii epistola septem mutuz, f. 126.

Ibid. epp. 341, 342, 337-340, 356. :

Epist. tres. Misc. clxxix. 423 (¢.e. pt. 1, p. 724). Codex chartaceus, in folio mar-
jori, ff. 262, sec. xvii. ; olim peculium coll. soc. Jesu Clarom. Paris, postea Joh. Meerman.
τοι, Τὰ, 1,

S. Basilii, archiep. Casareensis, epistola ad Optimum episcopum in illud, πᾶς ὁ ἀποκτείνας
kaiv, Pp. 423.

Epistola ad Chilonem. Laud. xvii. 352 (¢.e. pt. 1, p. 500). Codex chartaceus, et
levigatus, in 4° ff. 358, sec. xv. [ol. 692].

S. Basilii Magni epistola ad Chilonem, fol. 352.

Epist. ad Coloneos. Baroc. cxlii. 264b (z.e. pt I, p. 242). Codex chartaceus, in
4° ff. 292, sec. xiv. ineuntis.

S. Basilii Magni epistola ad Coloneos, fol. 264b.

Ejus et Libanii epistole. Baroc. xix. 191 (é.e. pt. 1, p. 27). Codex chartaceus in
4° minori, ff. 200, sec. xv. manibus tamen diversis scriptus.

S. Basilii et Libanii sophiste epistola decem amcebeer, fol. 101.

Ejus et Libanii epistole. Baroc. cxxxi. 296 (¢.e, pt. 1, p. 211). Codex bombycinus,
in 4° maj. ff. 4 et 536, sec. xiv. haud eadem manu scriptus; madore aliquantum corruptus.

S. Basilii et Libanii epistole tres mutuz, f. 2g9b.

Epistole ad Libanium et Modestum. Baroc. ccxvi. 301 (¢.e. pt. 1, p. 376). Codex,
fragmentis constans pluribus, in 4° ff. 379 quorum 43 priora membranacea, cetera char-
tacea sunt.

S. Basilii epistola ad Libanium, fol. zor1b.

Ejusdem ad Modestum epistola, imperf. fol. 301b.

Basilii et Libanii epistole quinque mutua, fol. 302.

ibid. Epp; CCCXXKV. 'seq., eCckIN., cexli,. coclix:


The following MSS. of St. Basil are in the British Museum :
Harleian Collection :


1801. Codex membranaceus (Newton’s arms in spare leaf). Doctrina Beati Basilii.

2580. Liber chartaceus. 95. Basilii sermo de parentum honore, Latine redditus per
Guarinum.

2678. Codex membranaceus. S. Basilii de institutis juvenum liber ex versione et
cum prefatione Leonardi Aretini.

5576. XIVthc. 40 Homilies.

5639. XVth c. Homilies.

5576. XIVthc. Hexaemeron.

5622. XIVthc. Com. on Isaiah.

5541. XVthc. Ad juvenes.

5609. XVthc. oy

5660. XVthce. τὸ

5657. XIVthc. Extracts.


PROLEGOMENA. Ixxvil


soso, ΤΙ ἃ; 8 8 Vi. Virg.

5624. XIVthc. Ep.ad Greg. Frat.
6827. XVIIthe. Epp. .
a05%,, XVth ὁ. De Cons..in Adv,
4987. XVthc. Admon.


Burney Collection :
οὐ AVth'c. Ad juvenes.
75. XVthe. Epp. ad Liban.


Additional :
22ΞοΟ. Vellum curs. Xthc.. De Sp.. Seto.
34060. XVthc. The doubtful work De Sp. Scto.
14066. XIIthc. Homilies.
34060. XVthc. Against Drunkards.
25881. XVIthc. The Forty Martyrs.
1oo14. XVIIthc. Ad juvenes.
Tosug.. ἈΠΟ... Reg. fus. tract.
9347. .X1Vthec. Ascetic.
18492. XVIthc. De Frugalitate.
17474, XVthc.. Epp. can.
23771. C.1500. Sermones Tractatus.
Autograph of Raph. Volterrano (translation).


Arundel :
535. XlVthe. Excerp. ex adv. Eunom. v.
532. Xthe. Hexaemeron.


528. XVthc. Against Drunkards.
520. XVthe. De tranqu. an.

583. XIVthc. Epp. can. ad Amph.
fore ΧΙ c. Ado. ad’Pil.* /


| ᾽ Ie
' ᾿ 4
‘
j
ΠῚ 0} ᾿ ὶ Ι δὴν [ 2 |
4 ἢ p : re ᾿ ἣν ἐν yd
14 i,
ee | ἀνα
ξ ee τὸ“ »" “ ( ᾿ δὶ
᾿ ν ᾿ μσυγυ τ πτσσον sy neualter Gh Gee pean G ely , ; |
Me aetemnt werent ee crem enero so?
‘ Fae
os δὴ P
i Bye
ἣ Ἢ Υ
4
ἊΨ '
ἢ ᾿ “νῖ.υδδὺ
᾿ ͵
" !
Ἶ
. j
®
} ᾿ Ρ
ἴς Ἶ
ΒΡ Ε ἱ
Ἢ a
7 § |
| cheep!
oF ᾿ :
a bie
᾿ ‘3
; ᾿
᾿ ς .
. 4
᾿ ν᾽ :
i ee + ἢ πὴ [
. ᾿ ᾿ ae
ὴ φᾷ ΠῚ J ,
iy τ (ὦ
' ᾽
᾿ s . iy
wl ®
“ ’
Ὶ
ΝΣ,
4 |
᾿ mY i ye
ἢ ᾿
Γ
; ALM
a « 7)
᾿
‘ ‘ ,
᾿ . |
} Sy, ;
a ' Ἢ
"ὁ ΠΗ , ἐ ᾿ ὶ ἶ at
Φκ ἂν t ' ;
ἢ ᾿ t Ἂ
¢
ἢ


᾿ Δ ΥΩ ᾿ ͵ Ae νέον ἡ
πο oF tas iin xh ice
ν᾽ Ny : : . . wher Savill


δ εν... ae Ε΄.
yee, | ' i . . a” i


! ῃ , ͵ )
i fy ‘ ' hy Buel "
) ey ὶ ω ν - i ’ ἢ 4 Ὁ ἢ ὺ
j ἀν" LA , ὶ het . . 7 ey |
ἣν J Hh ae MA, ra es oe ¥ TAAL 4 ‘i ae
4 ᾿ iv ‘ . ἣ ᾽ ΐ “galt ~ an Γ : ἼΩΝ τω τὴν on “
i a. Υ } + Fak } | ,
Ρ ζ΄ ed y a
ἐῇ ] b 4
fa ν᾿ ᾿ | τ ;
ἢ Fi
bt 4 i ᾿ ' ! 4 .
i γε ᾿
ἵν δὼ ΩΝ ' ᾿ ἤν,
ων Ὶ ᾿ » e
“ ; ay ἧ Ἶ Ἦ ᾿ i » i j
Pe ἍΝ ᾿ ‘ » ] ! Π
γν , ΑΝ ᾿ Pi ᾿ ;
ov 4 ve is
Pi} iy ) , ,
= ᾿ ἣν
7 ᾿ Ἂ i Ἂς Ἶ ' ἶ 4)
4°? / i
ϊ δ : ἢ
ΓῚ ‘ ι Ε ; ᾿
» ) , | a "
Ὰ “ὯΝ ὙΠ ἷ
j ’ 5 "a ᾿
‘th ὺ : ὁ i ae:
Lan i } ὶ
Pie , ! Oya eb ἌΡ
᾿ ec : ἌΡΗ re “
"- ͵ '
‘ oh
‘ 7 ᾿
ἴ Ϊ ‘ ) i yi
y \ Uh Rawal ἢ λον yt
fl ; ἢ |
rey | δ
Ἰ ‘ anil ava a ἥ ἊΝ, rl ""
᾿ . : ‘ ; ὴ ᾿ ὶ bs ὴ
i ὶ
A 4
‘
) nt ᾿ Ξ
ἣ
ss)
A τ


TOT ATIOY BACIAEIOT ΠΕΡῚ TOT IINETMATOC ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ.


THE: BOOK). OF SAINT, BASIL ON .THE. SPIRIT.


DE SPIRITU SANCTO.


PRE Eva @ Ee


TuE heresy of Arius lowered the dignity of the Holy Ghost as well as that of the Son.
He taught that the Three Persons of the Holy Trinity are wholly unlike one another
both in essence and in glory. ‘‘ There is a triad, not in equal glories;” ‘*one more glori-
ous than the other in their glories to an infinite degree.” So says the Zhalza, quoted
in Ath. de Syn. § 15. But the Nicene definition, while it was precise in regard to the
Son, left the doctrine of the Holy Ghost comparatively open, (Πιστεύομεν εἰς τὸ "Aycov Πνεῦμα, )
not from hesitation or doubt, but because this side of Arian speculation was not prominent.
(Cf. Basil, Letters cxxv. and ccxxvi. and Dr. Swete in D.C.B. iii. 121.) It was the
expulsion of Macedonius from the see of Constantinople in 360 which brought ‘* Mace-
donianism” to a head. He was put there by Arians as an Arian. Theodoret (Ecc. Hist.
ii. 5) explains how disagreement arose. He was an upholder, if not the author, of the
watchword ὁμοιούσιον (Soc. ii. 45), but many supporters of the ὁμοιούσιον (e.2., Eustathius of
Sebasteia) shrank from calling the Holy Ghost a creature. So the Pneumatomachi began
to be clearly marked off. The various creeds of the Arians and semi-Arians did not
directly attack the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, though they did not accept the doctrine of
the essential unity of the Three Persons. (Cf. Hahn, Lzbliothek der Symbole, pp. 148-
174, quoted by Swete.) But their individual teaching went far beyond their confessions.
The Catholic theologians were roused to the danger, and on the return of Athanasius from
his third exile, a council was held at Alexandria which resulted in the first formal ecclesi-
astical condemnation of the depravers of the Holy Ghost, in the Zomus ad Anti-
ochenos (qg.v. with the preface on p. 481 of Ath. in the edition of this series. Cf. also
Ath. ad Serap. i. 2, 10). In the next ten years the Pneumatomachi, Macedonians, or
Marathonians, so called from Marathonius, bishop of Nicomedia, whose support to the party
was perhaps rather pecuniary than intellectual (Nicephorus H.E. ix. 47), made head, and
were largely identified with the Homoiousians. In 374 was published the Azcoratus of
St. Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis in Cyprus, written in 373, and containing two creeds
(vide Heurtley de F. et Symb. pp. 14-18), the former of which is nearly identical with the
Confession of Constantinople. It expresses belief in τὸ Πνεῦμα τὸ “Ἅγιον, Κύριον, καὶ Ζωοποιὸν, τὸ ἐκ
τοῦ Πατρὸς ἐκπορευόμενον, τὸ σὺν Πατρὶ καὶ Υἱῷ συμπροσκυνούμενον καὶ συνδοξαζόμενον, τὸ λαλῆσαν διὰ τῶν προφητῶν.
It is in this same year, 374, that Amphilochius, the first cousin of Gregory of Nazianzus
and friend and spiritual son of Basil, paid the first of his annual autumn visits to Caesarea
(Bishop Lightfoot, D.C.B. i. 105) and there urged St. Basil to clear up all doubt as to
the true doctrine of the Holy Spirit by writing a treatise on the subject. St. Basil com-
plied, and, on the completion of the work, had it engrossed on parchment (Letter ccxxx1.)
and sent it to Amphilochius, to whom he dedicated it.


BASIL


I I Ii III


CHAPTER I,


Prefatory remarks on the need of exact in-
vestigation of the most minute portions of
theology.

1. Your desire for information, my right
well-beloved and most deeply respected
brother Amphilochius, I highly commend,
and not less your industriousenergy. I have
been exceedingly delighted at the care and
watchfulness shewn in the expression of your
opinion that of all the terms concerning God
in every mode of speech, not one ought to
be left without exact investigation. You
have turned to good account your reading of
the exhortation of the Lord, ‘* Every one that
asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh find-
eth,” ' and by your diligence in asking might,
I ween, stir even the most reluctant to give
you a share of what they possess. And
this in you yet further moves my admiration,
that you do not, according to the manners of
the most part of the men of our time, pro-
pose your questions by way of mere test, but
with the honest desire to arrive at the actual
truth. There is no lack ‘in these days of
captious listeners and questioners; but to
find a character desirous of information, and
seeking the truth as a remedy for ignorance,
is very difficult. Just as in the hunter’s
snare, or in the soldier’s ambush, the trick
is generally ingeniously concealed, so it is
with the inquiries of the majority of the
questioners who advance arguments, not so
much with the view of getting any good out
of them, as in order that, in the event of
their failing to elicit answers which chime
in with their own desires, they may seem to
have fair ground for controversy.

2. If “To the fool on his asking for
wisdom, wisdom shall be reckoned,” ? at
how high a price shall we value ‘‘the wise
hearer” who is quoted by the Prophet in
the same verse with ‘the admirable coun-
sellor”?* It is right, I ween, to hold him
worthy of all approbation, and to urge him
on to further progress, sharing his enthusi-
asm, and in all things toiling at his side as
he presses onwards to perfection. To count
the terms used in theology as of primary im-
portance, and to endeavour to trace out the
hidden meaning in every phrase and in every
syllable, is a characteristic wanting in those
who are idle in the pursuit of true religion,
but distinguishing all who get knowledge of
‘*the mark” “ of our calling;”* for what is
set before us is, so far as is possible with


1 Twuke xi. 10.
2 Prov. xvii. 28, Ixx.


8 Is. ili. 3, xx.
4 Phil, 111, 14.


human nature, to be made like unto God.
Now without knowledge there can be no
making like ; and knowledge is not got with-
out lessons. The beginning of teaching is
speech, and syllables and words are parts of
speech. It follows then that to investigate
syllables is not to shoot wide of the mark,
nor, because the questions raised are what
might seem to some insignificant, are they
on that account to be held unworthy of heed.
Truth is always a quarry hard to hunt, and
therefore we must look everywhere for its
tracks. The acquisition of true religion is
just like that of crafts; both grow bit by bit;
apprentices must despise nothing. Ifa man
despise the first elements as small and in-
significant, he will never reach the perfection
of wisdom.

Yea and Nay are but two syllables,
yet there is often involved in these little
words at once the best of all good things,
Truth, and that beyond which wickedness
cannot go, a Lie. But why mention Yea
and Nay? Before now, a martyr bearing
witness for Christ has been judged to have
paid in full the claim of true religion by
merely nodding his head.’ lf, then, this be
so, what term in theology is so small but
that the effect of its weight in the scales
according as it be rightly or wrongly used
is not great? Of the law we are told ‘ not
one jot nor one tittle shall pass away ;”* how
then could it be safe for us to leave even the
least unnoticed? Thevery points which you
yourself have sought to have thoroughly
sifted by us are at the same time both small
and great. Their use is the matter of a
moment, and peradventure they are there-
fore made of small account; but, when we
reckon the force of their meaning, they are
great. They may be likened to the mustard
plant which, though it be the least of shrub-
seeds, yet when properly cultivated and the
forces latent in its germs unfolded, rises to
its own sufficient height.

If any one laughs when he sees our
subtilty, to use the Psalmist’s* words, about
syllables, let him know that he reaps laugh-
ter’s fruitless fruit ; and let us, neither giving
in to men’s reproaches, nor yet vanquished


1 7.e., confessed or denied himself a Christian. The Bene-
dictine Editors and their followers seem to have missed the
force of the original, both grammatically and historically, in
referring it to the time when St. Basil is writing; ἤδη ἐκρίθη
does not mean "“ αὖ the present day is judged,” but “ere now
has been judged.’ And in A.D. 374 there was no persecution
of Christians such as seems to be reterred to, although Valens
tried to crush the Catholics.

2 Matt. v. 1S.

3 Ps. cxix. ὃς, xx. ‘*The lawless have described subtilties
for me, but not according to thy law, O Lord;” for A.V. ἃ
R.V., “ The proud have digged pits for me which are not after
thy law.” The word ἀδολεσχία 15 used in a bad sense to mean
garrulity; in a good sense, keenness, subtilty.


ON THE SPIRIT. 3


by their disparagement, continue our investi-
gation. So far, indeed, am I from feeling
ashamed of these things because they are
small, that, even if I could attain to ever so
minute a fraction of their dignity, I should
both congratulate myself on having won
high honour, and should tell my brother and
fellow-investigator that no small gain had
accrued to him therefrom.

While, then, I am aware that the con-
troversy contained in little words is a very
great one, in hope of the prize I do not
shrink from toil, with the conviction that the
discussion will both prove profitable to my-
self, and that my hearers will be rewarded
with no small benefit. Wherefore now with
the help, if I may so say, of the Holy Spirit
Himself, I will approach the exposition of
the subject, and, if you will, that I may be
put in the way of the discussion, I will fora
moment revert to the origin of the question
before us.

3. Lately when praying with the people,
and using the full doxology to God the
Father in both forms, at one time ** w7zth the
Son together with the Holy Ghost,” and at
another ‘‘ through the Son zz the Holy
Ghost,” I was attacked by some of those
present on the ground that I was introduc-
ing novel and at the same time mutually con-
tradictory terms.’

You, however, chiefly with the view of
benefiting them, or, if they are wholly in-
curable, for the security of such as may fall
in with them, have expressed the opinion
that some clear instruction ought to be pub-
lished concerning the force underlying the
syllables employed. I will therefore write
as concisely as possible, in the endeavour to
lay down some admitted principle for tne dis-
cussion.


CHAPTER ΤΕ


The origin of the heretics’ close observation of
syllables.


we pétty “exactitude of these:: men
about syllables and words is not, as might
be supposed, simple and _ straightforward;
nor is the mischief to which it tends a small
one. There is involved a deep and covert
design against true religion. Their pertina-
cious contention is to show that the mention


1 It is impossible to convey in English the precise force of
the prepositions used. ‘* With” represents meta, of which the
original meaning is ‘‘ amid; ” * together with,” σύν, of which
the original meaning is “ at the same time as.”” The Latin of
the Benedictine edition translates the first by ‘‘ cum,” and the
second by ‘‘una cum.” “4 Through” stands for διά, which,
with the genitive, is used of the instrument; ‘zz’? for ἐν,
“in,” but also commonly used of the instrument or means.
In the well known passage in 1. Cor. viii. 6, A.V. renders δι᾽
οὗ τὰ πάντα by “ through whom are all things; ” R.V., by ‘* dy
whom.”’


of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is unlike,
as though they will thence find it easy to
demonstrate that there is a variation in
nature. They have an old sophism, invented
by Aetius, the champion of this heresy, in
one of whose Letters there is a passage to the
effect that things naturally unlike are ex-
pressed in unlike terms, and, conversely,
that things expressed in unlike terms are
naturally unlike. In proof of this statement
he drags in the words of the Apostle, “" One
God and Father or whom are all things,
. « « andone Lord Jesus Christ By whom
are valk: things.”\) ὦ. Whatever, )then,;’. he
goes on, **is the relation of these terms to
one another, such will be the relation of
the natures indicated by them; and as the
term ‘of whom’ is unlike the term ‘ by
whom,’ so is the Father unlike the Son.” 5 On


this heresy depends the idle subtilty of these


men about the phrases in question. They
accordingly assign to God the Father, as
though it were His distinctive portion ani
lot, the phrase *‘of Whom;’’ to God the
Son they confine the phrase ** by Whom;”
to the Holy Spirit that of **in Whom,” and
say that this use of the syllables is never in-


11, Cor. viii. 6.

2The story as told by Theodoret (Ecc. Hist. ii. 23) is as
follows: §* Constantius, on his return from the west, passed
some time at Constantinople” (2.6., in 360, when the
synod at Constantinople was held, shortly after that of the
Isaurian Seleucia, “ substance ” and ““ hypostasis ” being de-
clared inadmissible terms, and the Son pronounced like the
Father according to the Scriptures). The Emperor was urged
that ““ Eudoxius should be convicted of blasphemy and lJaw-
lessness. Constantius however . » replied that a decision
must first be come to on matters ¢oncerniny the faith, and that
afterwards the case of Eudoxius should be enquired into.
Basilius (of Ancyra), relying on his former intimacy, ventured
boldly to object to the Emperor that he was attacking the
apostolic decrees; but Constantius took this ill, and told
Basilius to hoid his tongue, for to you, said he, the disturb-
ance of the churches 1s due. When Basilius was silenced,
Eustathius (of Sebasteia) intervened and said, Since, sir, you
wish a decision to be come to on what concerns the faith, con-
sider the blasphemies uttered against the Only Begotten by
Eudoxius; and, as he spoke, he produced the exposition οἵ
faith, wherein, besides many other impieties, were found the
following expressions: Things that are spoken of in unlike
terms are unlike in substance; there is one God the Father
of Whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ by
Whom are all things. Now the term ‘of Whom’ is unlike
the term ‘by Whom,’ so the Son 15 unlike God the Father.
Constantius ordered this exposition of the faith to be read,
and was displeased with the blasphemy which’ it involved.
He therefore asked Eudoxius if he had drawn it up. Eu-
doxius instantly repudiated the authorship, and said that it
was written by Aetius. Now Actius at the present
time was associated with Eunomius and Eudoxius, and, as
he found Eudoxius to be, like himself, a sybarite in luxury
as well as a heretic in faith, he chose Antioch as the most
congenial place of abode, and both he and Eunomius were
fast fixtures at the couches of Eudoxius. . . The Em.
peror had been told all this, and now ordered Aetius to be
brought before him. On his appearance, Constantius shewed
him the document in question, and proceeded to enquire if he
was the author of its language. Aetius, totally ignorant of
what had taken place, and unaware of the drift of the enquiry,
expected that he should win praise by confession, and owned
that he was the author of the phrases in question. Then the
Emperor perceived the greatness of his iniquity, and forthwith
condemned him to exile and to be deported to a place in
Phrygia.” St. Basil accompanied Eustathius and his name-
sake to Constantinople on this occasion, being then only in
deacon’s orders. (Philost. iv. 12.) Basil of Ancyra and Eus-
tathius in their turn suffered banishment. Basil, the deacon,
returned to the Cappadocian Cesarea,


4


terchanged, in order that, as I have already
said, the variation of language may indicate
the variation of nature.’ Verily it is sufh-
ciently obvious that in their quibbling about
the words they are endeavouring to maintain
the force of their impious argument.

By the term ὁ" of whom ” they wish to in-
dicate the Creator; by the term ‘‘ through
whom,” the subordinate agent? or instru-
ment;* by the term ‘zz whom,” or ‘‘ zz
which,’’ they mean to shew the time or place.
The object of all this is that the Creator of the
universe* may be regarded as of no higher
dignity than an instrument, and that the Holy
Spirit may appear to be adding to existing
things nothing more than the contribution
derived from place or time.


ΓΙΑΤ ΤΙΣ Ali.


5. The systematic discussion of syllables is de-
rived from heathen philosophy.


ΤΉΕΥ have, however, been led into this
error by their close study of heathen writers,
who have respectively applied the terms ‘‘ of
whom” and ‘' ¢hrougk whom” to things
which are by nature distinct. These writers
suppose that by the term ‘¢0f whom” or
‘Cof which” the matter is indicated, while
the term ‘‘ through whom” or ‘ through
which ”’® represents the instrument, or, gen-
erally speaking, subordinate agency.® Or
rather — for there seems no reason why we


1¢f. the form of the Arian Creed as given by Eunomius in
his ᾿Απολογία (Migne, xxx. 840. ‘* We believe in one God,
Father Almighty, of whom are all things; and in one only
begotten Son of God, God the word, our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom are all things; and in one Holy Ghost, the
Comforter, in whom distribution of all grace in proportion as
may be most expedient is made to each of the Saints,”

_ *of. Eunomius, Liber. Apol. § 27, where of the Son he says

ὑπουργός.

ϑ0η the word ὄργανον, a tool, as used of the Word of God,
cf. Nestorius in Marius Merc. Migne, p. 761 & Cyr. Alex. Ep.
1. Migne, x. 37. ‘*The creature did not give birth to the
uncreated, but gave birth to man, organ of Godhead.” cf.
Thomasius, Christ. Dog. i. 336.

Mr. Johnston quotes Philo (de Cher. § 35; i. 162, n.) as
speaking of ὄργανον δὲ λόγον Θεοῦ δι᾽ οὗ κατεσκευάσθη (sc. ὃ
κόσμος).

4 Mere of course the Son is meant,

5 The ambizuitv of gender in ἐξ οὗ and δι᾽ οὗ can only be
expressed by giving the alternatives in English.

ὁ There are four causes or varieties of cause:

1. The essence or quiddity (Form) : τὸ τί ἣν εἶναι.

2. The necessitating conditions (Matter): τὸ τίνων ὄντων ἀν-

aykn τοῦτ᾽ εἶναι.

3- The proximate mover or stimulator of change (Efficient) :

ἢ τί πρῶτον ἐκίνησε.
4. That for the sake of which (Final Cause or End) : τὸ τίνος
ἕνεκα. Grote’s Aristotle, i. 354.

The four Aristotelian causes are thus:1. Formal. 2. Mate-
rial. 3. Efficient. 4. Final. cf. Arist. Analyt. Post. II. xi.,
Metaph. 1. iii., and Phvs, IT. iii. The six causes of Basil may
be referred to the four of Aristotle as follows:

Aristotle, Basil.

1. τὸ Ti ἣν εἶναι. καθ᾽ ὃ: 7.e., the form or idea
according to which athing
is made.

ἐξ οὗ: t.e., the matter out of
which it is made.

ὑφ᾽ ob: 2.6., the agent, using
means.

δι᾽ οὗ : t.e., the means,

δι᾽ 0: 7.e., the end.

ἐν @, Or sine gua non, applying to all.


2. τὸ ἐξ οὗ γίνεταί TL.


3. ἡ ἀρχὴ τῆς μεταβολῆς ἡ πρώτη.


4. τὸ οὗ ἕνεκα.


BASIL


should not take up their whole argument, and
briefly expose at once its incompatibility with
the truth and its inconsistency with their own
teaching — the students of vain philosophy,
while expoundirg the manifold nature of
cause and distinguishing its peculiar signifi-
cations, define some causes as principal,’
some as codperative or con-causal, while
others are of the character of ‘‘s¢ze gua
non,’ or indispensable.”

For every one of these they have a distinct
and peculiar use of terms, so that the maker
is indicated in a different way from the in-
strument. For the maker they think the
proper expression is ‘¢ γ whom,” maintain-
ing that the bench is produced * dy” the
carpenter ; and for the instrument ** through
which,” in that it is produced ** through ” or
by means of adze and gimlet and the rest.
Similarly they appropriate ‘of which” to
the material, in that the thing made is “ὁ of”
wood, while ‘‘ according to which” shews
the design, or pattern put before the crafts-
man. For he either first makes a mental
sketch, and so brings his fancy to bear upon
what he is about, or else he looks at a pattern
previously put before him, and arranges his
work accordingly. The phrase ‘‘ 07 account
of which” they wish to be confined to the
end or purpose, the bench, as they say, being
produced for, or on account of, the use of
man. ‘** Jz which” is supposed to indicate
time and place. When was it produced?
In this time. And where? In this place.
And though place and time contribute noth-
ing to what is being produced, yet without
these the production of anything is impossi-
ble, for eficient agents must have both place
and time. It is these careful distinctions,
derived from unpractical philosophy and
vain delusion,*? which our opponents have
first studied and admired, and then trans-
ferred to the simple and unsophisticated
doctrine ‘of the Spirit, to’ the belstilme
of God the Word, and the setting at naught
of the Divine Spirit. Even the phrase
set apart by non-Christian writers for the
case of lifeless instruments* or of manual


_ Ἱπροκαταρκτική. cf. Plut. 2, 1056. B.D. προκαταρκτικὴ αἰτία ἡ
εἱμαομένη.-
2cf. Clem. Alex. Strom. viii.g. ‘* Of causes some are prin-
cipal, some preservative, some coéperative, some indispen-
sable; e.g., of education the principal cause is the father; the
preservative, the schoolmaster; the codperative, the disposition
of the pupil; the indispensable, time.”
SEK τῆς ματαιότητος καὶ κενῆς ἀπάτης.
cf. ματαιότης ματαιοτήτων, ‘*vanity of vanities,” Ecc. i. 2,
Ixx. In Arist. Eth. i. 2, a desire is said to be κενὴ καὶ ματαία,
which goes into infinity, — everything being desired for the
sake of something else, — 7 e., xevq, void, like a desire for the
moon, and ματαία, unpractical, like a desire for the empire of
China. In the text ματαιότης seems to mean heathen philo-
sophy, a vain delusion as distinguished from Christian phi-
losophy.
Ὁ ἄψυχα ὄργανα. A slave, according to Aristotle, Eth. Nich.
Vill. 7, 6, is ἔμψυχον ὄργανον.


ON


service of the meanest kind, I mean the ex-
pression ‘ through or by means of which,”
they do not shrink from transferring to the
Lord of all, and Christians feel no shame in
applying to the Creator of the universe lan-
cuage belonging to a hammer or a saw.


CHAPTER IV.


That there is no distinction tn the scriptural
use of these syllables.


6. We acknowledge that the word of truth
has in many places made use of these expres-
sions; yet we absolutely deny that the free-
dom of the Spirit is in bondage to the petti-
ness of Paganism. On the contrary, we
maintain that Scripture varies its expressions
as occasion requires, according to the cir-
cumstances of the case. For instance, the
phrase ** of which” does not always and ab-
solutely, as they suppose, indicate the mate-
rial,’ but it is more in accordance with the
usage of Scripture to apply this term in the
case of the Supreme Cause, as in the words
πε God, of whom are all things,” ? and
again, ** All things of God.” * The word of
truth has, however, frequently used this term
in the case of the material, as when it says
‘¢’Thou shalt make an ark of incorruptible
wood;”* and ** Thou shalt make the can-
dlestick of pure gold;”° and ‘* The first man
τε eartn, catthy;°’* and ‘*’Thou. art
formed out of clay as I.am.”” But these
men, to the end, as we have already re-
marked, that they may establish the differ-
ence of nature, have laid down the law that
this phrase befits the Father alone. This
distinction they have originally derived from
heathen authorities, but here they have
shewn no faithful accuracy of imitation. To
the Son they have in conformity with the
teaching of their masters given the title of
instrument, and to the Spirit that of place,
for they say zz the Spirit, and ¢hrough the
Son. But when they apply *‘ of whom” to
God they no longer follow heathen example,


1 tAn= Lat. materres, from the same root as mater, whence
Eng. materfal and matter. (ὕλη, vAF a2, is the same word as
sylva wood. With materies cf. Madeira, from the Portu-
guese Ὁ madera” =timber.)

‘“*“The word ὕλη in Plato bears the same signification as
in ordinary speech: it means wood, timber, and sometimes
generally material. The later philosophic application of the
word to signify the abstract conception of material substratum
is expressed by Plato, so far as he has that concept at all, in
other ways.” Ed. Zeller. Plato and the older Academy, ii.
296. Similarly Basil uses ὕλη. As a technical philosophic
term for abstract matter, it is first used by Aristotle.

21 Cor. viii. 6. 31. Cor.. Xi, 12.

Senay. 10, τα. A.V. *shittim.” R.V.“ acacia.’ St.
Ambrose (de Spirttu Sancto, ii. 9) seems, say the Benedictine
Editors, to have here misunderstood St. Basil’s argument. St.
Basil is accusing the Pneumatomachi not of tracing all things
to God as the material ‘* of which,”’ but of unduly limiting the
use of the term “ of which ” to the Father alone.

BEX. XXV. 231. 6 1 Cor. xv. 47. 7 Job xxxiii. 6, Ixx.


THE SPIRIT. ς


but go over, as they say, to apostolic usage,
as; iteis. said, ‘* But of him are.ye in Christ
Jesus,” ? and ‘* All things of God.” ? What,
then, is the result of this systematic discus-
sion? There is one nature of Cause ; another
of Instrument; another of Place. So the
Son is by nature distinct from the Father, as
the tool from the craftsman; and the Spirit
is distinct in so far as place or time is dis-
tinguished from the nature of tools or from
that of them that handle them.


CHAPIE RAN:


That “ through whom” ts said also in the
case of the Father, and“ of whom” in the
case of the Son and of the Spirit.


7. AFTER thus describing the outcome of
our adversaries’ arguments, we shall now pro-
ceed to shew, as we have proposed, that the
Father does not first take ** of whom” and
then abandon * through whom” to the Son;
and that there is no truth in these men’s
ruling that the Son refuses to admit the Holy
Spirit to a share in ‘*of whom” or in
‘¢through whom,” according to the limita-
tion of their new-fangled allotment of phrases.
‘¢’There is one God and Father of whcm
are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ
through whom are all things.” °

Yes; but these are the words of a writer
not laying down a rule, but carefully dis-
tinguishing the hvpostases.*

The object of the apostle in thus writing
was not to introduce the diversity of nature,
but to exhibit the notion of Father and of
Son as unconfounded. That the phrases
are not opposed to one another and do not,
like squadrons in war marshalled one against
another, bring the natures to which they are
applied into mutual conflict, is perfectly
plain from the passage in question. ‘The
blessed Paul brings both phrases to bear
upon one and the same subject, in the words
‘¢of him and through him and to him are
all things.’’® That this plainly refers to the
Lord will be admitted even by a reader pay-
ing but small attention to the meaning of
the words. The apostle has just quoted
from the prophecy of Isaiah, ‘* Who hath
known the mind of the Lord, or who hath

410 Catholic Theology does not oweto St. Basil the dis-
tinction between the connotations of οὐσία and ὑπόστασις which
soon prevailed over the identification obtaining at the time οἵ
the Nicene Council, at all events his is the first and most
famous assertion and defence ofit. At Nicaa, in 325, to have
spoken of St. Paul as “ distinguishing the hypostases ’? would
have been held impious. Some forty-five years later St. Basil
writes to his brother, Gregory of Nyssa (Ep. xxxviii.), in fear
lest Gregory should fall into the error of failing to distinguish
between hypostasis and ousia, between person and essence.


cf. Theodoret Dial. i. 7, and my note on his Ecc. Hist. i, 3.
5 Rom, xi. 36.


6 BASIL
i ene
been his counsellor,! and then goes on, ‘‘ For | cannot but be applied to God the Father.


of him and from him and to him are all
things.” That the prophet is speaking
about God the Word, the Maker of all
creation, may be learnt from what immedi-
ately precedes: ‘* Who hath measured the
waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted
out heaven with the span, and compre-
hended the dust of the earth in a measure,
and weighed the mountains in scales, and
the hills in a balance? Who hath directed
the Spirit of the Lord, or being his coun-
sellor hath taught him?”? Now the word
‘‘ who” in this passage does not mean abso-
lute impossibility, but rarity, as in the pas-
sage ** Who will rise up for me against the
evil doers?” * and ‘*‘ What man is he that
desireth life?” * and ** Who shall ascend into
the hill,,of. the Lord?” So. is it. im. the
passage in question, ‘* Who hath directed
[Ixx., known] the Spirit of the Lord, or
being his counsellor hath known him?”
ἐς For the Father loveth the Son and sheweth
him all things.” ° This is He who holds the
earth, and hath grasped it with His hand,
who brought all things to order and adorn-
ment, who poised’ the hills in their places,
and measured the waters, and gave to all
things in the universe their proper rank,
who encompasseth the whole of heaven with
but a small portion of His power, which, in
a figure, the prophet calls a span. Well
then did the apostle add ‘*Of him and
through him and to him are all things.” ἢ
For of Him, to all things that are, comes the
cause of their being, according to the will
of God the Father. Through Him all things
have their continuance® and constitution,'®
for He created all things, and metes out to
each severally what is necessary for its health
and preservation. Wherefore to Him all
things are turned, looking with irresistible
longing and unspeakable affection to ‘the
author”?! and maintainer ‘‘ of” their ‘ life,”
as it is written ‘* The eyes of all wait upon
thee,’’’” and again, ‘* These wait all upon
thee,” '*? and ‘*Thou openest thine hand,
and satisfiest the desire of every living
thing.” **

ὃ. But if our adversaries oppose this our
interpretation, what argument will save them
from being caught in their own trap?

For if they will not grant that the three
expressions ‘t of him” and ‘+ through him”


1 Rom. xi. 34, and Is. Χ] 13.
16, ΠΡ 19. 01:

3 Ps. xciv. 16.

“PS. XXR1V. 12.

PPS. ΣΙΝ. 2.

6 John v. 20.

T σοῤῥοπία. cf. Plat. Phad. 109, A.


8 Rom. xi. 38.
9 διαμονή. cf. Arist. de Sp. i. 1.
a cf, Coli 10. 1:
11 Acts iii. 15.
12 Ps, exlv. 15.
18 Ps. Civ. 27.
14 Ps, cxlv. 16.


and ‘**to him ” are spoken of the Lord, they


Then without question their rule will fall
through, for we find not only ‘* of whom,”
but also **through whom ”’ applied to the
Father. And if this latter phrase indicates
nothing derogatory, why in the world should
it be confined, as though conveying the sense
of inferiority, to the Son? .If it always and
everywhere implies ministry, let them tell
us to what superior the God of glory’ and
Father of the Christ is subordinate.

They are thus overthrown by their own
selves, while our position will be on both
sides made sure. Suppose it proved that
the passage refers to the Son, “ of whom ”
will be found applicable to the Son. Sup-
pose on the other hand it be insisted that the
prophet’s words relate to God, then it will
be granted that **through whom” is prop-
erly used of God, and both phrases have
equal value, in that both are used with equal
force of God. Under either alternative both
terms, being employed of one and the same
Person, will be shewn to be equivalent.
But let us revert to our subject.

9. In his Epistle to the Ephesians the
apostle says, ‘* But speaking the truth in
love, may grow up into him in all things,
which is the head, even Christ; from whom
the whole body fitly joined together and
compacted by that which every joint suppli-
eth, according to the effectual working in
the measure of every part, maketh increase
of the body.” ἢ"

And again in the Epistle to the Colossi-
ans, to them that have not the knowledge of
the Only Begotten, there is mention of him
that holdeth ‘‘the head,” that is, Christ,
‘¢ from which all the body by joints and bands
having nourishment ministered increaseth
with the increase of God.”* And _ that
Christ is the head of the Church we have
learned in another passage, when the apos-
tle says ‘* gave him to be the head over all
things to the Church,”’ * and ‘‘ of his fulness
have all we received.” *® And the Lord Him-
self says ‘*He shall take of mine, and shall
shew it unto you.” Ina word, the diligent
reader will perceive that “οἵ whom” is
used in diverse manners.’ For instance, the
Lord says, “1 perceive that virtue is gone
out of me.” ἢ Similarly we have frequently
observed “of whom” used of the Spirit.
‘¢ He that soweth to the spirit,” it is said,


Sh όθτ'ῸὉὃἢἢ


1 Ps, xxix..3; Acts vil. 2. 4Eph. i. 22.

2 Eph. iv. 15, 16. ' John i. τό.

3 Col. ii. 19. 6 3 John xvi. 15.

7 πολύτροποι. cf. the cognate adverb 1n Heb. i. 1.

8 cE ἐμοῦ.᾽ The reading in St. Luke (viii. 46) is am’ ἐμοῦ.
In the parallel passage, Mark v. 30, the words are, * Jesus
knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him,” ἐξ αὐτοὺ
which Ὁ), inserts in Luke viii. 45.


ON THE


SPIRIT. ἢ


‘shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.” ’

ohn too writes, ‘‘ Hereby we know that
he abideth in us by (ἐκ) the spirit which he
hath given us.”* ‘** That which is conceived
im her,” says .the* angel, 6615 of the “Holy
Ghost,” * and the Lord says ‘* that which is
born of the spirit is spirit.” * Such then is
the case so far.

το. It must now be pointed out that the
phrase ‘*through whom” is admitted by
Scripture in the case of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Ghost alike. It
would indeed be tedious to bring forward
evidence of this in the case of the Son, not
only because it is perfectly well known, but
because this very point is made by our op-
ponents. We now show that ‘through
whom” is used also in the case of the
Father. ‘God is faithful,” it is said, ‘+ by
whom (διέ οὗ) ye were called unto the fellow-
ship of his Son,” °? and ‘‘ Paul an apostle of
Jesus Christ by (διά) the will of God;” and
again, “ Wherefore thou art no more a ser-
vant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir
through God.”*® And ‘like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by (διά) the glory of
God the Father.”* Tsaiah, moreover, says,
‘¢ Woe unto them that make deep counsel
and not through the Lord;”* and many
proofs of the use of this phrase in the case
of the Spirit might be adduced. ‘* God hath
revealed him to us,” it is said, ** by (διά) the
spirit ;” ® and in another place, ‘* That good
thing which was committed unto thee keep
by (διά) the Holy Ghost;”?*°® and again,
“ΤῸ one is given by (διά) the spirit the word
of wisdom.” ™

11. In the same manner it may also be
said of the word ‘‘in,” that Scripture admits
its use in the case of God the Father. In the
Old Testament it is said through (év) God we
shall do valiantly,'® and, ‘* My praise shall be
continually of (év) thee;”?** and again, ‘In
thy name will I rejoice.” ** In Paul we read,
ΚΠ God who created all things,” '® and,
‘¢ Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus unto the
church of the Thessalonians in God our
Father; ”’® and ‘if now at length I might
have a prosperous journey by (ἐν) the will
of God to come to you;”’’ and, ** Thou


1 Gal. vi. 8. 3 Matt. i. 20. 51 Cor.i. 9.
21 John iii. 24. 4 John iii. 6.
6Gal.iv.7. A.V. reads “ an heir of God through Christ; ”


so XCD. R.V. with the copy used by Basil agrees with A.B.

7Rom. vi. 4. It is pointed out by the Rev. C. F. H. John-
ston in his edition of the De Sfiritu that among quotations
from the New Testament onthe point in question, St. Basil
has omitted Heb. ii. 10, ‘‘ It became him for whom (δι᾽ ov) are
all things and through whom (δι᾽ οὗ) are all things,” ‘* where
the Father is described as being the final Cause and efficient
Cause of all thing's.”

Ss. xxix. 15, xx, 2 Tim. i..14. 12\Ps,.cvi. 13;

91 Cor. ii. 10. 11; Cor. xii. 8. 13 Ps. 1xxi. 6.

14 For ‘shall they rejoice,” Ps. lxxxix. τό.

15 Eph. iii. 9. 16 2 Thess. i. 1. 17 Rom, 1, 10.


makest thy boast of God.”" Instances are
indeed too numerous to reckon; but whit
we want is not so much to exhibit an abun-
dance of evidence as to prove that the con-
clusions of our opponents are unsound. |
shall, therefore, omit any proof of this usage
in the case of our Lord and of the Holy
Ghost, in that it is notorious. But I cannot
forbear to remark that ** the wise hearer ”’
will find sufficient proof of the proposition
before him by following the method of con-
traries. For if the difference of language in-
dicates, as we are told, that the nature has
been changed, then let identity of language
compel our adversaries to confess with shame
that the essence is unchanged.

12. And it is not only in the case of the
theology that the use of the terms varies,’
but whenever one of the terms takes the
meaning of the other we find them fre-
quently transferred from the one subject to
the other. As, for instance, Adam says, “1
have gotten a man ¢hrough God,” * meaning
to say the same as from God; and in another
passage ‘* Moses commanded . . . Israel
through the word of the Lord,” * and, again,
‘¢Ts not the interpretation through God?” ὃ
Joseph, discoursing about dreams to the

. a . a . ες 4)
prisoners, instead of saying ‘* from God,
says plainly ‘‘through God.” Inversely
Paul uses the term ‘* fromz whom” instead
of ** through whom,” when he says ** made
from a woman” (A.V., ‘‘of” instead of
‘through a woman”).®° And this he has
plainly distinguished in another passage,
where he says that it is proper to a woman
to be made of the man, and to a man to be
made through the woman, in the words
‘¢For as the woman is from [A.V., of] the
man, even so is the man also through [A.V.,
by] the woman.”’ Nevertheless in the
passage in question the apostle, while illus-
trating the variety of usage, at the same time
corrects odzter the error of those who sup-
posed that the body of the Lord was a
spiritual body,° and, to shew that the God-
bearing ° flesh was formed out of the com-

1 Rom. ii. 17.

2 According to patristic usage the word “ theology ” is con-
cerned with all that relates to the divine and eternal nature of
Christ, as distinguished from the οἰκονομία, which relates to
the incarnation, and consequent redemption of mankind. cf.
Bishop Lightfoot’s Apostolic Fathers, Part II. Vol. ii. p. 75,
and Newman’s Ar/ans, Chapter I. Section iii.

3 Gen. iv. 1, Ixx. A.V. renders ‘‘ she conceived and hare
Cain and said,” and here St. Basil has been accused of quoting
from memory. But in the Greek of the Ixx. the subject to
εἶπεν is not expressed, and a possible construction of ‘the
sentence is to refer itto Adam. In his work adv. Eunom. ii.
20, St. Basil again refers the exclamation to Adam.

4 Num. xxxvi. 5, xx. 6 Gal. iv..4.

5 Gen. xl. 8, Ixx. Ty Cor. xi. 12.

8 The allusion 1s to the Docete. cf. Luke xxiv. 39.

9The note of the Benedictine Editors remarks that the
French theologian Fronton du Duc (Duczus) accuses Thecd-


oret (on Cyril’s Anath. vii.) of misquoting St. Basil as
writing here ‘‘ God-bearing man”? instead of ** God-bearing


᾿ BASIL
.- ELSES απο OM ONP ENE eek


mon lump' of human nature, gave prece-
dence to the more emphatic preposition.

The phrase ‘¢ through a woman” would
be likely to give rise to the suspicion of
mere transit in the generation, while the
phrase ‘¢of the woman” would satisfacto-
rily indicate that the nature was shared by
the mother and the offspring. The apostle
was in no wise contradicting himself, but he
shewed that the words can without difficulty
be interchanged. Since, therefore, the term
‘‘ from whom ” is transferred to the identical
subjects in the case of which ‘ through
whom” is decided to be properly used, with
what consistency can these phrases be in-
variably distinguished one from the other, in
order that fault may be falsely found with true
religion?


CHAPTER: Vi.


Issue joined with those who assert that the Son
ts not with the Father, but after the Father.
Also concerning the equaé glory.


13. Our opponents, while they thus art-
fully and perversely encounter our argument,
cannot even have recourse to the plea of ig-
norance. It is obvious that they are annoyed
with us for completing the doxology to
the Only Begotten together with the Father,
and for not separating the Holy Spirit from
the Son. On this account they style us in-
novators, revolutionizers, phrase-coiners, and
every other possible name of insult. But
so far am I from being irritated at their
abuse, that, were it not for the fact that their
loss causes me ‘heaviness and continual
sorrow,” I could almost have said that I
was grateful to them for the blasphemy, as
though they were agents for providing me
with blessing. For ‘‘ blessed are ye,” it is
said, “ὁ when men shall revile you for my
sake.”* The grounds of their indignation
are these: The Son, according to them, is
not together with the Father, but after the
Father. Hence it follows that glory should
be ascribed to the Father * through him,”
but not ‘*wztk him;” inasmuch as ** wth
him” expresses equality of dignity, while
‘* through him” denotes subordination. They
further assert that the Spirit is not to be
ranked along with the Father and the Son,
but under the Son and the Father; not co-


flesh,”? a term of different signification and less open as a
Nestorian interpretation. ‘* God-bearing,” θεοφόρος, was an
epithet applied to mere men, as, for instance, St. Ignatius. So
Clement of Alexandria, 1. Strom. p. 218, and Gregory of
Nazianzus, Or, xxxvii. p. 609. St. Basil does use the expres-
sion Jesus Christ ἄνθρωπον Θεόν in Hom, on Ps, xlix,

Ldinaua. cf. Rom, ix. 21.


acy. Ot. IX. 2, Ὁ Matt. v. 11.


ordinated, but subordinated ; not connumer-
ated, but subnumerated.’

With technical terminology of this kind
they pervert the simplicity and artlessness of
the faith, and thus by their ingenuity, suffer-
ing no one else to remain in ignorance, they
cut off from themselves the plea that igno-
rance might demand.

14. Let us first ask them this question:
In what sense do they say that the Son is
ςς after the Father; ” later in time, or in or-
der, or in dignity? But in time no one is so
devoid of sense as to assert that the Maker
of the ages” holds a second place, when no
interval intervenes in the natural conjunction
of the Father with the Son.* And indeed
so far as our conception of human relations
goes,‘ it is impossible to think of the Son as
being later than the Father, not only from
the fact that Father and Son are mutually
conceived of in accordance with the relation-
ship subsisting between them, but because
posteriority in time is predicated of subjects
separated by a less interval from the present,
and priority of subjects farther off. For in-
stance, what happened in Noah’s time 15
prior to what happened to the men of Sodom,
inasmuch as Noah is more remote from our
own day; and, again, the events of the history
of the men of Sodom are posterior, because
they seem in a sense to approach nearer to
our own day. But, in addition to its being
a breach of true religion, is it not really the
extremest folly to measure the existence of
the life which transcends all time and all the
ages by its distance from the present? Is it
not as though God the Father could be com-
pared with, and be made superior to, God the
Son, who exists before the ages, precisely
in the same way in which things liable to
beginning and corruption are described as
prior to one another?

The superior remoteness of the Father is
really inconceivable, in that thought and in-
telligence are wholly impotent to go beyond
the generation of the Lord; and St. John
has admirably confined the conception within
circumscribed boundaries by two words,
‘‘In the deg¢enning was the Word.” For
thought cannot travel outside ‘* was,” nor
imagination® beyond ‘‘dbeg¢xning.’ Let


1 ὑποτάσσω. cf. τ Cor. xv. 27, and 717. cf. chapter xvii.
ὑποτεταγμένος is applied to the Son in the Macrostich or
Lengthy Creed, brought by Eudoxius of Germanicia to
Milan in 344. Vide Soc. ii. 19.

2 ποιητὴς TOV αἰώνων.

_ 5 Yet the great watchword of the Arians was ἦν ποτε ὅτε
οὐκ IV.

4 τῇ ἐννοίᾳ τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων is here the reading of five MSS.
The Benedictines prefer τῶν ἀνθρώπω», with the sense of ‘in
heman thought.”

5 φαντασία is the philosophic term for imagination or presen-
tation, the mental faculty by which the object made apparent,
φάντασμα, becomes apparent, φαίνεται. Aristotle, de An. 111.


ΟΝ THE SPIRIT:


9


your thought travel ever so far backward,
you cannot get beyond the ‘* was,” and
however you may strain and strive to see
what is beyond the Son, you will find it im-
possible to get further than the “ degznning.”
True religion, therefore, thus teaches us to
think of the Son together with the Father.

15. If they really conceive of a kind of
degradation of the Son in relation to the
Father, as though He were in a lower place,
so that the Father sits above, and the Son is
thrust off to the next seat below, let them
confess what they mean. We shall have no
more to say. A plain statement of the view
will at once expose its absurdity. They who
refuse to allow that the Father pervades all
things do not so much as maintain the logi-
cal sequence of thought in their argument.
The faith of the sound is that God fills all
things;* but they who divide their up and
down between the Father and the Son do
motiiremember even: the word. of the
Prophet: **If I climb up into heaven thou
art there; if I go down to hell thou art
there also.” ? Now, to omit all proof of the
ignorance of those who predicate place of
incorporeal things, what excuse can be
found for their attack upon Scripture,
shameless as their antagonism is, in the
passages “" Sit thou on my right hand ” * and
‘Sat down on the right hand of the majesty
GiiGod = (Lhe expression '*° right: hand.”
does not, as they contend, indicate the lower
place, but equality of relation; it is not un-
derstood physically, in which case _ there
might be something sinister about God,’ but
Scripture puts before us the magnificence of
the dignity of the Son by the use of dignified
language indicating the seat of honour. It
is left then for our opponents to allege that
this expression signifies inferiority of rank.
Let them learn that ‘‘ Christ is the power
of God and wisdom of God,” δ -and that
faeisstie,mmace. of the invisible:God?’7
and “brightness of his~glory,”* and that
ἘΣ ἀπ} God. the Father) sealed,” by
engraving [Ilimself on Him."


ii. 20, defines it as ‘*a movement ofthe mind generated by sen-
sation.” Fancy, which is derived from φιντασία (φαίνω,
¥BHA=shine) has acquired a slightly different meaning
in some usages of modern speech,

‘Eph. iv. 10, APS, CKXKIX. EE Js 3. Ps. ex.s

4 Heb. i. 3, with the variation of “ of God ” for ‘on high.”

5] know of no better way of conveying the sense of the
original oxatos than by thus introducing the Latin sznzster,
which has the double meaning of left and ill-omened. Itis to
the credit of the unsuperstitious character of English-speaking
people that while the Greek σκαῖος and ἀριστευός, the Latin
sinister and /evus, the French gauche, and the German /zvk, all
have the meaning of awkward and unlucky as well as simply
on the Ieft hand, the English /eft (though probably derived
from lift = weak) has lost all connotation but the local one.

6 7 Cor. i. 24. PCO. TS. & Flebs. κυ... «Ὁ fohm yin27:

10 The more obvious interpretation of ἐσφοάγισεν in John vi.
27, would be sealed with a mark of approval, as in the miracle
just performed. cf. Bengel, “ sigillo 1.1 quod genuinum est


Now are we to call these passages, and
others like them, throughout the whole of
Holy Scripture, proofs of humiliation, or
rather public proclamations of the majesty
of the Only Begotten, and of the equality
of His glory with the Father? We ask
them to listen to the Lord Himself, distinctly
setting forth the equal dignity of His glory
with the Father, in His words, ‘**He that
hath seen me hath seen the Father;”?! and
again, ‘* When the Son cometh in the glory
of his Father ;”? that they ὁ’ should honour
the Son even as they honour the Father;” ?
and, ‘‘ We beheld his glory, the glory as of
the. only “begotten of the Father; * :and
‘‘the only begotten God which is in the
bosom of the Father.” ° Of all these pas-
sages they take no account, and then assign
to the Son the place set apart for His foes.
A father’s bosom is a fit and becoming seat
for a son, but the place of the footstool is
for them that have to be forced to fall.°

We have only touched cursorily on these
proofs, because our object is to pass on to
other points. You at your leisure can put
together the items of the evidence, and then
contemplate the height of the glory and the
preéminence of the power of the Only
Begotten. However, to the well-disposed
hearer, even these are not insignificant, un-
less the terms ‘* right hand” and ‘* bosom ”
be accepted in a physical and derogatory
sense, so as at once to circumscribe God in
local limits, and invent form, mould, and
bodily position, all of which are totally dis-
tinct from the idea of the absolute, the in-
finite, and the incorporeal. There is more-
over the fact that what is derogatory in the
idea of it is the same in the case both of the
Father and the Son; so that whoever repeats
these arguments does not take away the
dignity: of. the Son, «but does “incur the
charge of blaspheming the Father; for what-
ever audacity a man be guilty of against
the Son he cannot but transfer to the Father.
If he assigns to the Father the upper place


commendatur, et omne quod non genuinum est excluditur.’””
But St. Basil explains ** sealed”? by *‘ stamped with the image
of His Person,” an interpretation which Alford rejects. St.
Basil, atthe end of Chapter xxvi. of this work, calls our Lord
the χαρακτὴρ Kai ἰσότυπος σφραγίς, 7.é., ‘*express image and
seal graven to the like ” of the Father. St. Athanasius (Ep. i.
ad Serap. xxiii.) writes, ‘* The seal has the form of Christ the
sealer, and in this the sealed participate, being formed accord-
ing to it.” cf. Gal. iv, 19, and 2 Pet, 1. 4.

1John xiv.g. 2 Mark viii. 38. 3John v.23. 4 Johni. 14.

5Johni. 18. ‘* Only begotten God” is here the reading of
five MSS. of Basil. The words are wanting in one codex. In
Chapter viii. of this work St. Basil distinctly quotes Scripture
as calling the Son “only begotten God.” (Chapter viii.
Section 17.) Butin Chapter xi. Section 27, where he has been
alleyed to quote John i, 18, with the reading ‘‘ Only begotten
Son” (e.2., Alford), the MS. authority for his text is in
favour of ‘*Only begotten Gop.” ΦῸ is the reading of &.
B.C. 7 of A. Onthe comparative weight of the textual and
patristic evidence vide Bp. Westcott 72 Joc. :

Cay ΤΕ χοῦν


10


BASIL


by way of precedence, and asserts that the
only begotten Son sits below, he will find
that to the creature of his imagination attach
all the consequent conditions of body. And
if these are the imaginations of drunken
delusion and phrensied insanity, can it be
consistent with true religion for men taught
by the Lord himself that ‘+ He that honour-
eth not the Son honoureth not the Father” *
to refuse to worship and glorify with the
Father him who in nature, in glory, and in
dignity is conjoined with him? What shall
we say? What just defence shall we have
in the day of the awful universal judgment
of all creation, if, when the Lord clearly
announces that He will come ‘in the glory
of his, Father;”* when Stephen beheld
esus standing at the right hand of God; ἢ
when Paul testified in the spirit concerning
Christ 66 that he is at the right hand of
God;” 4 when the Father says, ** Sit thou
on my right hand;”° when the Holy Spirit
bears witness that he has sat down on * the
right hand of the majesty” ° of God; we
attempt to degrade him who shares the
honour and the throne, from his condition of
equality, toa lower state?’ Standing and
sitting, I apprehend, indicate the fixity and
entire stability of the nature, as Baruch, when
he wishes to exhibit the immutability and
immobility of the Divine mode of existence,
says, ‘* For thou sittest for ever and we
perish utterly.” ° Moreover, the place on
the right hand indicates in my judgment
equality of honour. Rash, then, is the at-
tempt to deprive the Son of participation in
the doxology, as though worthy only to be
ranked in a lower place of honour.


CHAPTER VII.


Against those who assert that tt ts not proper
Jor “with whom” to be said of the Son, and
that the proper phrase is “ through whom.”


16. Burt their contention is that to use
the phrase ‘* with him” is altogether strange
and unusual, while “Ὁ through him” is at
once most familiar in Holy Scripture, and
very common in the language of the brother-
hood. What is our answer to this? We
say, Blessed are the ears that have not heard
you and the hearts that have been kept from
the wounds of your words. To you, on the


1 John v. 23. 3 Acts vii. 55. ΡΟΣ, τὸ

2 Matt. xvi. 27. 4 Rom. viii. 34. 6 Heb. viii. 1.

7Mr. Johnston well points out that these five testimonies
are not cited fortuitously, but “in an order which carries the
reader from the future second coming, through the present
session at the right hand, back to the ascension in the past.”

8 Baruch iii. 3, Ixx.

®The word ἀδελφότης is in the New Testament peculiar
to 5. Peter (1 Peter ii. 17, and v. 9); it occurs in the Epistle of
St. Clement to the Corinthians, Chap. 11.


other hand, who are lovers of Christ,’ I say
that the Church recognizes both uses, and
deprecates neither as subversive of the cther.
For whenever we are contemplating the
majesty of the nature of the Only Begotten,
and the excellence of His dignity, we bear
witness that the glory is wth the Father;
while on the other hand, whenever we be-
think us of His bestowal® on us of good
gifts, and of our access® to, and admission
into, the household of God,* we confess that
this grace is eflected for us ¢hrough Him and
ὁγ " Him.

It follows that the one phrase ‘ wth
whom ” is the proper one to be used in the
ascription of glory, while the other,
εἰ through whom,” is specially appropriate
in giving of thanks. It is also quite untrue
to allege that the phrase “" wztk whom” is
unfamiliar in the usage of the devout. All
those whose soundness of character leads
them to hold the dignity of antiquity to be
more honourable than mere new-fangled
novelty, and who have preserved the tradi-
tion of their fathers ® unadulterated, alike in
town and in country, have employed this
phrase. It is, on the contrary, they who are
surfeited with the familiar and the customary,
and arrogantly assail the old as stale, who wel-
come innovation, just as in dress your lovers
of display always prefer some utter novelty
to what is generally worn. So you may
even still see that the language of country
folk preserves the ancient fashion, while of
these, our cunning experts’ in logomachy,
the language bears the brand of the new
philosophy.

What our fathers said, the same say we,
that the glory of the Father and of the Son
is common; wherefore we offer the doxology
to the Father wztk the Son. But we do not
rest only on the fact that such is the tradi-
tion of the Fathers; for they too followed
the sense of Scripture, and started from the
evidence which, a few sentences back, I
deduced from Scripture and laid before you.


For ‘¢the brightness” is always thought of


1 Φιλόχριστοι. The word is not common, but occurs in
inscriptions, cf, Anth. Pal. I. x. 13.

ὀρθὴν πίστιν ἔχουσα φιλοχρίστοιο μενοινῆς.

2 χορηγία, «ς΄. ἴπ6 use of the cognate verb in1 Pet. iv. 11.
ἐξ ἰσχύος ἧς χορηγει ὃ θεός.

8 προσαγωγή. cf. Eph. ii. 18.

4 οἰκείωσιν πρὸς τὸν Θεόν. cf. οἰκεῖοι τοῦ Θεοῦ in Eph. ii. 19.

ἐν. 6 cf. Gal. i. 14.

7 The verb, évrpiBoua', appears to be used by St. Basil, if he
wrote ἐντετριμμένων in the sense of to be ἐντριβής or versed in
a thing (cf. Soph. Ant. 177) --- ἃ sense not illustrated by
classical usage. But the reading of the Moscow MS. (u)
ἐντεθραμμένων, ‘trained in,” ““ nurtured in,” is per se much
more probable. The idea of the country folk preserving the
good old traditions shews the change of circumstances in St.
Basil’s day from those of the 2dc., when the “ pagani” er
villagers were mostly still heathen, and the last to adopt the
novelty of Christianity. cf. Pliny’s Letter to Trajan (Ep. 96),
‘*neque ctvitates tantum sed vicos ettam atque agros super-
stitionis istius conlagio pervagata est.”


ON


THE


SPIRIT. II


with ‘*the glory,”' ‘* the image” with the


archetype,” and the Son always and every-
where together with the Father; nor does
even the close connexion of the names, much
less the nature of the things, admit of separa-
tion.


CHAPTER VIII.


In how many ways “ THROUGH whom” ts used ;
and in what sense “wiTH whom’ ts more
suitable. Explanation of how the Son re-
ceives a commandment, and how Fe ts sent.


17. WueEn, then, the apostle ‘‘ thanks
God through Jesus Christ,” * and again says
that **through Him” we have ‘* received
graceand apostleship for obedience to the faith
among all nations,” * or ** through Him have
access unto this grace wherein we stand and
rejoice,’ he sets forth the boons conferred
on us by the Son, at one time making the
grace of the good gifts pass through from the
Father to us, and at another bringing us to
the Father through Himself. For by saying
‘¢ through whom we have received grace and
apostleship,” ° he declares the supply of the
good gifts to proceed from that source; and
again in saying ‘*through whom we have
had access,” 7 he sets forth our acceptance
and being made ‘*‘ of the household of God” ®
through Christ. Is then the confession of the
grace wrought by Him to usward a detrac-
tion from His glory? Is it not truer to say
that the recital of His benefits is a proper
argument for glorifying Him? It is on this
account that we have not found Scripture
describing the Lord to us by one name, nor
even by such terms alone as are indicative of
His godhead and majesty. At one time it
uses terms descriptive of His nature, for it
recognises the ‘*name which is above every
name,”’® the name of Son,’® and speaks of
true Son,’ and only begotten God,’? and
Power of God,'? and Wisdom,"* and Word."®
Then again, on account of the divers man-
ners '® wherein grace is given to us, which,
because of the riches of His goodness,"’ accord-
ing to his manifold '* wisdom, he bestows on


1 Heb. i. 1. cf. Aug. 322. ii. ad Serap.: ‘‘The Father is
Light, and the Son brightness and true light.”

2 2 Cor. iv. 4, 5 Rom. v. 2. 8 ef. Eph. ii, 19.

3 Rom, i. 8. 6 Rom. i. 5. 2 Phyl. 11. δ.

4 Rom. i. 5. 7 Rom, v. 2.

10 Two MSS., those in the B. Museum and at Vienna, read
here Inoov. In 42. 210. 4, St. Basil writes that the name above
every name is αὐτὸ τὸ καλεῖσθαι αὐτὸν Yiov τοῦ Θεοῦ.

11 cf, Matt. xiv. 33, and xxvii. 54.

12Johni.18. cf. noteonp. .

131 Cor. i. 24, and possibly Rom. i. 16, if with Ὁ. we read
gospel of Christ.

14; Cor. 1. 24.

eee. )onn 1. 1. εἰς Ps, cvii. 20; Wisdom. ix,. 1, ἘΠ. 15.
Ecclesiasticus xliii. 20.

16 To πολύτροπον. cf. Heb.i. 1.

1 Tov πλοῦτον τῆς ἀγαθότητος. cf. Rom ii. 4, Tod πλούτου τῆς
χρηστότητος.


18 Eph. iii. 10.


them that need, Scripture designates Him by
innumerable other titles, calling Him Shep-
herd,' King,’ Physician,’ Bridegroom,’ Way,°
Door,® Fountain,’ Bread,* Axe,® and Rock.!°
And these titles do not set forth His nature,
but, as I have remarked, the variety of the
effectual working which, out of His tender-
heartedness to His own creation, according
to the peculiar necessity of each, He bestows
upon them that need. Them that have fled
for refuge to His ruling care, and through
patient endurance have mended their way-
ward ways,'!' He calls ‘* sheep,” and confesses
Himself to be, to them that hear His voice
and refuse to give heed to strange teaching, a
“ὁ shepherd.” \For)¢* my» sheep,” Hex says;
‘¢ hear my voice.” To them that have now
reached a higher stage and stand in need of
righteous royalty,'? He is a King.

And in that, through the straight way of
His commandments, He leads men to good
actions, and again because He safely shuts
in all who through faith in Him betake them-
selves for shelter to the blessing of the higher
wisdom,'® He is a Door.

So He says, “" By me if any man enter in,
. . » heshall goin andout and shall find past-
ure.”?'* Again, because to the faithful He is
a defence strong, unshaken, and harder to
break than any bulwark, He is a Rock.
Among these titles, it is when He is styled
Door, or Way, that the phrase ‘‘ through
Him” is very appropriate and plain. As,
however, God and Son, He is glorified with
and together with © the Father, in that ‘+ at
the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth; and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to
S¢e.2., John x. 9.


tcf. Rev. xxi. 6.
8 ¢.g., John vi. 21.


1e.g., John x, 12.

2¢g., Matt. xxi. 5.

3¢o0., Matt. ix. 12.

4¢.2., Matt. ix. 15. 9 cf. Matt. iii. 10.

5 e,g., John xiv, 6. 19 50%, 1 Cor. Xa Ae

111 translate here the reading of the Parisian Codex, called
by the Benedictine Editors /tegius Secundus, τὸ εὐμετάβολον
κατωρθωκότας. The harder reading, τὸ εὐμετάδοτον, which may
be rendered ‘* have perfected their readiness to distribute,” has
the best manuscript authority, but it is barely intelligible; and
the Benedictine Editors are quite right in calling attention to the
fact that the point in question here is not the readiness of the
flock to distribute (cf. 1 Tim. vi. 18), but their patient fol-
lowing of their Master. The Benedictine Editors boldly pro-
pose to introduce a word of no authority τὸ ἀμετάβολον,
rendering gut per patitentiam animam immutabilem pre-
buerunt. The reading adopted above is supported by a pas-
sage in Lp. 244, where St. Basil is speaking of the waywardness
of Eustathius, and seems to fit in best with the application
of the passage to the words of our Lord, ‘‘ have fled for retuge
to his ruling care,’’ corresponding with ‘* the sheep follow
him, for they know his voice ’”’ (St.John x. 4), and ‘have
mended their wayward ways,” with “ a stranger will they not
follow,’’ v.5. Mr. Jobnston, in his valuable note, compares
Origen’s teaching on the Names of our Lord.

12S0 three MSS. Others repeat ἐπιστασία, translated
“ὁ ruling care”? above. ἔννομος is used by Plato for ** lawful”
and “ law-abiding.”” (Legg. g21 C. and Rep. 424 E.) Int
Cor. ix. 21, A.V. renders ‘‘ under the law.”

13 Τὸ τῆς γνώσεως ἀγαθόν : possibly *‘ the good of knowledge
of him.”


14 John x. 9. 15 cf. note on page 3, On μετά and σύν.


12


the glory of God the Father.” '


BASIL


Wherefore | self has bound the strong man and spoiled


we use both terms, expressing by the one) his goods,’ that is, us men, whom our enemy


His own proper dignity, and by the other
His grace to usward.

18. For ‘through Him” comes every
succour to our souls, and it is in accordance
with each kind of care that an appropriate
title has been devised. So when He pre-
sents to Himself the blameless soul, not
having spot or wrinkle,’ like a pure maiden,
He is called Bridegroom, but whenever He
receives one in sore plight from the devil’s
evil strokes, healing it in the heavy infirmity
of its sins, He is named Physician.
shall this His care for us degrade to mean-
ness our thoughts of Him? Or, on the con-
trary, shall it smite us with amazement at
once at the mighty power and love to man*
of the Saviour, in that He both endured to
suffer with us‘ in our infirmities, and was able
to come down to our weakness? For not
heaven and earth and the great seas, not
the creatures that live in the water and on
dry land, not plants, and stars, and air, and
seasons, not the vast variety in the order of
the universe,’ so well sets forth the excel-
lency of His might as that God, being in-
comprehensible, should have been able, im-
passibly, through flesh, to have come into
close conflict with death, to the end that by
His own suffering He might give us the boon
of freedom from suffering.° The apostle, it
is true, says, ‘* In all these things we are more
than conquerors through him that loved
us.” 7 Butin a phrase of this kind there is
no suggestion of any lowly and subordinate
ministry,® but rather of the succour rendered
‘*in the power of his might.” ® For He Him-


SP) it, 10,11. 2 Eph. v. 29.

3 Φιλανθρωπια occurs twice in the N.T. (Acts xxviii. 2, and
Titus iii. 4) and is in the former passage rendered by A.V.
“ kindness,” in the latter by “love to man.” The φιλανθρωπία
of the Maltese barbarians corresponds with the lower classical
sense of kindliness and courtesy. The love of God in Christ
to man introduces practically a new connotation to the word
and its cognates.

# Or to sympathize with our infirmities.

5 ποικίλη διακόσμησις. διακόσμησις was the technical term
of the Pythagorean philosophy for the orderly arrangement of
the universe (cf. Arist. Metaph. I. v. 2, “ἡ 6Xn διακόσμησις 4
Pythagoras being credited with the first application of the
word κόσμος to the universe. (Plut. 2,886 c.) So mundus in
Latin, whence Augustine’s oxymoron, ‘\O munde immunde !”
On the scriptural use of κόσμος and ἀιών vide Archbp. Trench’s
New Testament Synonyms, p. 204.

6In Hom. on Ps, Ixv. Section 5, St. Basil describes the

power of God the Word being most distinctly shewn in the
ceconomy of the incarnation and His descent to the lowliness
and the infirmity of the manhood. cf. Ath. on the Incarnation,
sect. 54, ‘‘ He was made man that we might be made God;
and He manifested Himself by a body that we might receive
the idea of the unseen Father; and He endured the insolence
of men that we might inherit immortality. For while He
Himself was in no way injured, being impassible and incor-
ruptible and very Word and God, men who were suffering,
and for whose sakes He endured all this, He maintained and
preserved in His own impassibility.” 7 Rom. viii. 37.
_ Sumnpesia. Lit. “ under-rowing.” The cognate ὑπηρέτης
is the word used in Acts xxvi. 16, in the words of the Saviour
to St. Paul, ‘to make thee a minister,” and in 1 Cor. iv. 1, * Let
aman so account Οἱ us as of the ministers of Christ.”

9 Eph. vi. 10.


And |


had abused in every evil activity, and made
ἐς vessels meet for the Master’s use ’’’? us who
have been perfected for every work through
the making ready of that part of us which is
in our own control.? Thus we have had our
approach to the Father through Him, being
translated from ‘*the power of darkness to
be partakers of the inheritance of the saints
‘in light.”* We must not, however, regard
the economy °® through the Son as a compul-
sory and subordinate ministration resulting
from the low estate of a slave, but rather the
'voluntary solicitude working effectually for
His own creation in goodness and in pity,
;according to the will of God the Father.
For we shall be consistent with true religion
if in all that was and is from time to time
perfected by Him, we both bear witness
‘to the perfection of His power, and in no
case put it asunder from the Father’s will.
For instance, whenever the Lord is called
the Way, we are carried on to a higher
meaning, and not to that which is derived
from the vulgar sense of the word. We un-
derstand by Way that advance® to perfec-
tion which is made stage by stage, and in
regular order, through the works of righteous-
ness and ‘* the illumination of knowledge ;” 7
ever longing after what is before, and reach-
ing forth unto those things which remain,®
until we shall have reached the blessed end,
the knowledge of God, which the Lord
through Himself bestows on them that have
trusted in Him. For our Lord is an essen-
tially good Way, where erring and straying
are unknown, to that which is essentially
good, to the Father. Por: no jong yee
says, “‘ cometh to the Father but ΡΥ.
A.V.] through me.” °® Such is our way up
to God ““ through the Son.”

1g. It will follow that we should next in
order point out the character of the pro-
vision of blessings bestowed on us by the


i
|
Ϊ
|
|


1 cf. Matt. xii. 29. 22 Tim. ii. 21.

3 This passage is difficult to render alike from the variety
of readings and the obscurity of each. I have endeavoured
to represent the force of the Greek ἐκ τῆς ἑτοιμασίας τοῦ
ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν. understanding by “τὸ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν,᾽᾽ practically, “f our
free will.” cf. the enumeration of what is ἐφ᾽ ἡμιν, within
our own control, inthe Enchiridion of Epictetus, Chap, I.
‘Within our own control are impulse, desire, inclination.’? On
Is. vi.8, ** Here am I; send ine,” St. Basil writes, “" He did not
add ‘I will go;’ for the acceptance of the message is within
our control (ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν), but to be made capable of going is of
Him that gives the grace, of the enabling God.” The Bene-
dictine translation of the text is “per drberi arbitrii nostri
preparationem.” But other readings are (i) τῆς ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν, “the
preparation which is in our own control;” (ii) τῆς ἑτοιμσσίας
αὐτοῦ, ** His preparation; ’’ and (iii) the Syriac represented by
“arbitrio suo.”

4 Colsi aay ia. 5 cf. note on page 7.

6 προκοπή: cf. Luke ii. 52, where it is said that our Lord
προέκοπτε, z.€., ** continued to cut His way forward.”

Τὰ Core v6, ἘΝ. inane.

© There seems to be here a recollection, though not a quo-
tation, of Phil, iii. 13. 9 John xiv. 6.


ON


-


Tine SPIRIT.


13


Father ‘‘through him.” Inasmuch as all
created nature, both this visible world and
all that is conceived of in the mind, can-
not hold together without the care and
providence of God, the Creator Word, the
Only begotten God, apportioning His succour
according to the measure of the needs of
each, ΝΕ Ὁ mercies various and mani-
fold on account of the many kinds and char-
acters of the recipients of His bounty, but
appropriate to the necessities of individual
requirements. Those that are confined in
the darkness of ignorance He enlightens:
for this reason He is true Light.’ Portioning
requital in accordance with the desert of
deeds, He judges: for this reason He is
righteous Judge.” *** For the Father judgeth
no man, but hath committed all judgment
to the Son.” * Those that have lapsed from
the lofty height of life into sin He raises from
their fall: for this reason He is Resurrec-
tion.* Effectually working by the touch of
His power and the will of His goodness He
does all things. He shepherds ; He .en-
lightens ; He nourishes; He heals; He guides;
He raises up; He calls into being things that
were not; He upholds what has been created.
Thus the good things that come from God
reach us ‘*through the Son,” who works in
each case with greater speed than speech
can utter. For not lightnings, not light’s
course in air, is so swift; not eyes’ sharp turn,
not the movements of our very thought. Nay,
by the divine energy is each one of these in
speed further surpassed than is the slowest
of all living creatures outdone in motion by
birds, or even winds, or the rush of the
heavenly bodies ; or, not to mention these,
by our very thought itself. For what extent
of time is needed. by Him who ‘upholds all
things by the word of His power,”® and
works not by bodily agency, nor requires
the help of hands to form and fashion, but
holds in obedient following and unforced
consent the nature of all things that are?
So as Judith says, ‘¢ Thou hast thought, and
what things thou didst determine were ready
at hand.” ® On the other hand, and lest we
should ever be drawn away by the great-
ness of the works wrought to imagine that
the Lord is without beginning,’ what saith


1 John i. 9. 8 John v. 22. 5 Heb. i. 3.
22 Tim. iv. 8. 4 John xi. 25. 6 Judith ix. 5 and 6.
7 dvapyos. This word is used in two senses by the Fathers.


(i) In the sense of ἀΐδιος or eternal, it is applied (4) to the
Trinity in unity. ¢.7., Quest. Misc. v.442 (Migne Ath. iv. 783),
attributed to Athanasius, κοινὸν ἡ OVG.a* κοινὸν TO ἄναρχον.
(δ) To the Son. ¢g., Greg. Naz. Orat. XxiX. 490, ἐὰν Thy ἀπὸ
χρόνον vons ἀρχὴν καὶ ἄναοχος ὁ υἱὸς, οὐκ ἄρχεται yao ἀπὸ χρόνον
ὁ χρόνων δεσπότης. (11) In the sense of ἀναίτιος, ““ causeless,”
“originis principio carens,’’ it is applied to the Father alone,
and not to the Son. So Gregory of Nazianzus, in the oration
quoted above, ὁ vids, ἐὰν ws αἴτιον Tov πατέρα λαμβάνῃς, οὐκ


ee ee EE 5 Ἐπ... 6.0 8 ee ee SS SS


the Self-Existent ?!


‘¢T live through [by,
AV)


the Father, ” ? and the power of
God; ‘¢ The Son hath power [can, A.V. ]
ἴ do/‘nothines:; of “himself. 7?) And’ the
self-complete Wisdom? Ireceived “ἃ com-
mandment what I should say and what I
should speak.” * ‘Through all these words
He is guiding us to the knowledge of the
Father, and referring our wonder at all that
is brought into existence to Him, to the
end that **through Him” we may know the
Father. For the Father is not regarded from
the difference of the operations, by the exhibi-
tion of a separate and peculiar energy; for
whatsoever things He sees the Father doing,
‘¢these also doeth the Son _ likewise;”®
but He enjoys our wonder at all that comes
to pass out of the glory which comes
to Him from the Only Begotten, rejoicing
in the Doer Himself as well as in the
greatness of the deeds, and exalted by all
who acknowledge Him as Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, ** through whom [by
whom, A.V. ]are all things, and for whom are
all things.” ® Wherefore, saith the Lord, ‘All
mine are thine,” 7 as though the sovereignty
over created things were conferred on Him,
and ‘‘ Thine are mine,” as though the creat-
ing Cause came thence to Him. We are not
to suppose that He used assistance in His
action, or yet was entrusted with the ministry
of each individual work by detailed commis-
sion, a condition distinctly menial and quite
inadequate to the divine dignity. Rather
was the Word full of His Father’s excel-
lences ; He shines forth from the Father, and
does all things according to the likeness of
Him that begat Him. For if in essence He
is without variation, so also is He without


avapxos, the Son, if you understand the Father as cause,
is not without beginning.” ἄρχη yap υἱοῦ πατὴρ ws αἴτιος. ** For
the Father, as cause, is Beginning of the Son.’? But, though
the Son in this sense was not ἄναρχος, He was said to be
begotten avdpxws. So Greg. Naz. (Hom. xxxvii. 590) τὸ ἴδιον
ὄνομα τοῦ ἀνάρχως γεννηθέντος, vids. Cf. the Letter of Alexan-
der of Alexandria to Alexander of Constantinople. Theod.
Ecc. Hist.i.3. τὴν ἄναρχον αὐτῷ παρὰ Tov πατρὸς γέννησιν ἀνατί
θεντας. cf. Hooker, Ecc. Pol.v.54. * By the gift of eternal gen-
eration Christ hath received of the Father one and in number
the self-same substance which the Father hath of himself un-
received from any other. For every beginning ts a father
unto that which cometh of it; and every offspring is a son unto
that out of which it groweth. Seeing, therefore, the Father
alone is originally that Deity which Christ originally is not
(for Christ is God by being of God, light by issuing out of
light), it followeth hereupon that whatsoever Christ hath com-
mon unto him with his heavenly Father, the same of neces-
sity must be gzven him, but naturally and eternally given.’
So Hilary De Trin. xii. 21, ** Ubr auctor eternus est, δὲ et
nativatis @eternitas est: quia sicut nativitas ab auctore est,
ita et ab eterno auctore eterna nativitas est.” And Augus.
tine De. Trin. v.15, ““ Naturam prestat filio SINE INITIO gen-
er atto.


1 ἡ Ὁ ΣΝ 8 John v. 19. 5 John v. 19.
2 John vi. 57. 4 John xii. 49.
6 Heb. ii. 10. cf. Rom. xi. 36, to which the reading of two


manuscripts more distinctly assimilates the citation, The
majority of commentators refer Heb. ii. 10, tothe Father, but
Theodoret understands it of the Son, and the argument of St.
Basil necessitates the same application.

7 John xvii. το.


14


BASIL


variation in power.’ And of those whose
power is equal, the operation also is in all
ways equal. And Christ is the power of
God, and the wisdom of God.” And so
‘‘all things are made through [by, A.V.]
him,” * and “ὁ all things were created through
Poy, A:V.|' him «and for him,” *; οἵ, 1ἢ
the discharge of any slavish service, but in
the fulfilment of the Father’s will as Creator.

20. When then He says, ‘*‘I have not
spoken of myself,”*® and again, ‘‘As the
Father said unto me, 801 speak,” ° and ** The
word which ye hear is not mine, but [the
Father’s] which sent me,”’ and in another
place, ‘* As the Father gave me command-
ment, even so I do,”® it is not because He
lacks deliberate purpose or power of initia-
tion, nor yet because He has to wait for the
preconcerted key-note, that he employs lan-
guage of this kind. His object is to make it
plain that His own will is connected in in-
dissoluble union with the Father. Do not
then let us understand by what is called
a **commandment” a peremptory mandate
delivered by organs of speech, and giving
orders to the Son, as to a subordinate, con-
cerning what He ought todo. Let us rather,
in a sense befitting the Godhead, perceive a
transmission of will, like the reflexion of an


object in a mirror, passing without note of


time from Father to Son. ‘For the Father
loveth the Son and sheweth him all things,” ὃ
so that ‘‘all things that the Father hath ”
belong to the Son, not gradually accruing to
Him little by little, but with Him all to-
gether and at once. Among men, the work-
man who has been thoroughly taught his
craft, and, through long training, has sure
and established experience in it, is able, in
accordance with the scientific methods which
now he has in store, to work for the future
by himself. And are we to suppose that the
wisdom of God, the Maker of all creation,
He who is eternally perfect, who is wise
without a teacher, the Power of God, ‘in
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge,” ” needs piecemeal instruc-
tion to mark out the manner and measure of
His operations? I presume that in the vanity
of your calculations, you mean to open a
school; you will make the one take His seat
in the teacher’s place, and the other stand b
in a scholar’s ignorance, gradually learning
RRS Ar ere el la ig ον θα
bishops at Nicea, as implying ὁμοούσιος. Vide Athan. De
Decretis, 8 20, in Wace and Schaff’s Bik. D162:

. 1 Cor. i. 24. 5 John xii, 49. 8 John xiv. 31.

Gah i. 3: pone xii. 50. 9John v. 20.

OA τό; John xiv. 24.
10 Col. ii.3, A.V. cf. the amendment of R.V., “all the treas-


ures of wisdom and knowledge hidden,” and Bp. Lightf
St. Paul’s use of the gnostic term ἀπόκρυφος. ἀἐτγωρο Ναὶ δ


wisdom and advancing to perfection, by les-
sons given Him bit by bit. Hence, if you
have sense to abide by what logically fol-
lows, you will find the Son being eternally
taught, nor yet ever able to reach the end of
perfection, inasmuch as the wisdom of the
Father is infinite, and the end of the infinite
is beyond apprehension. It results that
whoever refuses to grant that the Son has
all things from the beginning will never
grant that He will reach perfection. But I
am ashamed at the degraded conception to
which, by the course of the argument, I have
been brought down. Let us therefore revert
to the loftier themes of our discussion.

21. ‘* He that hath seen me hath seen the
Father ;”? not the express§mage, nor yet the
form, for the divine nature does not admit of
combination; but the goodness of the will,
which, being concurrent with the essence, is
beheld as like and equal, or rather the same,
in the Father as in the Son.’

What then is meant by ‘‘became sub-
ject.’?*. What» by * delivered, him (up fos
us all”?* It is meant that the Son has it of
the Father that He works in goodness on be-
half of men. But you must hear too the
words, ‘* Christ hath redeemed us from the
curse of the law ;”° and ‘* while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us.” ἢ

Give careful heed, too, to the words of the
Lord, and note how, whenever He instructs us
about His Father, He is in the habit of
using terms of personal authority, saying, ‘‘ I
will; be thou clean ;” and “ὁ Peace, be still ;”°
and ‘‘ But I say unto you;”? and ‘* Thou
dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee ;᾽ 5 and all
other expressions of the same kind, in order
that by these we may recognise our Master
and Maker, and by the former may be taught
the Father of our Master and Creator."


1 John xiv. 9. iy ὦ

2The argument appears to be not that Christ is not the
‘express image,” or impress ofthe Father, as He is described
in Heb. i. 3, or form, asin Phil. ii. 6, but that this is not the
sense in which our Lord’s words in St.John xiv. 9, must be
understood to describe ‘‘ seeing the Father.” ͵, Χαρακτὴο and
μοοφὴ are equivalent to ἡ θεια φύσις, and μορφή is used by St.
Basil as it is used bv St. Paul, — coinciding with, if not fol-
lowing, the usage of the older Greek philosophy, —to mean
essential attributes which the Divine Word had before the in-
carnation (cf. Eustathius in Theod. Dial. 11. [Wace and Schafft
Ed., p. 203]; ‘‘ the express image made man,” — ὃ τῷ πνεύματι
σωματοποιηθεὶς ἄνθρωπος χαρακτήρ.) _ ‘ "

The divine nature does not admit οἵ combination, in the
sense of confusion (cf. the protests of Theodoret in his Dia-
lovues against the confusion of the Godhead and manhood in
the Christ), withthe human nature in our Lord, and remains
invisible. On the word χαρακτήο vide Suicer, and on poopy
Archbp. Trench’s New Testament Synonyms and Bp. Lightfoot


pt ΜΚ 8. uF 9 Matt. v. 22, etc.
4 Rom. viii. 32. 7 Matt. viii. 3. 10 Mark ix. 25.
5 Gal. iii. 13. & Mark iv. 39. :

11 There is a difficulty in following the argument in the fore-
going quotations. F.Combefis, the French Dominican editor
of Basil, would boldly interpose a ‘ not,” and read ‘ whenever
he does oft instruct us concerning the Father.’ But there ts
no MS. authority for this violent remedy. The Benedictine


6 Rom. v. 8.


ΟΝ THEFSPIRIT.


15


Thus on all sides is demonstrated the true
doctrine that the fact that the Father creates
through the Son neither constitutes the
creation of the Father imperfect nor exhibits
the active energy of the Son as feeble, but
indicates the unity of the will; so the expres-
sion ** through whom” contains a confession
of anantecedent Cause, and is not adopted in
objection to the efficient Cause.


COAP Ors) Tx,


Definitive conceptions about the Spirit which
conform to the teaching of the Scriptures.


22. LET us now investigate what are our
common conceptions. concerning the Spirit,
as well those which have been gathered by
us from Holy Scripture concerning It as
those which we have received from the un-
written tradition of the Fathers. First of all
we ask, who on hearing the titles of the
Spirit is not lifted up in soul, who does not
raise his conception to the supreme nature?
It iscalled ‘Spirit of God,” ' τ Spirit of truth
which proceedeth from the Father,”? *‘right
Sumi 5 teading opirit.”” “Its * proper
and peculiar title is ‘* Holy Spirit; which
is aname specially appropriate to everything
that is incorporeal, purely immaterial, and
indivisible. So our Lord, when teaching
the woman who thought God to be an ob-
ject of local worship that the incorporeal is in-
comprehensible, said ** God is a spirit.” ° On
our hearing, then, of a spirit, it is impossible
to form the idea of a nature circumscribed,
subject to change and variation, or at all like
the creature. We are compelled to advance
in our conceptions to the highest, and to think
of an intelligent essence, in power infinite,
in magnitude unlimited, unmeasured by times
or ages, generous of It’s good gifts, to whom
turn all things needing sanctification, after
whom reach all things that live in virtue, as
being watered by It’s inspiration and heiped
on toward their natural and proper end}; per-
fecting all other things, but Itself in nothing
lacking; living not as needing restoration,
but as Supplier of life; not growing by addi-
tions, but straightway full, self-established,
omnipresent, origin of sanctification, light
perceptible to the mind, supplying, as_ it
were, through Itself, illumination to every
faculty in the search for truth; by nature un-


Editors say all is plainif we render “‘ postguam nos de patre
erudizvit.’? But the Greek will not admit of this.

1 Matt. xii. 28, etc. 2 John xv. 26. 3 Ps, li. 10.

4 Ps. li. 12, lIxx. R.V. and A.V., “ free spirit.”

5 It will be remembered that in the Nicene Creed “ the Lord
and Giver of life” is τὸ κύριον τὸ ζωοποιόν. In A.V. we have
both ke (John xv, 26, ἐκεῖνος) and z# (Rom, viii. 16, αὐτὸ τὸ
πνεῦμα).

6 John iv, 24.


approachable, apprehended by reason of
goodness, filling all things with Its power,’
but communicated only to the worthy ; not
shared in one measure, but distributing Its
energy according to ‘‘the proportion of
faith ;”? in essence simple, in powers various,
wholly present in each and being wholly
everywhere; impassively divided, shared
without loss of ceasing to be entire, after the
likeness of the sunbeam, whose kindly light
falls on him who enjoys it as though it
shone for him alone, yet illumines land and
sea and mingles with the air. So, too, is
the Spirit to every one who receives It, as
though given to him alone, and yet It sends
forth grace sufficient and full for all man-
kind, and is enjoyed by all who share It, ac-
cording to the capacity, not of Its power, but
of their nature.

23. Now the Spirit is not brought into
intimate association with the soul by local
approximation. How indeed could there be
a corporeal approach to the incorporeal?
This association results from the withdrawal
of the passions which, coming afterwards
gradually on the soul from its friendship to
the flesh, have alienated it from its close
relationship with God. Only then after a
man is purified from the shame whose stain
he took through his wickedness, and has
come back again to his natural beauty, and as
it were cleaning the Royal Image and restor-
ing its ancient form, only thus is it possible
for him to draw near to the Paraclete.* And
He, like the sun, will by the aid of thy puri-
fied eye show thee in Himself the image of
the invisible, and in the blessed spectacle of
the image thou shalt behold the unspeakable
beauty of the archetype.* Through His aid
hearts are lifted up, the weak are held by the
hand, and they who are advancing are brought
to perfection.* Shining upon those that are
cleansed from every spot, He makes them
spiritual by fellowship with Himself. Justas
when a sunbeam falls on bright and transpar-
ent bodies, they themselves become brilliant
too, and shed forth a fresh brightness from
themselves, so souls wherein the Spirit dwells,
illuminated by the Spirit, themselves become
spiritual, and send forth their grace to others.

8 cf. Theodoret, Dial. i. p. 164, Schaff and Wace’s ed. ““ Sin
is not of nature, but of corrupt will.’”? So the ninth article of
the English Church describes it as not the nature, but the
‘¢fault and corruption of the nature, of every man.’”’ On the
figure of the restored picture cf. Ath. de Incar. ὃ 14, and
Theod. D7a/. ii. p. 183.

4 cf. Ep.2360. ‘‘ Our mind, enlightened by the Spirit, looks
toward the Son, and in Him, asin an image, contemplates
the Father.’? There seems at first sight some confusion in
the text between the ‘‘ Royal Image” in us and Christ as the
image of God; but it is in proportion as we are like Christ
that we see God in Christ. It is the ‘‘ pure in heart”? who *‘ see


God.”
δι. Proficientes perficiuntur.”’ Ben. Ed.


16


BASIL


Hence comes foreknowledge of the future,
understanding of mysteries, apprehension of
what is hidden, distribution of good gifts, the
heavenly citizenship, a place in the chorus
of angels, joy without end, abiding in God,
the being made like to God, and, highest of
all, the being made God.' Such, then, to
instance a few out of many, are the concep-
tions concerning the Holy Spirit, which we
have been taught to hold concerning His
greatness, His dignity, and His operations,
by the oracles” of the Spirit themselves.


CHAPTER X.


Against those who say that it ts not right
to rank the Holy Spirit with the Father
and the Son.


24. But we must proceed to attack our
opponents, in the endeavour to confute those
ἐς oppositions” advanced against us which
are derived from ‘‘ knowledge falsely so-
called.” *

It is not permissible, they assert, for the.
Holy Spirit to be ranked with the Father and
Son, on account of the difference of His
nature and the inferiority of His dignity.
Against them it is right to reply in the words
of the apostles, ‘‘ We ought to obey God
rather than men.” ὁ

For if our Lord, when enjoining the bap-
tism of salvation, charged His disciplesto bap-
tize all nations in the name ‘* of the Father


and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost,” ὃ


1 Θεὸν γενεσθαι. The thought has its most famous expres-
sion in Ath. de Incar. ὃ 54. He was made man that we might
be made God — Θεοποιηθῶμεν. cf. De Decretis, § 14, ana
other passages of Ath. Ireneus (Adv. Her. iv. 38 [|lxxv.])
writes * zon ab initto dit factt sumus, sed primo quidem homt-
nes, tuncdemum dit.’ “6 Secundum enim beniguitatem suam
bene dedit bonum, et s'miles sibi sue potestatis homines fecit ;”
and Origen (contra Celsum, iii. 28), ‘* That the human nature
by fellowship with the more divine might 4e made divine, not
in Jesus only, but also in all those who with faith take up the
life which Jesus taught; ’’ and Greg. Naz. Or. xxx. ὃ 14, “ Till
by the power of the incarnation he make me God.”

In Basil adv. Eunom. ii. 4, we have, ‘‘ They who are per-
fect in virtue are deemed worthy of the title of God.”

cf. 2 Pet.i.4: ‘That ye might be partakers of the divine
nature.”

2 ὑπ’ αὐτῶν τῶν λογίων τοῦ πνεύμστος. St. Basil is as un-
conscious as other early Fathers of the limitation of the word
λόγια to ‘* discourses.” Vide Salmon’s ut. to the N.T. Ed.
iv. p. 95.

81 Tim. vi. 20. The intellectual championship of Basil
was chiefly asserted in the vindication of the consubstantiality
of the Spirit, against the Arians and Semi-Arians, of whom
Eunomius and Macedonius were leaders, the latter giving his
name tothe party who were unsound on the third Person of
the Trinity, and were known as Macedonians as well as
Pneumatomachi. But even among the maintainers of the
Nicene confession there was much less clear apprehension of
the nature and work of the Spirit than of the Son. Even so
late as 380, the year after St. Basil’s death, Gregory of Nazian-
zus, Orat. xxxi. de Spiritu Sancto, Cap. 5, wrote “of the wise
on our side some held it to bean energy, some a creature, some
God. Others, from respect, they say, to Holy Scripture, which
lays down no law on the subject, neither worship nor dishonour
the Holy Spirit.” cf. Schaff’s Hist.of Christian Ch. 111. Period,
Sec. 128. In Letter cxxv. of St. Basil will be found a summary
of the heresies with which he credited the Arians, submitted to
Eustathius of Sebaste in 373, shortly before the composition of
the present treatise for Amphilochius.

4 Acts v. 29. 5 Matt. xxviii. 19.


not disdaining fellowship with Him, and these
men allege that we must notrank Him with the
Father and the Son, is it not clear that they
openly withstand the commandment of God?
If they deny that codrdination of this kind
is declaratory of any fellowship and conjunc-
tion, let them tell us why it behoves us to
hold this opinion, and what more intimate
mode of conjunction ' they have.

If the Lord did not indeed conjoin the Spirit
with the Father and Himself in baptism, do
not? let them lay the blame of conjunction
upon us, for we neither hold nor say anything
different. If on the contrary the Spirit is
there conjoined with the Father and the Son,
and no one is so shameless as to say anything
else, then let them not lay blame on us for
following the words of Scripture.

25. But all the apparatus of war has been
got ready against us; every intellectual mis-
sile is aimed at us; and now blasphemers’
tongues shoot and hit and hit again, yet harder
than Stephen of old was smitten by the
killers of the Christ.* And do not let them
succeed in concealing the fact that, while an
attack on us serves for a pretext for the war,
the real aim of these proceedings is higher.
It is against us, they say, that they are pre-
paring their engines and their snares ; against
us that they are shouting to one another,
according to each one’s strength or cunning,
to come on. But the object of attack is
faith. The one aim of the whole band of
opponents and enemies of ** sound doctrine ” *
is to shake down the foundation of the faith
of Christ by levelling apostolic tradition with
the ground, and utterly destroying it. So
like the debtors, —of course dona _ fide debtors,
——they clamour for written proof, and reject
as worthless the unwritten tradition of the
Fathers. But we will not slacken in our de-


1The word used is συνάφεια, a crucial word in the con-
troversy concerning the union of the divine and human natures
in our Lord, cf. the third Anathema of Cyril against Nestorius
and the use of this word, and Theodoret’s counter statement
(Theod, pp. 25, 22). Theodore of Mopsuestia had preferred
συνάφεια to ἕνωσις; Andrew of Saimosata saw no difference be-
tween them. Athanasius (de Sent. Dionys. § 17) employs it
for the mutual relationship of the Persons in the Holy Trinity :
““ προκαταρκτικὸν γάρ ἐστι τῆς συναφείας TO Ovoma.”

2 μηδέ, The note of the Ben. Eds, is, “" This reading, fol.
lowed by Erasmus, stirs the wrath of Combefis, who would
read, as is found in four MSS., τότε ἡμῖν, ‘then let them lay
the blame on us.’ But he is quite unfair to Erasmus, who has
more clearly apprehended the drift of the argument. Basil
brings his opponents to the dilemma that the words ‘In the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost ’
either do or do not assert a conjunction with the Father and the
Son. If not, Basil ought not to be found fault with on the
score of ‘ conjunction,’ for he abides by the words of Scripture,
and conjunction no more follows from his words than from
those of our Lord. If they do, he cannot be found fault with
for following the words of Scripture. The attentive reader
will see this to be the meaning of Basil, and the received read-
ing ought to be retained.”

3 Χριστοφόνοι. The compound occurs in Ps. Ignat. ad
Philad. vi.

41 Tim. 1. 10.

5 Mr. Johnston sees here a reference to the parable of the
unjust steward, and appositely quotes Greg. Naz. Orat. xxxi,


ON) ΓΕΞΕΡΥΞΡΕΡΙΚΤΤ,


17


fence of the truth. We will not cowardly
abandon the cause. ‘The Lord has delivered
to us as a necessary and saving doctrine that
the Holy Spirit is to be ranked with the
Father. Our opponents think differently, and
see fit to divide and rend’ asunder, and rele-
gate Him tothe nature of a ministering spirit.
Is it not then indisputable that they make
their own blasphemy more authoritative than
the law prescribed by the Lord? Come, then,
set aside mere contention. Let us consider
the points before us, as follows:

26. Whence is it that we are Chris-
tians? Through our faith, would be the
universal answer. And in what way are we
saved? Plainly because we were regenerate
through the grace given in our baptism.
How else could we be? And after recognising
that this salvation is established through the
Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost,
shall we fling away ‘‘that form of doctrine ” ”
which we received? Would it not rather be
ground for great groaning if we are found now
further off from our salvation ‘* than when
we first believed,’* and deny now what we
then received? Whether a man have de-
parted this life without baptism, or have
received a baptism lacking in some of the
requirements of the tradition, his loss is
equal.* And whoever does not always and
everywhere keep to and hold fast as a sure
protection the confession which we recorded
at our first admission, when, being delivered
‘‘from the idols,” ave came ‘‘to the living
God,” ° constitutes himself a ‘* stranger”
from the ‘‘ promises” ® of God, fighting
against his own handwriting,’ which he put


§ 3, on the heretics’ use of Scripture, ‘‘ They find a cloak for
their impiety in their affection for Scripture.’”? The Arians at
Nicza objected to the ὁμοόυσιον as unscriptural.

Bef, ρος χα. 5- 2 Rom. vi. 17. S Roms Xt, τι: 32.0

4 The question is whether the baptism has been solemnized,
according to the divine command, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. St. Cyprian in his con-
troversy with Stephen, Bp. of Rome, represented the sterner
view that heretical baptism was invalid. But, with some
exceptions in the East, the position ultimately prevailed that
baptism with water, and 22 the prescribed words, by whom-
soever administered, was valid. So St. Augustine, “ Sz
evangelicts verbis in nomtne Patrts et Filii et Spiritus Sancti
Marcion baptismum consecrabat, integrum erat Sacramentum,
guamvis ejus fides sub eisdem verbis aliud opinantis quam
catholica veritas docet non esset integra.” (Cont. Petil. de
unico bapt. § 3.) So the VIII. Canon of Arles (314), ** De
Afris, quod propria lege sua utuntur ut rebaptizent, placuit,
ut, stad ecclestam aliguts de herest venerit, tnterrogent eum
symbolum; et st perviderint eum tn Patre, et Filio et Spiritu
Sancto,esse baptizatum, manus et tantum tmponantur, ut
accipiat spiritum sanctum. Quod si interrogatus non respon-
derit hance Trinitatem, baptizetur.” Sothe VII. Canon of
Constantinople (381) by which the Eunomians who only
baptized with one immersion, andthe Montanists, here called
Phrygians, and the Sabellians, who taught the doctrine of the
Fatherhood of the Son, were counted as heathen. Vide Bright’s
notes on the Canons of the Councils, p. τοῦ. Socrates, v. 24,
describes how the Eunomi-Eutychians baptized not in the name
of the Trinity, but into the death of Christ.

er Ehess. 170. 6 Eph. ii. 12.

7The word χειρόγραφον, more common in Latin than in
Greek, is used generally for a bond. cf. Juv. Sat. xvi. 41,
“ Debitor aut sumptos pergtknon reddere nummos,vana super-
vacut dicens chirographa ligni.”? On the use of the word, vide
Bp. Lightfoot on Col. ii. 14. The names of the catechu


on record when he professed the faith. For
if to me my baptism was the beginning
of life, and that day of regeneration the first
of days, it is plain that the utterance utterea
in the grace of adoption was the most honour-
able of all. Can I then, perverted by these
men’s seductive words, abandon the tradition
which guided me to the light, which bestowed
on me the boon of the knowledge of God,
whereby I, so long a foe by reason of sin,
was made a child of God? But, for myself,
I pray that with this confession I may depart
hence to the Lord, and them I charge to
preserve the faith secure until the day of
Christ, and to keep the Spirit undivided from
the Father and the Son, preserving, both in
the confession of faith and in the doxology,
the doctrine taught them at their baptism.


CHAPTER. XT:


That they who deny the Spirit are trans-
gressors,


27. ‘*Who hath woe? Who hath sor-
row?” For whom is distress and darkness?
For whom eternal doom? [5 it not for the
trangressors? For them that deny the faith?
And what is the proof of their denial? Is it
not that they have set at naught their own
confessions? And when and what did they
confess? Belief in the Father and in the
Son and in the Holy Ghost, when they re-
nounced the devil and his angels, and ut-
tered those saving words. What fit title
then for them has been discovered, for the
children of light to use? Are they not ad-
dressed as transgressors, as having violated
the covenant of their salvation? What am
I to call the denial of God? What the
denial of Christ? What but transgressions?
And to him who denies the Spirit, what title
do you wish me to apply? Must it not bethe
same, inasmuch as he has broken his covenant
with God? And when the confession of faith
in Him secures the blessing of true religion,
and its denial subjects men to the doom of
godlessness, is it not a fearful thing for them
to set the confession at naught, not through
fear of fire, or sword, or cross, or scourge, or
wheel, or rack, but merely led astray by the
sophisiry and seductions of the pneumatoma-
chi? I testify to every man who is confessing
Christ and denying God, that Christ will profit
him nothing ;* to every man that calls upoa
God but rejects the Son, that his faith is vain ; °
to every man that sets aside the Spirit, that


mens were registered. and the Renunciation and Profession of
Faith (/uterrogationes et Responsa ; ἐπερωτήσεις Kat amoxpi-
gets) may have been signed.


1 Prov. xxiii. 29. 2cf, Gal. ν. 2. 8 cf. 1 Cor. Xv. 17.


18


his faith in the Father and the Son will be
useless, for he cannot even hold it without
the presence of the Spirit. For he who does
not believe the Spirit does not believe in the
Son, and he who has not believed in the
Son does not believe in the Father. For
none ‘¢can say that Jesus is the Lord but by
the Holy Ghost,”’ and ‘* No man hath seen
God at any time, but the only begotten God
which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath
declared him.” ?

Such an one hath neither part nor lot in the
true worship; for it is impossible to worship
the Son, save by the Holy Ghost ; impossible
to call upon the Father, save by the Spirit of
adoption.


CHAPTER XII.


Against those who assert that the baptism in
the name of the Father alone ts sufficient.


28. Ler no one be misled by the fact of
the apostle’s frequently omitting the name
of the Father and of the Holy Spirit when
making mention of baptism, or on this
account imagine that the invocation of the
names isnot observed. ‘* As many of you,”

e says, ‘*as apti i ‘ist hav
h ys, “ὁ 45 were baptized into Christ have
put on Christ; ”° and again, ** As many of
you as were baptized into Christ were bap-
tized into his death.” * For the naming of
Christ is the confession of the whole,’ shew-
ing forth as it does the God who gave, the
Son who received, and the Spirit who is, the
unction. So we have learned from Peter,
in the Acts, of ‘ Jesus of Nazareth whom
God anointed with the Holy Ghost;’’ ἦ and
in Isaiah, ‘‘ The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because the Lord hath anointed me;” ἢ
and the Psalmist, ‘* Therefore God. even thy
God, hath anointed thee with the oil of glad-
ness above thy fellows.”® Scripture, how-
ever, in the case of baptism, sometimes
plainly mentions the Spirit alone.’®

‘* For into one Spirit,” '! it says, ‘* we were
all baptized in’* one body.” '* And in har-

1 Cor. Xii. 3.

2John i. 18. On the reading “only begotten God” cf.
note on p.g. In this passage in St. Basil ‘* God” is the
reading of three MSS. at Paris, that at Moscow, that at
the Bodleian, and that at Vienna. ‘Son” is read by Regius
111., Regius I., Regius IV., and Regius V. in Paris, the
three last being all otf the 14th century, the one in the British
Museum, and another in the Imperial Library at Vienna,
which generally agrees with our own in the Museum.

3 Gal. ili. 27, R.V.

4 Rom, vi. 3, with change to 2d person.

5 cf, note on p. 17

6 ** τοῦ Χριστοῦ προσηγορία . . « δηλοῖ τόν τε Χρίσαντα Θεὸν
καὶ τὸν Χρισθέντα Yiov καὶ τὸ Χρίσμα τὸ Πνεῦμα.

7 Acts x. 18. 8 Is.1]x.1. 9 Ps. χὶν. ἡ.

10 No subject occurs in the original, but ‘‘ Scripture ” seems
better than ‘*the Apostle” of the Bened. Tr. ‘ Videtur
fecisse mentionem,” moreover, is not the Latin for φαίνεται


μνημονεύσας, but for φαίνεται μνημονεῦσαι.
11 Sic, 12 Sic. 181 Cor. xii. 13, loosely quoted.


BASIL


ere a ee ee ae ΞΞΝΝΣ


mony with this are the passages: ‘* You
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost,” ?
and ‘* He shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost.”? But no one on this account would
be justified in calling that baptism a perfect
baptism wherein only the name of the Spirit
ros invoked. For the tradition that has been
given us by the quickening grace must re-
main for ever inviolate. He who redeemed
our life from destruction * gave us power of
renewal, whereof the cause is ineflable and
hidden in mystery, but bringing great salva-
tion to our souls, so that to add or to take
away anything * involves manifestly a falling
away from the life everlasting. If then in
baptism the separation of the Spirit from the
Father and the Son is perilous to the bap-
tizer, and of no advantage to the baptized,
how can the rending asunder of the Spirit
from Father and ‘from Son be safe for us?®
Faith and baptism are two kindred and in-
separable ways of salvation: faith is perfect-
ed through baptism, baptism is established
through faith, and both are completed by
the same names. For as-we believe in the
Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, so
are we also baptized in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost: first comes the confession, introduc-
ing us to salvation, and baptism follows, set-
ting the seal upon our assent.


CHAPTER itt.


Statement of the reason why in the writings of
Paul the angels are associated with the
Father and the Son.


29. It is, however, objected) that other
beings which are enumerated with the Father
and the Son are certainly not always glorified
together with them. The apostle, for in-
stance, in his charge to Timothy, associates
the angels with them in the words, ‘‘ I charge
thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ
and the elect angels.””* We are not for
alienating the angels from the rest of crea-
tion, and yet, it is argued, we do not allow
of their being reckoned with the Father and
the Son. To this I reply, although the
argument, so obviously absurd is it, does not
really deserve a reply, that possibly before a
mild and gentle judge, and especially before
One who by His leniency to those arraigned
before Him demonstrates the unimpeachable
equity of His decisions, one might be willing
to offer as witness even a fellow-slave; but
for a slave to be made free and called a son


1 Actsi. 5 2 Luke iii. 16.
4 cf. Deut. iv. 2, and Rev. xxi. 18, 19.
5 cf, note on p. 17. 61 Tim, v, 21.


8 ε΄. PS. Clik. 4.


\


|


ΟΝ THE (SPIRIT.


of God and quickened from death can only
be brought about by Him who has acquired
natural kinship with us, and has_ been
changed from the rank of a slave. For how
can we be made kin with God by one who
isan alien? How can we be freed by one
who is himself under the yoke of slavery? It
follows that the mention of the Spirit and
that of angels are not made under like con-
ditions. The Spirit is called on as Lord of
life, and the angels as allies of their fellow-
slaves and faithful witnesses of the truth. It
is customary for the saints to deliver the
commandments of God in the presence of
witnesses, as also the apostle himself says
to Timothy, ““ The things which thou hast
heard of me among many witnesses, the same
commit thou to faithful men;”!' and now
he calls the angels to witness, for he knows
that angels shall be present with the Lord
when He shall come in the glory of His
Father to judge the world in righteousness.
For He says, ‘*‘ Whoever shall confess me
before men, him shall the Son of Man also
confess before the angels of God, but
he that denieth Me before men shall be
denied before the angels of God;”? and
Paul in another place says, ** When the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
angels.” * Thus he already testifies before
the angels, preparing good proofs for himself
at the great tribunal.

30. And not only Paul, but generally all
those to whom is committed any ministry of
the word, never cease from testifying, but call
heaven and earth to witness on the ground
that now every deed that is done is done


| within them, and that in the examination of


all the actions of life they will be present
judged. So it is said, ‘* He shall
heavens above and to earth, that
ige his people.” * And so Moses


when t to deliver his oracles to the
people Ws, “1 call heaven and earth to
\witness s day;”° and again in his song
he says, ive ear, O ye heavens, and I will


speak, ΑΝ hear, O earth, the words of my
mouth ; ”* and Isaiah, *‘ Hear, O heavens,
and give ear, Ὁ earth; 7 and Jeremiah de-
scribes astonishment in heaven at the tidings
of the unholy deeds of the people: **The
heaven was astonished at this, and was
horribly aly d, because my people com-
mitted υνοῇ, ἧς": And so the apostle,
knowing th¥~ingels to be set over men as
tutors and guardians, calls them to witness.
Moreover, Joshua, the son of Nun, even
5 Deut. iv. 26.

© Deut. XXX1i1, Fs


TISA. 1. 2;
S Jer. il. na), 03, xm,


ee Oe | Oe
2 Luke xii. 8, 9.
32 Thess. i. 7.


; [


2


set up a stone as witness of his words (al-
ready a heap somewhere had been called a
witness by Jacob),' for he says, ** Behold
this stone shall be a witness unto you this
day to the end of days, when ye lie to the
Lord our God,” ? perhaps believing that
by God’s power even the stones would
speak to the conviction of the transgressors ;
or, if not, that at least each man’s conscience
would be wounded by the force of the re-
minder. In this manner they who have
been entrusted with the stewardship of souls
provide witnesses, whatever they may be, so
as to produce them at some future day.
But the Spirit is ranked together with God,
not on account of the emergency of the
moment, but on account of the natural fel-
lowship; is not dragged in by us, but in-
vited by the Lord.


CHAPTER αν:


Objection that some were baptized unio Moses
and behevedin him, and an answer to Itt;
with remarks upon types.


31. Bur even if some are baptized unto
the Spirit, itis not, it is urged, on this ac-
count right for the Spirit to be ranked with
God. Some ‘were: baptized unto Moses
in the cloudand in the sea.”* And it is ad-
mitted that faith even before now has been
put in men; for ‘* The people believed God
and his servant Moses.” * Why then, it is
asked, do we, on account of faith and of
baptism, exalt and magnify the Holy Spirit
so far above creation, when there is
evidence that the same things have before
now been said of men? What, then, shall
we reply? Our answer is that the faith in
the Spirit is the same as the faith in the
Father andthe Son; and in like manner, too,
the baptism. But the faith in Moses and in
the cloud is, as it were, in a shadow and type.
The nature of the divine is very frequently
represented by the rough and shadowy out-
lines ° of the types ; but because divine things
are prefigured by small and human things,
it is obvious that we must not therefore con-
clude the divine nature to be small. The
type is an exhibition of things expected, and
gives an imitative anticipation of the future.
So Adam was a type of **Him that was
tov comes) ον Lypically, $+ That/rock: was
Christ; ” and the water a type of the living
power of the word; as He says, “1 any


1 Gen. xxxi. 47. nears Κα. 2.

2Josh, xxiv. 27. 1xx. ee xiv. 31, xx.

5 σκιαγραφία, or shade-painting, is illusory scene-painting.
Plato (Crit. 107 c.) calls it ‘indistinct and deceptive.”’ cf. Ar.
Eth. Nic. i. 3, 4, “ παχυλῶς καὶ ἐν τύπῳ." The τύπος gives the
general design, not an exact anticipation.

6 Rom, v. 14. 71 Cor. X. 4.


20


BASIL


man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink.” The manna is a type of the liv-
ing bread that came down from heaven; "
and the serpent on the standard,’ of the
passion of salvation accomplished by means
of the cross, wherefore they who even looked
thereon were preserved. So in like manner,
the history of the exodus of Israel is recorded
to shew forth those who are being saved
through baptism. For the firstborn of the Is-
raelites were preserved, like the bodies of the
baptized, by the giving of grace to them that
were marked with blood. For the blood of
the sheep is a type of the blood of Christ;
and the firstborn, a type of the first-
formed. And inasmuch as the first-formed
of necessity exists in us, and, in sequence of
succession, is transmitted till the end, it fol-
lows that *“‘in Adam” we ““ 411 die,” * and
that ‘‘death reigned”® until the fulfilling
of the law and the coming of Christ. And
the firstborn were preserved by God from
being touched by the destroyer, to show that
we who were made alive in Christ no longer
die in Adam. The sea and the cloud for
the time being led on through amazement
to faith, but for the time to come they
typically prefigured the grace to be. ‘* Who
is wise and he shall understand these
things? ” §— how the sea is typically a bap-
tism bringing about the departure of Pharaoh,
in like manner as this washing causes the
departure of the tyranny of the devil. The
sea slew the enemy in itself: and in baptism
too dies our enmity towards God. From
the sea the people came out unharmed: we
too, as it were, alive from the dead, step up
from the water ‘* saved ” by the ** grace” of
Him who called us.’ And the cloud is a
shadow of the gift of the Spirit, who cools
the flame of our passions by the ““ mortifica-
tion ’’ of our ‘* members.” ὃ

32. What then? Because they were typi-
cally baptized unto Moses, is the grace of
baptism therefore small? Were it so, and if
we were in each case to prejudice the dignity of
our privileges by comparing them with their
types, not even one of these privileges could
be reckoned great; then not the love of God,
who gave His only begotten Son for our
sins, would be great and extraordinary, be-
cause Abraham did not spare his own son;?®
then even the passion of the Lord would not
be glorious, because a sheep typified the
offering instead of Isaac; then the descent
into hell was not fearful, because Jonah


1 John vii. 37. 2 John vi. 49, δι.

3 σημεῖον, as in the LXX. cf. Numb. xxi. g and John iii, 14,
41 Cor; xys22, © Hiph. 11.5.

6 Col..iiiag.

9 cf. Rom. viii. 32.


had previously typified the death in three
days and three nights. The same prejudicial
comparison is made also in the case of baptism
by all who judge of the reality by the shadow,
and, comparing the typified with the type,
attempt by means of Moses and the sea to
disparage at once the whole dispensation of
the Gospel. What remission of sins, what re-
newal of life, is there in the sea? What
spiritual gift is there through Moses? What
dying ' of sins is there? Those men aid
not die with Christ ; wherefore they were not
raised with Him.? They did not ‘ bear the
image of the heavenly ;”’* they did not “* bear
about in the body the dying of Jesus ;”* they
did not ‘* put off the old man; ” they did not
“ρας on the new man which is renewed in
knowledge after the image of Him which
created him.”® Why then do you compare
baptisms which have only the name in com-
mon, while the distinction between the
things themselves is as great as might be
that of dream and reality, that of shadow and
figures with substantial existence?

33. But belief in Moses not only does not
show our belief in the Spirit to be worthless,
but, if we adopt our opponents’ line of argu-
ment, it rather weakens our confession in the
God of the universe. © The people,” at πὶ
written, ** believed the Lord and his servant
Moses.” ® Moses then is joined with God,
not with the Spirit; and he was a type not
of the Spirit, but of Christ. For at that time
in the ministry of the law, he by means of
himself typified ‘‘ the Mediator between God
and men.” 7 Moses, when mediating for the
people in things pertaining to God, was not
a minister of the Spirit; for the law was
given, “ὁ ordained by angels in the hang of a
mediator,” ° namely Moses, in a
with the summons of the peopl
thou with us, τον τὸ butletmor
with us.” ° Thus faith in Moses is
the Lord, the Mediator between
men, who said, ‘* Had ye believed
would have believed me.” ”° Is
faith in the Lord a trifle, because J was sig-
nified beforehand through Moses?” So then,
even ‘f men were baptized unto Meses, it does
not follow that the grace given of the Spirit
in baptism is small. I may point out, too,
that it is usual in Scripture to say Moses and
the law,'’ as in the passage, ‘ghey have
Moses and the prophets.”*?” WHi@n therefore
it is meant to speak of the baptism of the law,


oses, ye
hen our


|


1 νέἐκρωσὶς, A.V. in 2 Cor. iv. τὸ, ‘*dyinyr,”” Rom. iv. 19,
‘*deadness.”

2 cf. Rom. vi. 8.

31 Cor. Xv. 49. 6 Ex. xiv. 31.

42 Cor. iv. 10, Τα Time 11- δ.

11 y.¢., to mean by ““ Moses,” the law.


8 Gal. iii. 19.
9) TX. Sos) TO.
10 John v. 46.
12 Luke xvi. 29.


5 Col. iii. 9, 10.


ON: THE: SPIRIT.


21


the words are, ‘‘ They were baptized unto
Moses.” ? Why then do these calumniators
of the truth, by means of the shadow and the
types, endeavour to bring contempt and
ridicule on the ‘* rejoicing” of our ** hope,” ”
and the rich gift of our God and Saviour,
who through regeneration renews our youth
like the eagle’s?* Surely it is altogether
childish, and like a babe who must needs be
fed on milk,* to be ignorant of the great
mystery of our salvation; inasmuch as, in
accordance with the oradual progress of our
education, while being brought to perfec-
tion in our training for godliness,’ we were
first taught elementary and easier lessons,
suited to our intelligence, while the Dis-
penser of our lots was ever leading us up, by
sradually accustoming us, like eyes brought
up in the dark, to the great light of truth.
Wor He spares our weakness, and in the
lepth of the riches * of His wisdom, and the
anscrutable judgments of His intelligence,
used this gentle treatment, fitted for our needs,
gradually accustoming us to see first the
shadows of objects, and to look at the sun in
water, to save us from dashing against the
spectacle of pure unadulterated light, and
being blinded. Just so the Law, having a
shadow of things to come, and the typical
teaching of the prophets, which is a dark
utterance of the truth, have been devised as
means to train the eyes of the heart, in that
hence the transition to the wisdom hidden
in mystery 7 will be made easy. Enough so
far concerning types; nor indeed would it be
possible to linger longer on this topic, or the
incidental discussion would become many
times bulkier than the main argument,


CHAPTER . XV.


Reply to the suggested objection that we are
baptized “into water.’ Also concerning
baptism.


34. WHAT more? Verily, our opponents
are well equipped with arguments. We are
baptized, they urge, into water, and of
course we shall not honour the water above
all creation, or give it a share of the honour
of the, Father and of the Son. The areu-
ments of these men are such as might be ex-
pected from angry disputants, leaving no
means untried in their attack on him who
has offended them, because their reason is
clouded over by their feelings. We will
not, however, shrink from the discussion even


11 Cor. X. 2.

2 Heh. iii. 6.
Sef, Ps... Cll. δὲ
$cf. Heb. v. 12.


Sof, t Tims ἐν. ἢ:
& Rom, 1.22:
71 Cor. ii. 7.


of these points. If we do not teach the igno-
rant, at least we shall not turn away before
evil doers. But let us for a moment retrace
our steps.

25. The dispensation of our God and
Saviour concerning man is a recall from the
fall, and a return from the alienation caused by
disobedience to close communion with God.
This is the reason for the sojourn of Christ
in the flesh, the pattern life described in the
Gospels, the sufferings, the cross, the tomb,
the resurrection ; so that the man who is being
saved through imitation of Christ receives
that old adoption. For perfection of life the
imitation of Christ is necessary, not only in
the example of gentleness,’ lowliness, and
long suffering set us in His life, but also of
His actual death. So Paul, the imitator of
Christ,” says, ““ being made conformable
unto his death; if by any means I might
attain unto the resurrection of the dead.” °
How then are we made in the likeness
of His death? * In that we were buried °
with Him by baptism. What then is the
manner of the burial? And what is the δά:
vantage resulting from the imitation? First
of all, it is necessary that the continuity of the
old life be cut. And this is impossible un-
less a man be born again, according to the
Lord’s word; ° for the regeneration, as in-
deed the name shews, is a beginning of a
second life. So before beginning the second,
it is necessary to put an end to the first.
For just as in the case of runners who turn
and take the second course,’ a kind of halt
and pause intervenes between the move-
ments in the opposite direction, so also in
making a change in lives it seemed necessary
for death to come as mediator between the
two, ending all that goes before, and begin-
ning all that comes after. How then do
we achieve the descent into hell? By im-
itating, through baptism, the burial of
Christ. Forthe bodies of the baptized are,
as it were, buried in the water. Baptism
then symbolically signifies the putting off of
the works of the flesh; as the apostle says,
ye were ‘circumcised with the circumcision
made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision
of Christ; buried with him in baptism.” ὃ


1 aopynoiain Arist. Eth. iv. 5,5, is the defect where meek-
ness (πραότης) is the mean. In Plutarch, who wrote a short
treatise on it, itis a virtue. In Mark iii. 5, Jesus looked round
on them ‘* with anger, ” wer’ ὀργῆς, but in Matt. xi. 29, He
calls Himself πρᾷος.

ρα COP Ke hs Pie We τὸ, ἴὰς 4 Rom. vi. 4, 5-

5A.V., “areburied.” Grk. and R.V., ‘‘ were buried.”

6 John nit ἃς

7 In the double course /SéavAos) the runner turned (κάμπτω)
the post at the end of the stadium. So “κάμψαι διαύλον
θάτερον κῶλον πάλιν in AEsch. Ag’. 335, for retracing one’s
steps another way.


8 Col. ii. 11, 12.
Φ


22


BASIL


I -- τυτυὺυτΡρ7σὺΡ̓ὔρ τπτ''’!ἵὔἕἷἧἷἧἷἵἷ““Ἕἃ“ἷ“ἕ“ἕ0!΄΄


And there is, as it were, a cleansing of the
soul from the filth? that has grown on it
from the carnal mind,? as it is written,
‘¢ Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter
than snow.” ? On this account we do not,
as is the fashion of the Jews, wash ourselves
at each defilement, but own the baptism of
salvatica‘’ to be one.® For there the death
on behalf of the world is one, and
one the resurrection of the dead, whereof
baptism isa type. For this cause the Lord,
who is the Dispenser of our life, gave us the
covenant of baptism, containing a type of
life and death, for the water fulfils the
image of death, and the Spirit gives
us the earnest of life. Hence it follows
that the answer to our question why
the water was associated with the Spirit ° is
clear: the reason is because in baptism two
ends were proposed; on the one hand, the
destroying of the body of sin,’ that it may
never bear fruit unto death; ® on the other
hand, our living unto the Spirit,® and having
our fruit in holiness; ἢ" the water receiving
the body as ina tomb figures death, while
the Spirit pours in the quickening power, re-
newing our souls from the deadness of sin
unto their original life. This then is what
it is to be born again of water and of the
Spirit, the being made dead being effected in
the water, while our life is wrought in us
through the Spirit. In three immersions,”
then, and with three invocations, the great
mystery of baptism is performed, to the end
that the type of death may be fully figured,
and that by the tradition of the divine know-
ledge the baptized may have their souls en-
lightened. It follows that if there is any
grace in the water, it is not of the nature of
the water, but of the presence of the Spirit.
For baptism is ** not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good


avy, % Pet. 111. 21.
270 σαρκικὸν φοόνημα. cf. the φρόνημα τῆς σαρκός Of Rom.


viii.6. cf. Articie ix.
a P35 lo; 7 cf. Rom. vi. 6.
πες τ Pet. ii.2r. 8 cf. Rom. vii. 5.
Sey. Eph.iv. 5. OCF. Asal V. 25.


6 cf. John iii. 5. 10 cf. Rom, vi. 22.

11'Trine immersion was the universal rule of the Catholic
Ciurch. cf. Greg. Nyss. The Great Catechism, p. 502 of this
edition, So Tertull. de Cor. Mil. c. iii., Aquam aditurt,
thidem, sed et aliquanto prius in ecclesia, sub antistitis manu
contestamur, nos renuntiare diabolo et pompe et angelis
ejus, Dehinc ter mergitamur. Sozomen (vi. 26) says that
Eunomius was alleged to be the first to maintain that baptism
ourht to be performed in-one immersion and to corrupt in
this manner the tradition of the apostles, and Theodoret
(Heret. fab. iv. 3) describes Eunomius as abandoning the
trine immersion, and also the invocation of the Trinity as
bap'izing into the death of Christ. Jeremy Taylor (Ductor
dubttantium, iii. 4, Sect. 13) says, **In England we have a
custom of sprinkling, and that but once. . . . As to the
number, though the Church of England hath made no law,
and therefore the custom of doing it once is the more indiffer-
ent and at liberty, yet if the trine immersion be agreeable to
the analogy of the mystery, and the other be not, the custom
eu ἐπί not to prevail, and is not to be complied with, if the case
be evident or declared.” e


conscience towards God.” ὁ So in training
us for the life that follows on the resurrection
the Lord sets out all the manner of life re-
quired by the Gospel, laying down for us the
law of gentleness, of endurance of wrong, of
freedom from the defilement that comes of the
love of pleasure, and from covetousness, to the
end that we may of set purpose win bcfore-
hand and achieve all that the life to come of
its inherent nature possesses. If therefore
any one in attempting a definition were to
describe the gospel as a forecast of the life
that follows on the resurrection, he would
not seem to me to go beyond what is meet
and right. Let us now return to our main
topic.

36. Through the Holy Spirit comes our
restoration to paradise, our ascension into
the kingdom of heaven, our return to the
adoption of sons, our liberty to call God our
Father, our being made partakers of the
grace of Christ, our being called children of
light, our sharing in eternal glory, and, in
a word, our being brought into a state of all
ἐς fulness of blessing,” ἢ both in this world
and in the world to come, of all the good
gifts that are in store for us, by promise
whereof, through faith, beholding the re-
flection of their grace as though they were
already present, we await the full enjoyment.
If such is the earnest, what the perfection?
If such the first fruits, what the complete ful-
filment? Furthermore, from this too may be
apprehended the difference between the grace
that comes from the Spirit and the baptism
by water: in that John indeed baptized with
water, but our Lord Jesus Christ by the Holy
Ghost. ‘I indeed,” he says, *‘ baptize you
with water unto repentance; but he that
cometh after me is mightier than I, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall bap-
tize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.” °
Here He calls the trial at the judgment
the baptism of fire, as the apostle says,
‘The fire shall try every man’s work, of
what sort it is.” * And again, ‘‘ The day
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed
by fire.” ° And ere now there have been some
who in their championship of true religion
have undergone the death for Christ’s sake,
not in mere similitude, but in actual fact, and
so have needed none of the outward signs of
water for their salvation, because they were
baptized in their own blood.® Thus I write


1] Pet. iii. 21. 8 Matt. iii. 11. 57d.


2 Rom. xv. 29. 4 Cor, tit. 13.

6On the martyrs’ baptism of blood, cf. Eus. vi. 4, on the
martyrdom of the Catechumen Herais. So St. Cyril, of Jeru-
salem (Cat. Lect. iii. 10), “1 a man receive not baptism, he
has not salvation; excepting only the martyrs, even who
without the water receive the kingdom. Forwhen the Saviour
was ransoming the world through the cross, and was pierced


ON” THE SPIRIT:


23


not to disparage the baptism by water, but
to overthrow the arguments’ of those who
exalt themselves against the Spirit; who
confound things that are distinct from one
another, and compare those which admit of
no comparison.


CHAPTER AVE


That the Holy Spirit is in every conception in-
separable from the Father and the Son, alike
in the creaton of perceptible objects, in the
dispensation of human affairs, and in the
judgment to come.


37. Let us then revert to the point raised
from the outset, that in all things the Holy
Spirit is inseparable and wholly incapable of
being parted from the Father and the Son.
St. Paul, in the passage about the gift of
tongues, writes to the Corinthians, * If ye all
prophesy and there come in one that believeth
not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all,
he is judged of all; and thus are the secrets
of the heart made manifest; and so falling
down on his face he will worship God and
report that God is in you of a truth.”? If
then God is known to be in the prophets
by the prophesying that is acting according
to the distribution of the gifts of the Spirit,
let our adversaries consider what kind of
place they will attribute to the Holy Spirit.
Let them say whether it is more proper to
rank Him with God or to thrust Him forth
to the place of the creature. Peter’s words
to Sapphira, ‘* How is it that ye have agreed
together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Ye
have not lied unto men, but unto God,” ? show
that sins against the Holy Spirit and against
God are the same; and thus you might learn
that in every operation the Spirit is closely
conjoined with, and inseparable from, the
Father and the Son. God works the differ-
ences of operations, and the Lord the diver-
sities of administrations, but all the while the
Holy Spirit is present too of His own will,
dispensing distribution of the gifts according
to each recipient’s worth. For, it is said,
ὁ there are diversities of gifts, but the same
Spirit ; and differences of administrations, but
the same Lord; and there are diversities of
Operations, but it is the same God which
workethy,all.in-all.’’*. “*But.all.these,” ἐξ 18


in the side, He gave forth blood and water, that some in times
of peace should be baptized in water; others in time of perse-
cution, in their own blood.’”? So Tertullian (Jz Valentin. ii.)
of the Holy Innocents, “ baptized in blood for Jesus’ sake”
(Keble), ** testimonium Christi sanguine litavere.”

1 Τοὺς λογισμοὺς καθαιρῶν. cf. 2 Cor, x. 4.

21 Cor. Xiv, 24, 25.

3 Acts v.gand 4. ‘Thou hast not [164,᾽ said to Ananias,
interpolated into the rebuke of Sapphira.

41 Cor. xii. 4, 5, 6.


said, ‘* worketh that one and the self-same
Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He
will.” Ὁ It must not however be supposed
because in this passage the apostle names in
the first place the Spirit, in the second the
Son, and in the third God the Father, that
therefore their rank is reversed. The apos-
tle has only started in accordance with our
habits of thought ; for when we receive gifts,
the first that occurs to us is the distributer,
next we think of the sender, and then we
lift our thoughts to the fountain and cause
of the boons.

38. Moreover, from the things created at
the beginning may be learnt the fellowship
of the Spirit with the Father and the Son.
The pure, intelligent, and supermundane
powers are and are styled holy, because they
have their holiness of the grace given by the
Holy Spirit. Accordingly the mode of the
creation of the heavenly powers 15 passed
over in silence, for the historian of the cos-
mogony has revealed to us only the creation
of things perceptible by sense. But do thou,
who hast power from the things that are seen
to form an analogy of the unseen, glorify the
Maker by whom all things were made, visi-
ble and invisible, principalities and powers,
authorities, thrones, and dominions, and all
other reasonable natures whom we cannot
name.” And in the creation bethink thee
first, I pray thee, of the original cause of all
things that are made, the Father; of the
creative cause, the Son; of the perfecting
cause, the Spirit; so that the ministering
spirits subsist by the will of the Father, are
brought into being by the operation of the
Son, and perfected by the presence of the
Spirit. Moreover, the perfection of angels is
sanctification and continuance in it. And
let no one imagine me either to affirm that
there are three original hypostases ° or to al-
lege the operation of the Son to be imperfect.
For the first principle of existing things is
One, creating through the Son and perfecting
through the Spirit. The operation of the
Father who worketh all in all is not imper-
fect, neither is the creating work of the Son
incomplete if not perfected by the Spirit.
The Father, who creates by His sole will,
could not stand in any need of the Son, but
nevertheless He wills through the Son; nor
could the Son, who works according to the
likeness of the Father, need co-operation, but
the Son too wills to make perfect through the
Spirit. ‘‘For by the word of the Lord were the


11 Cor. xii. 11. 2 cf. Col. i. 16.

3 ὑποστάσεις. apparently used here as the equivalent of ovaia:,
unless the negation only extends to ἀρχικᾶς. cf. note on p. 5.

4 Contrast the neuter τὸ ov of Pagan philosophy with the
ὁ ὧν or ἐγώ εἰμι οἵ Christian revelation,


24


BASIL


heavens made, and all the host of them by
the breath [the Spirit] of His mouth.”’ The
Word then is not a mere significant impres-
sion on the air, borne by the organs of
speech; nor is the Spirit of His mouth a
vapour, emitted by the organs of respiration ;
but the Word is He who “was with God in
the beginning” and ‘* was God,”? and the
Spirit of the mouth of God is **the Spirit of
truth which proceedeth from the Father.” ®
You are therefore to perceive three, the Lord
who gives the order, the Word who creates,
and the Spirit who confirms.*| And what
other thing could confirmation be than the
perfecting according to holiness? This per-
fecting expresses the confirmation’s firmness,


unchangeableness, and fixity in good. But
there is πὸ sanctification without the
Spirit. The powers of the heavens are


not holy by nature; were it so there would
in this respect be no difference between them
and the Holy Spirit. It is in proportion to
their relative excellence that they have their
meed of holiness from the Spirit. The brand-
ing-iron is conceived of together with the
fire; and yet the material and the fire are
distinct. ‘Thus too inthe case of the heavenly
powers; their substance is, peradventure, an
aérial spirit, or an immaterial fire, as it is
written, ** Who maketh his angels spirits and
his ministers a flame of fire;”° wherefore
they exist in space and become visible, and
appear in their proper bodily form to them
that are worthy. But their sanctification,
being external to their substance, superin-
duces their perfection through the commun-
ion of the Spirit. They keep their rank by
their abiding in the good and true, and
while they retain their freedom of will,
never fall away from their patient attend-
ance on Him who is truly good. It results
that, if by your argument you do away with
the Spirit, the hosts of the angels are dis-
banded, the dominions of archangels are
destroyed, ali is thrown into confusion, and
their life loses law, order, and distinctness.
For how are angels to cry ““ Glory to God in
the highest” ® without being empowered
by the Spirit? For ** No man can say that
Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost, and
no man speaking by the Spirit of God call-
eth Jesus accursed ; 7 as might be said by
wicked and hostile spirits, whose fall estab-


a Ps; sexi. 6, 2Johni.1. 8 John xv. 26.

4 τὸν στερεοῦντα τὸ πνεῦμα. It is to be noticed here that St.
Basil uses the masculine and more personal form in apposition
with the neuter πνεῦμα, and not the neuter as in the creed of
Constantinople, τὸ κύριον καὶ τὺ Ζωοποιὸν τὸ ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς
ἐκπορευόμενον, etc. There is scriptural authority for the mas-
culine in the “ ὅταν δὲ ἔλθῃ ἐκεῖνος, TO πνεῦμα τῆς ἀληθείας ᾽" Of
John xvi. 13. cf, p. 15-17.


o Ds, xiv. 4. 6 Luke ii. 14. 7.1 Cor. xii. 3.


lishes our statement of the freedom of the
will of the invisible powers; being, as they
are, in a condition of equipoise between
virtue and vice, and on this account needing
the succour of the Spirit. I indeed maintain
that even Gabriel’ in no other way foretells
events to come than by the foreknowledge of
the Spirit, by reason of the fact that one of
the boons distributed by the Spirit is prophe-
cy. And whence did he who was ordained
to announce the mysteries of the vision to
the Man of Desires? derive the wisdom
whereby he was enabled to teach hidden
things, if not from the Holy Spirit? The
revelation of mysteries is indeed the peculiar
function of the Spirit, as it is written, ‘‘ God
hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit.’’®
And how could ‘‘ thrones, dominions, prin-
cipalities and powers” * live their blessed
life, did they not ‘‘behold the face of the
Father whichisin heaven” ?° But to behold
it is impossible without the Spirit! Just as
at night, if you withdraw the light from the
house, the eyes fall blind and their faculties
become inactive, and the worth of objects
cannot be discerned, and gold is trodden on
in ignorance as though it were iron, so in
the order of the intellectual world it is impos-
sible for the high life of Law to abide with-
out the Spirit. For it so to abide were as
likely as that an army should maintain its
discipline in the absence of its commander,
or a chorus its harmony without the guidance
of the corypheus. How could the Sera-
phim cry ** Holy, Holy, Holy,”* were they
not taught by the Spirit how often true relig-
ion requires them to lift their voice in this
ascription of glory? Do ‘‘all His angels”
and ‘‘all His hosts” ” praise God? It is
through the co-operation of the Spirit. Do
ἐς thousand thousand” of angels stand before
Him, and ‘*ten thousand times ten thou-
sand” ministering spirits ?* They are
blamelessly doing their proper work by the
power of the Spirit. All the glorious and
unspeakable harmony ὃ of the highest heavens
both in the service of God, and in the mutual
concord of the celestial powers, can there-
fore only be preserved by the direction of the
Spirit. Thus with those beings who are not
gradually perfected by increase and advance,"®
but are perfect from the moment of the crea-
tion, there is in creation the presence of the


1 Lukei. 11.

2‘* Man greatly beloved.” A.V. and R.V. Dan. x. 11.

3 1 Cor. ii. 10. SLs. Vie 3.

4Col. 1. 16. 7 Ps. cxlviii. 2.

5 Matt. xviii. 10. 8 Dan. vii. 10.

9 cf. Job xxxviii. 7, though for the first clause the Ixx. reads
ὅτε ἐγενήθη ἄστρα. On the Pythagorean theory of the harmony
of the spheres vide Arist. De Cal.ii.g, 1. , af

10 προκοπή. cf. προέκοπτε of the boy Jesus in Luke ii. 52.


ON” THE SPIRIT.


25


Holy Spirit, who confers on them the grace
that flows from Him for the completion and
perfection of their essence.

39. But when we speak of the dispensa-
tions made for man by our great God and
Saviour Jesus Christ,” who will gainsay
their having been accomplished through the
grace of the Spirit? Whether you wish to
examine ancient evidence ;— the blessings of
the partriarchs, the succour given through
the legislation, the types, tle prophecies, the
valorous feats in war, the signs wrought
through just men ;— or on the other hand the
things done in the dispensation of the com-
ing of our Lord in the flesh ; — all is through
the Spirit. In the first place He was made
an unction, and being inseparably present
was with the very flesh of the Lord, ac-
cording to that which is written, ‘* Upon
whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending
and remaining on Him, the same is” * *m
beloved Son;”* and ‘Jesus of Nazareth”
whom ‘*God anointed with the Holy
Ghost.” ° After this every operation was
wrought with the co-operation of the Spirit.
He was present when the Lord was being
tempted by the devil; for, it is said, “ὁ Jesus
was led up of the Spirit into the wilderness
to be tempted.” ® He was inseparably with
Him while working His wonderful works;?
for, it is said, ‘* 1f I by the Spirit of God cast
out devils.”° And He did not leave Him
when He had risen from the dead ; for when
renewing man, and, by breathing on the
face of the disciples,® restoring the grace,
that came of the inbreathing of God, which
man had lost, what didthe Lord say? ‘ Re-
ceive ye the Holy Ghost: whose soever sins
ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and
whose soever ye retain, they are retained.”’ '°
And is it not plain and incontestable that
the ordering of the Church is effected through
the Spirit? For He gave, it is said, ‘* in the
church, first Apostles, secondarily prophets,


1 ὑπόστασις, apparently again used in its earlier identifica-
tion with οὐσία.

2 Titus ii. 13, R.V. The A.V. favours the view, opposed to
that of the Greek Fathers, that ‘‘the great God” means the
Father. cf. Theodoret in this edition, pp. 319 and 321 and
notes. -

% John i. 33. B ACIS S355

4 Matt. iii. 17. 6 Matt. iv. 1.

7 § νάμεις, rendered ** wonderful works” in Matt. vii. 22;
* mighty works ” in Matt. xi. 20, Mark vi. 14, and Luke x. 13;
and ‘* miracles’? in Acts ii. 22, xix. 11, and Gal. iii. v.

8 Matt. xii. 28.

9 Gen, ii. 7,1xx. is ἐνεφύσησεν εἰς τὸ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ. * εἰς TD
πούσωπον ᾽ is thence imported into John xx. 22. Mr.C. F. H.
Johns*ton notes, “ This addition . . . is found in the Prayer at
the Little Entrance in the Liturgy of St. Mark. Didymus, in
his treatise on the Holy Spirit, which we have only in St.
Jerome’s Latin Version, twice uses ‘iusuffans in factem'
corum, §§ 6,33. The text is quoted in this form by Epiphanius
Adv. Her, \xxiv. 13, and by St. Aug. De Trin. iv. 20.2 To
these instances may he added Athan. Ep. i. § 8, and the ver-
sions of Upper and Lower Egypt, the Thebaic, known as the
Sahidic, and the Memphitic, or Coptic, both ascribed to the
3d century. 10 John xx. 22, 23.


thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then
gifts of healing, helps, governments, diver-
sities of tongues,” ὁ for this order is ordained
in accordance with the division of the’ gifts
that are of the Spirit.”

40. Moreover by any one who carefully
uses his reason it will be found that even at
the moment of the expected appearance of
the Lord from heaven the Holy Spirit will
not, as some suppose, have no functions to
discharge: on the contrary, even in the day
of His revelation, in which the blessed and
only potentate*® will judge the world in right-
eousness,* the Holy Spirit will be present
with Him. For whois so ignorant ofthe good
things prepared by God for them that arc
worthy, as not to know that the crown of
the righteous is the grace of the Spirit, be-
stowed in more abundant and perfect meas-
ure in that day, when spiritual glory shall
be distributed to each in proportion as he shall
have nobly played theman? For among the
glories of the saints are ‘* many mansions”
in the Father’s house,°® that is differences of
dignities: for as ‘* star differeth from star in
glory, so also is the resurrection of the
dead.” 5 They, then, that were sealed by the
Spirit unto the day of redemption,’ and
preserve pure and undiminished the first
fruits which they received of the Spirit, are
they that shall hear the words “ὁ well done
thou good and faithful servant; thou hast
been faithful over a few things, I will make
thee ruler over many things.”® In like
manner they which have grieved the Holy
Spirit by the wickedness of their ways, or
have not wrought for Him that gave to
them, shall be deprived of what they have
received, their grace being transferred to
others; or, according to one of the evan-
gelists, they shall even be wholly cut asunder,®
—the cutting asunder meaning complete
separation from the Spirit. The body is not
divided, part being delivered to chastise-
ment, and part let off; for when a whole has
sinned it were like the old fables, and un-
worthy of a righteous judge, for only the half
to suffer chastisement. Nor is the soul cut in
two, — that soul the whole of which possesses
the sinful affection throughout, and works
the wickedness in co-operation with the body.
The cutting asunder, as I have observed, is
the separation for aye of the soul from the
Spirit. For now, although the Spirit does
not suffer admixture with the unworthy, He


11 Cor, xii. 28. 0 Dims vic, 15;

2 ef, ¥ COT. Klis 11. 4 Acts, xvii. 31.

5 παρὰ τῷ πατρί, (= chez le Pére,) with little or no change
of meaning, for ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ τοῦ πατρός μον. John xiv. 2.

6 1 Cor. Xv. 41, 42. 8 Matt. xxv. 21.

7 cf. Eph. iv. 30. ® Matt. xxiv. 51.


26


BASIL"


nevertheless does seem in a manner to be
present with them that have once been sealed,
awaiting the salvation which follows on their
conversion; but then He will be wholly
cut off from the soul that has defiled His
grace. For this reason ‘‘In Hell there is
none that maketh confession; in death none
that remembereth God,” ' because the succour
of the Spiritis no longer present. How then
is it possible to conceive that the judgment
is accomplished without the Holy Spirit,
wherein the word points out that He is Him-
self the prize? of the righteous, when instead
of the earnest® is given that which is per-
fect, and the first condemnation of sinners,
when they are deprived of that which they
seem to have? But the greatest proof of
the conjunction of the Spirit with the Father
and the Son is that He is said to have the
same relation to God which the spirit in us
has to each of us. ‘* For what man” it is
said, “ὁ knoweth the things of a man, save the
spirit of man which is in him? even so the


things of God knoweth no man but the


Spirit of God.” 4
On this point I have said enough.


CHAPTER XVII.


Against those who say that the [oly Ghost ts
not to be numbered with, but numbered
under, the Father and the Son. Wherein
moreover there is a summary notice of
the fatth concerning right sub-numeraton.


4τ. Wuat, however, they call subnu-
meration,? and in what sense they use this
word, cannot even be imagined without
difficulty. It is well known that it was im-
ported into our language from the ** wisdom
of the world;” * but a point for our present
consideration will be whether it has any
immediate relation to the subject under dis-
cussion. ‘Those who are adepts in vain in-
vestigations tell us that, while some nouns
are common and of widely extended denota-
tion, others are more specific, and that the
force of some is more limited than that of
Others. Essence, for instance, is a common
noun, predicable of all things both animate
and inanimate; while animal is more spe-


_ 2 Ps. vi. δ, Ιχχ. ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν τῷ θανάτῳ ὃ μνημονεύων σου,
ἐν δὲ τῷ ἅδῃ τίς ἐξομολογήσεται σοι; Vulg. * 7 inferno autem
guts confitebttur tibi ?”

2 Phil. iii. 14. Bg ΘΕ 2, vis. #1 Cor: tatt.

5«* The word was used as a quasi philosophical term to
express the doctrine quoted by St. Basil, in § 13: it does not
occur in the confession of Eunomius, which was prepared after
this book, A.D. 382; but it was used by him in his Liber
Apologeticus (before A.D. 365) against which St. Basil
wrote.” Rev. C. Εἰ. H. Johnston. For “ ὑπαρίθμησις ᾽" the
ouly authorities given by the lexicons are “ ecclesiastical.”
But the importation from the * wisdom of the world ” implies
use in heathen philosophy,

6 cf. 1 Cor. i. 20.


cific, being predicated of fewer subjects than
the former, though of more than those
which are considered under it, as it em-
braces both rational and irrational nature.
Again, human is more specific than animal,
and man than human, and than man the
individua. Peter, Paul or John.’ Do they
then mean by subnumeration the division of
the common into its subordinate parts? But
I should hesitate to believe they have
reached such a pitch of infatuation as to
assert that the God of the universe, lxe
some common quality conceivable only by
reason and without actual existence in any
hypostasis, is divided into subordinate divi-
sions, and that then this subdivision is called
subnumeration. This would hardly be said
even by men melancholy mad, for, besides
its impiety, they are establishing the very
opposite argument to their own contention.
For the subdivisions are of the same essence
as that from which they have been divided.
The very obviousness of the absurdity makes
it dificult for us to find arguments to con-
fute their unreasonableness; so that really
their folly looks like an advantage to them;
just as soft and yielding bodies offer no re-
sistance, and therefore cannot be struck a
stout blow. It is impossible to bring a vig-
orous confutation to bear ona palpable ab-
surdity. The only course open to us is to
pass by their abominable impiety in silence.
Yet our love for the brethren and the im-
portunity of our opponents makes silence
impossible.

42. What is it that they maintain? Look
at the terms of their imposture. ‘* We
assert that connumeration is appropriate to
subjects of equal dignity, and subnumer-
ation to those which vary in the direction of
inferiority.” ‘** Why,’ I rejoined, ‘* do you
say this? I fail to understand your extiaor-
dinary wisdom. Do you mean that gold
is numbered with gold, and that lead is un-
worthy of the connumeration, but, because
of the cheapness of the material, is subnu-
merated to gold? And do you attribute so
much importance to number as that it can


1‘ This portion of the theory of general language is the sub-
ject of what is termed the doctrine of the Predicables; a set of
distinctions handed down from Aristotle, and his follower
Porphyry, many of which have taken a firm root in scientific,
and some of them even in popular, phraseology. The predi-
cables are a five-fold division of General Names, not grounded
as usual on a difference in their meaning, that is, in the
attribute which they connote, but on a difference in the kind of
class which they denote. We may predicate of a thing five
different varieties of class-name:

A genus of the thing (γένος).
A species (εἶδος).

A differentia (διαφορά).

A proprium (ἰδιόν).

An acctdens (συμβεβηκός).

It is to be remarked of these distinctions, that they express,
not what the predicate is in its own meaning, but what rela-
tion it bears to the subject of which it happens on the particular
occasion to be predicated.” $F. S. Mill, System of Logic, i. 133.


ON


THE


SPIRIT. 27


either exalt the value of what is cheap, or
destroy the dignity of what is valuable?
Therefore, again, you will number gold
under precious stones, and such precious
stones as are smaller and without lustre
under those which are larger and_ brighter
in colour. But what will not be said by men
who spend their time in nothing else but
either ὁ to tell or to hear some new thing’ ??
Let these supporters of impiety be classed
for the future with Stoics and Epicureans.
What subnumeration is even possible of things
less valuable in relation to things very
valuable? How is a brass obol to be num-
bered under a golden stater? ‘* Because,”
they reply, ‘‘ we do not speak of possessing
two coins, but one and one.” But which of
these is subnumerated to the other? Each
is similarly mentioned. If then you num-
ber each by itself, you cause an equality of
value by numbering them in the same way;
but, if you join them, you make their value
one by numbering them one with the other.
But if the subnumeration belongs to the one
which is numbered second, then it is in the
power of the counter to begin by counting
the brass coin. Let us, however, pass over
the confutation of their ignorance, and turn
our argument to the main topic.

43. Do you maintain that the Son is
numbered under the Father, and the Spirit
under the Son, or do you confine your sub-
numeration to the Spirit alone? If, on the
other hand, you apply this subnumeration
also to the Son, you revive what is the
same impious doctrine, the unlikeness of
the substance, the lowliness of rank, the
coming into being in later time, and once for
all, by this one term, you will plainly again
set circling all the blasphemies against
the Only-begotten. To controvert these blas-
phemies would be a longer task than my
present purposeadmits of; and I am the less
bound to undertake it because the impiety
has been refuted elsewhere to the best of my
ability.” If on the other hand they suppose
the subnumeration to benefit the Spirit alone,
they must be taught that the Spirit is spoken
of together with the Lord in precisely the
same manner in which the Son is spoken of
with the Father. ‘* The name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost” ® is
delivered in lke manner, and, according to
the co-ordination of words delivered in bap-
tism, the relation of the Spirit to the Son is
the same as that of the Son tothe Father.
And if the Spirit is co-ordinate with the


1 Acts xvii. 21.
27 e.,in the second book of his work against Eunomius,.
8 Matt. xxviii. τῷ.


Son, and the Son with the Father, it is obvi-
ous that the Spirit is also co-ordinate with the
Father. When then the names are ranked
in one and the same co-ordinate series,’ what
room is there for speaking on the one hand
of connumeration, and on the other of sub-
numeration? Nay, without exception, what
thing ever lost its own nature by being num-
bered? Is it not the fact that things when
numbered remain what they naturally and
originally were, while number is adopted
among us asa sign indicative of the plu-
rality of subjects? For some bodies we
count, some we measure, and some we
weigh ;* those which are by nature continu-
ous we apprehend by measure; to those
which are divided we apply number(with the
exception of those which on account of their
fineness are measured) ; while heavy objects
are distinguished by the inclination of
the balance. It does not however follow
that, because we have invented for our con-
venience symbols to help us to arrive at the
knowledge of quantity, we have therefore
changed the nature of the things signified.
We do not speak of “" weighing under” one
another things which are weighed, even
though one be gold and the other tin; nor
yet do we ‘‘measure under” things that are
measured ; and so inthe same way we will not
‘Cnumber under” things which are num-
bered. And if none of the rest of things
admits of subnumeration how can they al-
lege that the Spirit ought to be subnumer-
ated? Labouring as they do under heathen
unsoundness, they imagine that things which
are inferior, either by grade of rank or sub-
jection of substance, ought to be subnumer-
ated.


CHAPIER: XVIL.


In what manner in the confession of the three
hypostases we preserve thé pious dogma of
the Monarchia. Wherein also is the re-
Jutation of them that allege that the Spirit
is subnumerated.®


44.


1 συστοιχ΄α, aseries of similar things, asin Arist. An. Pr.
ii, 21, 2. Inthe Pythagorean philosophy, a co-ordinate or
parallel series. Arist. Met. i. 5,6, and Eth. Nic. i. 6, 7.

2cf, Wis. xi.20. ‘Thou hast ordered all things in meas-
ure and number and weight.’

8 The term Movapyia first acquired importance in patristic
literature in Justin’s work De monarchia, against Polytheism.
Of the lost letter of Irenzeus to the Roman Presbyter Florinus,
who was deposed for heresy, presumably gnostic, the title, ac-
cording to Eusebius (HZ. £. v.20), was περὶ Movapxias, ἢ περὶ
τοῦ μὴ εἶναι τὸν θεὸν ποιητὴν κακῶν. Later it came to be used
to express not the Divine unity as opposed to Polytheism or
Oriental Dualism, but the Divine unity as opposed to Trithe-
ism. Vide the words of Dionysius of Rome, as quoted by
Athan. De Decreti's, § 26, ‘* Next let me turn to those who cut
in pieces, divide, and destroy that most sacred doctrine of the
church of God, the divine Monarchy, making it, as it were,
three powers and divided subsistences 2nd three godheads.”
So St. Basil Cont, Lunom, ii. ᾿Αρχὴ μὲν οὖν πατρὺς οὐδεμία,


In delivering the formula of the Fa-


28


BASIL


ther, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,' our Lord
did not connect the gift with number. He did
not say ‘+ into First, Second, and Third,”’?
nor yet *¢ into one, two, and three, but He gave
us the boonof the knowledge of the faith which
leads to salvation, by means of holy names.
So that what saves us is our faith. Number
has been devised as a symbol indicative of the
quantity of objects. But these men, who
bring ruin on themselves from every possible
source, have turned even the capacity for
counting against the faith. Nothing else
undergoes any change in consequence of
the addition of number, and yet these men in
the case of the divine nature pay reverence
to number, lest they should exceed the limits
of the honour due to the Paraclete. But, O
wisest sirs, let the unapproachable be alto-
gether above and beyond number, as the
ancient reverence of the Hebrews wrote the
unutterable name of God in peculiar charac-
ters, thus endeavouring to set forth its infinite
excellence. : Count, if you must; but you
must not by counting do damage to the
faith. Either let the ineffable be honoured
by silence ; or let holy things be counted con-
sistently with true religion. There is one
God and Father, one Only-begotten, and
one Holy Ghost. We proclaim each of
the hypostases singly; and, when count we
must, we do not let an ignorant arithmetic
carry us away to the idea of a plurality of
Gods.

45. For we do not count by way of addi-
tion, gradually making increase from unity


ἀρχὴ δὲ τοῦ υἱοῦ ὃ πατήρ. And in Lp. xxxviii. ᾿Αλλά Tis ἐστι
δύναμις ἀγεννήτως καὶ ἀνάρχως ὑφεοτῶσα ἥτις ἐςτὶν αἰτία τῆς
ἁπάντων τῶν ὄντων αἰτίας, ἐκ γὰρ τοῦ πατρὸς ὁ υἱὸς δι᾽ οὗ τὰ
πάντα. Andin Ep, cxxv. Eva γὰρ οἴδαμεν ἀγέννητον καὶ μίαν
τῶν πάντων ἀρχὴν, Tv πατέρα τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.
On the doctrine and its exponents compare ὃ 720f the De Sp. .5.

On the other hand ‘* Monarchians”’ was a name connoting
heresy when applied to tnose who pushed the doctrine of the
Unity to an extreme, involving denial of a Trinity. Of these,
among the more noteworthy were Paul of Samosata, bp. of
Antioch, who was deposed in 269, a representative of thinkers
who have been called dynamical monarchians, and Praxeas
(supposed by some to be a nickname), who taught at Rome in
the reign of Marcus Aurelius, and of whom Tertullian, the
originator of the term patripassians, as applied to Monarchians,
wrote ** Paracletum fugavit et patrem crucifixit.’? This
heretical Monarchianism culminated in Sabellius, the ‘ most
original, ingenious, and profound of the Monarchians.’?
Schaff. Ast. Chr. Church, i.293. cf. Gisseler, i. p. 127, Har-
nack’s Monarchianismus in Herzog’s Real Encyclopedie, Vol.
x. Thomasius Dog. Gesch. i. p. 179, and Fialon Et. Hist.
p..241.

1 Matt. XXVili. 10.

2 Mr. C, F. H. Johnston quotes as instances of the applica-
tion of the word ‘‘third’”? to the Holy Ghost; Justin Martyr
(Apol. i. 13) “ We honour the Spirit of prophecy in the third
rank.” Tertullian (Jz Prax. 8) *‘ As the fruit from the tree is
third from the root, and the rivulet from the river third from
the source, and the flame from the ray third from the sun.”
Eunomius (Lib. Apol. § 25) ‘‘ observing the teaching of Saints,
we have learned from them that the Holy Spirit is third
in dignity and order, and so have believed him to be third in
nature also.” On the last St. Basil (Adv. Exnom. ii.) rejoins
‘* Perhaps the word of piety allows Him to come in rank
second to the Son although He is inferior to the Son
in rank and dignity (that we may make the utmost possible
concession) it does not reasonably follow thence that he is of
a different nature.”” On the word “ perhaps” a dispute arose


at the Council of Florence, the Latins denying its genuineness.


to multitude, and saying one, two, and three,
—nor yet first, second, and third. For
eT,” God; 4#am (the frst. -and dream the
last.”? And hitherto we have never, even
at the present time, heard of a second God.
Worshipping as we do God of God, we
both confess the distinction of the Persons,
and at the same time abide by the Monarchy.
We do not fritter away the theology” in a
divided plurality, because one Form, so to
say, united* in the invariableness of the God;
head, is beheld in God the Father, and in
God the Only begotten. For the Son is in
the Father and the Father in the Son; since
such as is the latter, such is the former,
and such as is the former, such is the lat-
ter; and herein isthe Unity. So that accord-
ing to the distinction of Persons, both are one
and one, and according to the community of
Nature, one. How, then, if one and one,
are there not two Gods? Because we speak
of a king, and of the king’s image, and not
of two kings. The majesty is not cloven in
two, nor the glory divided. The sov-
ereignty and authority over us is one, and so
the doxology ascribed by us is not plural
but one; * because the honour paid to the
image passes on to the prototype. Now
what in the one case the image is by reason
of imitation, that in the other case the Son is
by nature; and as in works of art the likeness
is dependent on the form, so in the case ot
the divine and uncompounded nature the
union consists in the communion of the God-
head.* One, moreover, is the Holy Spirit,
and we speak of Him singly, conjoined as
He is to the one Father through the one Son,
and through Himself completing the ador-
able and blessed Trinity. Of Him the
intimate relationship to the Father and the
Son is sufficiently declared by the fact of His
not being ranked in the plurality of the crea-
tion, but being spoken of singly; for he is
not one of many, but One. For as there is
one Father and one Son, so is there one
Holy Ghost. He is consequently as far
removed from created Nature as_ reason
requires the singular to be removed from
compound and _ plural bodies; and He is in
such wise united to the Father and to the
Son as unit has affinity with unit.


115, xliv. 6.

2 According to patristic usage θεολογία proper is concerned
with all that relates tothe Divine and Eternal nature of our
Lord. cf. Bp. Lightfoot. Ap. Fathers, Part 11. vol. ii. p.75.

3 ἑνιζομένην. Var. lectiones are ἐνιζομένην, ““ seated in,’’ and
ἐνεικονιζομένην, ** imaged in.” é

4cf. the embolismus, or intercalated prayer in the Liturgy
of St. Fames, as cited by Mr. Ὁ. F. H. Johnston, “ For of thee
is the kingdom and the power and the glory, of Father, of Son,
and of Holy Ghost, now and ever.”

δ On the right use of the illustration of εἰκών, cf. Basil Ep.
xxxviii., and Bp. Lightfoot’s note on Col.i.15. ο΄. also John
i. 18 and xiv. 9, Io. :


ON


THE


SPIRIT. 29


46. And it is not from this source alone
that our proofs of the natural communion
are derived, but from the fact that He is
moreover said to be ‘*‘ of God;”! not indeed
in the sense in which ‘all things are of
God,” ὁ but in the sense of proceeding out of
God, not by generation, like the Son, but as
Breath of His mouth. But in no way is the
‘*mouth” a member, nor the Spirit breath
that is dissolved; but the word ““ mouth”
is used so far as it can be appropriate to
God, and the Spirit is a Substance having
life, gifted with supreme power of sanctifica-
tion. ‘Thus the close relation is made plain,
while the mode of the ineffable existence is
safeguarded. He is moreover styled ¢ Spirit
of Christ,’ as being by nature closely related
to Him. Wherefore ** If any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His.” *
Hence He alone worthily glorifies the Lord,
ΠΌΡΕ said, ** He shall clorify: me,”* not
astine creature, but as.*¢ Spirit of truth,” Ὁ
clearly shewing forth the truth in Himself,
and, as Spirit of wisdom, in His own great-
ness revealing ‘* Christ the Power of God
and the wisdom of God.”*® And as Para-
clete’ He expresses in Himself the goodness
of the Paraclete who sent Him, and in His
own dignity manifests the majesty of Him
from-whom He proceeded... There. is. then
on the one hand a natural glory, as light is
the glory of the sun; and on the other a


1 2 Cor, i. 12.

21 Cor. xi.12. George of Laodicea applied this passage to
the Son, and wrote to the Arians: ‘* Why complain of Pope
Alexander (¢.e. of Alexandria) for saying that the Son is
from the Father. . . For if the apostle wrote All things
are from God . . . Hemay be said to be from God in that
sense in which all things are from God.”” Athan., De Syz. 17.

3 Rom. viii. 9. 5 John xiv. 17.

4 John xvi. 14. 61 Cor. 1. 24.

7 παράκλητος occurs five times in the N.T., and is rendered
in A.V.in John xiv. 16 and 26, xv. 26 and xvi. 7, Com/forter,;
in 1 John ii. 1, Advocate, as applied to the Son, In the text
the Son, the Paraclete, is described as sending the Spirit, the
Paraclete; in the second clause of the sentence it can hardly be
positively determined whether the words tov ὅθεν προηλθεν
refer tothe Father or tothe Son. The former view is adopted
by Mr. C. F. H. Johnston, the latter by the editor of Keble’s
Studia Sacra, p. 176. The sequence of the sentences in John
Xv. 26 might lead one to regard οθεν προῆλθεν as equivalent to
7292 τοῦ ἸΙατρὺς ἐκπορεύεται. On the other hand, St. Basil’s
avoidance of direct citation of the verb ἐκπορεύεται, his close
connexion of τοῦ ἀποστείλαντος With ὅθεν προῆλθεν, and the
close of the verse in St. John’s gospel ἐκεῖνος μαρτυρήσει περὶ
ἐμοὺ, Suggest that the μεγαλωσύνη in St. Basil’s mind may be
the μεγαλυσύνη of the Son. At the same time, while the
Western Church was in the main unanimous as to the double
procession, this passage from St. Basil is not quoted as an
exception to the general current of the teaching of the Greek
Fathers, who, as Bp. Pearson expresses it, ‘* stuck more closely
to the phrase and languige of the Scriptures, saying that the
spirit proceedeth from the Father.’”? (Pearson On the Creed,
Art. viii. where vide quotations) Vide also Thomasius,
Christ. Dogm., i. 270, Namentlich auf letzere Bestimmung
legten die griechtschen Viter groszes Gewicht. Im Gegensatz
gegen den macedonischen Irrtum, der den Gerst fiir ein
Geschiipf des Sohnes ansah, fiihrte man die Subsistenz des-
selben ebenso auf den Vater zuruck wie die des Sohnes. Man
lehrte, also, der heilige Geist geht vom Vater aus, der Vater
tst die aoxn wie des Schnes so auch des Getstes; aber mit der
dem herkimmlichen Zuge des Dogma entsprechenden Niher-
bestinmung: nicht ἀμέσως, sondern ἐμμέσως, tnterventu filit
geht der Geist vom Vater aus, also “durch den Sohn vom
Vater.” Sodte bedeutendsten Kirchenlehrer, wihrend andere
einfach bet der Formel stehen blieben; er gehe vom Vater aus.


glory bestowed judicially and of free will
‘ab extra’ on themthat are worthy. The
latter 18. twololdi. “ Ao\son,” 18 15. said,
‘¢honoureth his father, and a servant his
master.” ' Of these two the one, the servile,
is given by the creature; the other, which
muy be called the intimate, is fulfilled by the
Spirit. For, as our Lord said of Himself,
‘¢T have glorified Thee on. the earth: I have
finished the work which thou gavest me to
do;”.? so of the Paraclete He gays ** He
shall glorify .me: for He shall receive of
mine, and shall show it unto you.’’* And
as the Sonis glorified of the Father when He
says “1 have both glorified z# and will glo-
rify z#* again,” ° so is the Spirit glorified
through His communion with both Father
and Son, and through the testimony of the
Only-begotten when He says * All manner
of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto
men: but the blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.” ἢ

47. And when, by means of the power
that enlightens us, we fix our eyes on the
beauty of the image of the invisible God,
and through the image are led up to the
supreme beauty of the spectacle of the
archetype, then, I ween, is with us in-
separably the Spirit of knowledge, in Him-
self bestowing on them that love the vision
of the truth the power of beholding the Image,
not making the exhibition from without, but
in Himself leading on to the full knowledge.
‘*No man knoweth the Father save the
Son.”7 And so “πὸ man can say that Jesus
is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost.”° For
it is not said through the Spirit, but
by the Spirit, and ‘* God is a spirit, and
they that worship Him must worship Him in
spirit and in truth,” " as it is written ‘¢in thy
light shall we see light,”’® namely by the
illumination of the Spirit, ‘the true light
which lighteth every man that cometh into
the world.” ** It results that in Himself He
shows the glory of the Only begotten, and
on true worshippers He in Himself bestows
the knowledge of God. Thus the way of
the knowledge of God lies from One Spirit
through the One Son to the One Father, and
conversely the natural Goodness and the in-
herent Holiness and the royal Dignity extend
from the Father through the Only-begotten
to the Spirit. Thus there is both acknow-
ledgment of the hypostases and the true


1 Mal. i. 6. 2John xvii. 4. 3 John xvi. 14.

4Four MSS. of the De 5.3. read ἐδόξασά σε, a variation not
appearing in MSS. of the Gospel.

δ John xii. 28. 6 Matt. xii. 31.

7 Matt. xi. 27, “ οὐδεὶς οἷδε τὸν πατέρα εἰ μὴ ὁ Ὑἱός ᾽᾽ substi-
tuted for ““ οὐ δὲ τὸν πατέρα τὶς ἐπιγνώσκει εἰ μὴ ὁ Yds.”

Sy Cor. ΣΙ :3, 10 Ps, xxXVvi. Qe

9 John iv. 24. 11 John i. 9.


30


BASIL


dogma of the Monarchy is not lost.' They
on the other hand who support their sub-
numeration by talking of first and second
and third ought to be informed that into the
undefiled theology of Christians they are
importing the polytheism of heathen error.
No other result can be achieved by the fell
device of subnumeration than the confession
of a first, a second, and athird God. Tor us
is sufficient the order prescribed by the Lord.
He who confuses this order will be no less
guilty of transgressing the law than are the
impious heathen.

Enough has been now said to prove, in
contravention of their error, that the com-
munion of Nature is in no wise dissolved by
the manner of subnumeration. Let us, how-
ever, make a concession to our contentious
and feeble minded adversary, and grant that
what is second to anything is spoken of in
subnumeration to it. Now let us see what
follows. ‘* The first man ” it is said ** is of the
earth earthy, the second man is the Lord
from heaven.” * Again ‘*that was not first
which is spiritual but that which is natural
and afterward that which is spiritual.” * If
then the second is subnumerated to the first,
and the subnumerated is inferior in dignity
to that to which it was subnumerated, ac-
cording to you the spiritual is inferior in
honour to the natural, and the heavenly man
to the earthy.


CHAPTER ΧΙ;


Against those who assert that the Spirit ought
not to be glorified,


AS. DE Mt eo,” sit is-rejoihed,. ἐς hut
glory is by no means so absolutely due to
the Spirit as to require His exaltation by us
in doxologies.” Whence then could we get
our demonstrations of the dignity of the
Spirit, ‘‘ passing all understanding,’ * if
His communion with the Father and the
Son were not reckoned by our opponents as
good for testimony of His rank? It is, at all
events, possible for us to arrive to a certain
extent at intelligent apprehension of the
sublimity of His nature and of His unap-
proachable power, by looking at the mean-


1cf. note on Ὁ. 27 and the distinction between δόγμα and
κήουγμα in ὃ 66. ‘The great objection which the Eastern
Church makes to the Fi/cogue, is, that it implies the existence
of two ἀρχαὶ in the godhead; and if we believe in δύο ἄναρχοι;
we, in effect, believe in two Gods. The unity of the Godhead
can only be maintained by acknowledging the Father to be
the sole ‘Aox» or πηγὴ Θεοτήτος, who from all eternity has com-
municated His own Godhead to His co-eternal and consubstan-
tial Son and Spirit. This reasoning is generally true. But, as
the doctrine of the Procession of the Spirit from the Father and
the Son presupposes the eternal generation of the Son from the
Father; it does not follow, that that doctrine impugns the
Catholic belief in the Mia ’Apx7.” Bp. Harold Browne, Exp.
xxxix Art., Note on Art v.

21 Cor, Xv. 47. 81 Cor. xv. 46. * Phil. γι ἢ,


ing of His title, and at the magnitude of His
operations, and by His good gifts bestowed
on us or rather on all creation. He is
called Spirit, as ‘*God is a Spirit,”? and
‘¢ the breath of our nostrils, the anointed of
the Lord.”’:*.. He is called holy,® ‘as’ the
Father is holy, and the Son is holy, for to the
creature holiness was brought in from with-
out, but to the Spirit holiness is the fulfil-
ment of nature, and it is for this reason that
He is described not as being sanctified, but
as sanctifying. He is called good,* as the
Father is good, and He who was begotten of
the Good is good, and to the Spirit His
goodness is essence. [le is called upright,’
as ‘*the Lord-is upright,”* in that He 1s
Himself truth,’ and is Himself Righteous-
ness,» having no divergence nor leaning to
one side or to the other, on account of the
immutability of His substance. He is called
Paraclete, like the Only begotten, as He Him-
self says, ** I willask the Father, and He will
give you another comforter.” ° Thus names
are borne by the Spirit in common with the
Father and the Son, and He gets these titles
from His natural and close relationship.
From what other source could they be
derived? Again He is called royal,’? Spirit
of truth,’ and Spirit of wisdom.’ ἘΠ The
Spirit of God,” it is said ** hath made me,” "ἢ
and God filled Bezaleel with ‘*the divine
Spirit of wisdom and understanding and
knowledge.” '* Such names as these are su-
per-eminent and mighty, but they do not
transcend His glory.

49. And His operations, what are they?
For majesty ineffable, and for numbers in-
numerable. How shall we form a concep-
tion of what extends beyond the ages?
What were His operations before that crea-
tion whereof we can conceive? How great
the grace which He conferred on creation?
What the power exercised by Him over the
ages tocome? He existed; He pre-existed ;
He co-existed with the Father and the Son
before the ages. It follows that, even if you
can conceive of anything beyond the ages,
you will find the Spirit yet further above
and beyond. And if you think of the crea-
tion, the powers of the heavens were estab-


1 John iv. 24.

2Lam. iv.20. Srvc in A.V. and R.V., the reference being
to Zedekiah. cf. Jer. xxxix.5. The Vulgate reads, *‘ Spiritus
oris nostrt Christus Dominus,” from the Greek of the LXX.
quoted by St. Basil, “" Πνεῦμα προσώπου ἡμῶν χριστὸς KUpLos.”

3 1 John i. 20. 5 Ps, di, 10,

4Ps, cxliii. τὸς 6 Ps. xcii. 15.

7 John xiv. 17; xv. 26; xvi. 13; 1 John v. 6.

82 (Cor iionOs

9 John xiv. τό, παράκλητον. cf. Note on p. 29.

᾽ν Ps. 11.12, xx. πνεῦμα ἡγεμονικόν. Vuly. sprritus princt-

alts,

: 11 John xv. 26, etc.


13 Job xxxiii. 4.
12 Is, xi. 2.


a4 Bx, axxi. 3, LX.


ON


THE SPIRIT. 31


lished by the Spirit,’ the establishment being
understood to refer to disability to fall away
from good. For it is from the Spirit that
the powers derive their close relationship to
God, their inability to change to evil, and
their continuance in blessedness. Is it
Christ’s advent? The Spirit is forerunner.
Is there the incarnate presence? The Spirit
is inseparable. Working of miracles, and
gifts of healing are through the Holy Spirit.
Demons were driven out by the Spirit of
God. The devil was brought to naught by
the presence of the Spirit. Remission of sins
was by the gift of the Spirit, for “γε were
Washea., yo. were), ‘sanctified, | «04.4 ian
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in
the holy Spirit of our God.” ? There is close
relationship with God through the Spirit, for
‘* God hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son
imiou.yeur hearts, crying Abba, Pather’ *
The resurrection from the dead is effected by
the operation of the Spirit, for ‘* Thou send-
est forth thy spirit, they are created; and
Thou renewest the face of the earth.” * If
here creation may be taken to mean the
bringing of the departed to life again, how
mighty is not the operation of the Spirit,
Who is to us the dispenser of the life that
follows on the resurrection, and attunes our
souls to the spiritual life beyond? Or if here
by creation is meant the change to a beiter
condition of those who in this life have
fallen into sin, (for it is so understood ac-
cording to the usage of Scripture, as in the
words of Paul ‘*if any man be in Christ he
is a new creature”’°), the renewal which
takes place in this life, and the transmutation
from our earthly and sensuous life to the
heavenly conversation which takes place in
us through the Spirit, then our souls are
exalted to the highest pitch of admiration.
With these thoughts before us are we to be
afraid of going beyond due bounds in the
extravagance of the honour we pay? Shall
we not rather fear lest, even though we
seem to give Him the highest names which
the thoughts of man can conceive or man’s
tongue utter, we let our thoughts about Him
fall too low?

It is the Spirit which says, as the Lord
says. ““ Get thee down, and go with them,
doubting nothing: for I have sent them.” ®
Are these the words of an inferior, or of one
in dread? ἐς Separate me Barnabas and
Saul for the work whereunto I have called
them.”” Does a slave speak thus? And
Isaiah, ‘‘ The Lord God and His Spirit hath

21 Cor. vi.11 R.V.


3 Gal. iv. 6.
4 Ps. Civ. 30.


5 2 Cor. v. 17.
6 Acts x. 20.
Τ᾿ Acts Xilie2.


sent me,” ? and ‘‘ the Spirit came down from


the Lord and guided them.” * And pray do
not again understand by this guidance some
humble service, for the Word witnesses
that it was the work of God; — ‘** Thou
leddest thy people,” it is. said ‘like ἃ
flock,” * and ‘* Thou that leadest Joseph
like a flock,” * and ““ He led them on safely,
so that they feared τοί. ὃ Thus when you
hear that when the Comforter is come, He
will put you in remembrance, and ‘* guide
you into all truth.”°® do not misrepresent
the meaning.

δοῦν Buk this that ‘*He maketh
intercession for us. It follows then that,
as the suppliant is inferior to the benefactor,
so far is the Spirit inferior in dignity to God.
But have you never heard concerning the
Only-begotten that He ““ is at the right hand
of God, who also maketh intercession for
us”?* Do not, then, because the Spirit is
in you, —if indeed He is at all in you, —
nor yet because He teaches us who were
blinded, and guides us to the choice of what
profits us, — do not for this reason allow your-
self to be deprived of the right and holy
opinion concerning Him. For to make the
loving kindness of your benefactor a ground
of ingratitude were indeed a very extrava-
gance of unfairness. ‘* Grieve not the Holy
Spirit;”’ hear the words of Stephen, the
first fruits of the martyrs, when he reproaches
the people for their rebellion and disobedi-
ence; ‘* you do always,” he says, ‘* resist the
Holy Ghost; ” '° and again Isaiah, — ‘* They
vexed His Holy Spirit, therefore He was
turned to be their enemy ;” "'! and in another
passage, ‘‘the house of Jacob angered the
Spirit of the Lord.” Are not these pas-


said
99. 7


1154. xlviii. 16. Mr. C.F. Johnston remarks: δ’ In Isaiah
xIviii. 16 St. Didymus, as translated by St. Jerome, gives
Spirttum suum, ‘The Targum has the same. St. Ambrose
writes: ὁ Duis est gui dicit; misit me Dominus Deus et
Spiritus Ejus; nist Quivenit a Patre.ut salvos faceret pecca-
tores? Quem ut audis, et Spiritus misit; ne cum legis quia
Filtus Spiritum mittrt, inferiorts esse Spiritum crederes
potestatis, (De Sp. S. iii. 1, § 7.) The passage is quoted by St.
Athanasius, St. Basil, St. Cyril Hieros., and, as far as the
editor is aware, without anv comment which would help to
determine their way of understanding the case of τὸ πνευμα;
but Origen, on the words ‘ Whosoever shall humble himself as
this litle child’ (Comm. in Evang., Matt. xiii. 18) says, —
quoting the original, which mav be rendered, “ὁ humbling
himself as this little child is imitating the Holy Spirit, who
humbled Himself for men’s salvation. That the Saviour and
the Holy Ghost were sent by the Father for the salvation of
men is made plain by Isaiah saying, in the person of the
Saviour, ‘the Lord sent me, and His Spirit. It must be
observed, however, that the phrase is ambiguous, for either
God sent and the Holy Ghost also sent, the Saviour; or, as
I understand, the Father sent both, the Saviour and the Holy
Ghost.” The Vulgate and Beza both render ‘ Spiritus.”
The order of the Hebrew is in favour of the nominative, 2s in
the Vulgate and Ixx. cf. Note A on Chap. xlviii. of Isaiah in
the Speaker’s Commentary.

21s. lxii. 14, LXX.

3 Ps. Ixxvii. 20.

4 Ps, 1xxx, τὶ

5 Ps. Ixxviii. 53.

6 John xvi. 13. cf. Xiv. 20.

7 Rom. viii. 26; 27.


8 Rom. viii. 34.

9 Eph. iv. 30.

10 Acts vii. 51.

11 Ts, 1xiii. 10.

12 Ps, cvi. 32; Micah ii. 7.


32


sages indicative of authoritative power? I
leave it to the judgment of my readers to
determine what opinions we ought to hold
when we hear these passages; whether we
are to regard the Spirit as an instrument, a
subject, of equal rank with the creature,
and a fellow servant of ourselves, or whether,
on the contrary, to the ears of the pious the
mere whisper of this blasphemy is not most
grievous. Do you call the Spirit a servant?
But, it is said, ‘‘the servant knoweth not
what his Lord doeth,”? and yet the Spirit
knoweth the things of God, as ‘*the spirit
of man that is in him.” ”


CHAP ik 20x,


Against those who maintain that the Spirtt
is in the rank netther of a servant nor of a
master, but in that of the frec.


51. He is not a slave, it'is said; not a
master, but free. Oh the terrible insensi-
bility, the pitiable audacity, of them that
maintain this! Shall I rather lament in
them their ignorance or their blasphemy?
They try to insult the doctrines that con-
cern the divine nature® by comparing them
with the human, and cndeavour to apply
to the ineffable nature of God that com-
mon custom of human life whereby the
difference of degrees is variable, not per-
ceiving that among men no one is a slave by
nature. For, men “are either brought under
a yoke of slavery by conquest, as when pris-
oners are taken in war; or they are enslaved
on account of poverty, as the Egyptians were
oppressed by Pharaoh; or, by a wise and
mysterious dispensation, the worst children
are by their fathers’ order condemned to
serve the wiser and the better ;* and this any
righteous enquirer into the circumstances
would declare to be not a sentence of con-
demnation buta benefit. For it is more prof-
itable that the man who, through lack of
intelligence, has no natural principle of rule
within himself, should become the chattel of
another, to the end that, being guided by the
reason of his master, he may be like a chariot
with a charioteer, or a boat with a steersman
seated at the tiller. Forthis reason Jacob by
his father’s blessing became lord of Esau,°
in order that the foolish son, who had not
intelligence, his proper guardian, might,
even though he wished it not, be benefited
by his prudent brother. So Canaan shall be
‘‘a servant unto his brethren” ® because,
since his father Ham was unwise, he was


cf. note on § 66.
5 Gen, xxvii. 29. ©.Geén, ix. 25.


1 John xv. 15.
ὃ τὰ τῇ - θεολογίας δόγματα.
“cf, Gen, ix, 25.


BASIL


---


uninstructed in virtue. In this world, then,
it is thus that men are made slaves, but they
who have escaped poverty or war, or do not
require the tutelage of others, are free. It
follows that even though one man be callea
master and another servant, nevertheless,
both in view of our mutual equality of rank
and as chattels of our Creator, we are all
fellow slaves. But in that other world what
can you bring out of bondage? For no
sooner were they created than bondage was
commenced. The heavenly bodies exercise no
rule over one another, for they are unmoved
by ambition, but all bow down to God, and
render to Him alike the awe which is due to
ΠῚ as Master and the glory which falls to
Him as Creator. For ‘‘ a son honoureth his
father and a servant his master,’’! and from
all God asks one of these two things; for
‘Cif I then be a Father where is my honour?
and if I be a Master wherevis my dear, 7
Otherwise the life of all men, if it were not
under the oversight of a master, would be
most pitiable; as is the condition of the
apostate powers who, because they stiffen
their neck against God Almighty, fling off
the reins of their bondage, —not that their
natural constitution is different, but the cause
is in their disobedient disposition to their
Creator. Whonr then dow you ‘call deer
Him who has no King? Him who has
neither powcr to rule another nor willingness
to be ruled? Among all existent beings no
such nature is to be found. To entertain
such a conception of the Spirit is obvious
blasphemy. If He isa creature of course He
serves with all the rest, for ‘‘ all things,” it is
said ‘‘ are thy servants,” * but if He is above
Creation, then He shares in royalty.*

1 Mal. i. 6. 2 Mal.i. 6. SPs. xix, pt.

# St. Basil’s view of slavery is that (a) as regards our rela-
tion to God, all created beings are naturally ina condition of
subservience to the Creator; (6) as regards our relationship ἢ»
one another, slavery is not of nature, but of convention and
circumstance. How far he is here at variance with the well
known account of slavery given by Aristotle in the first Book
of the Polrtics will depend upon the interpretation we put upon
the word “nature.” “415 there,’’ asks Aristotle, *f any one in-
tended by nature to be a slave, and for whom such a condition
is expedient and right, or rather is not all slavery a violation
of nature? There is no difficulty in answering this question,
on grounds both of reason and fact. For that some should
rule, and others be ruled, is a thing not only necessary, but ex-
pedient; from the hour of their birth some are marked out for
subjection, others for rule. . . . Where, then, there is such
a difference as that between soul and body, or between men
and animals (as in the case of those whose business it is to
use their body, and who can do nothing better), the lower sort
are by nature slaves, and it is better for them, as for all infe-
riors, that they should be under the rule of a master. . . .
It is clear, then, that some men are by nature free and others
slaves, and that for these latter slavery is both expedient and
right.” Politics, Bk. 1, Sec.5. Here by Nature seems to be
meant something like Basil’s ‘lack of intelligence,” and of
the τὸ κατὰ φύσιν ἄρχον, which makes it ** profitable” for one
man to be the chattel of another (κτῆμα is livestock, espe-
cially mancipium. cf. Shakspere’s K. and Pet., ‘‘ She is mv
goods, my chattels.” ‘ Chattel”? is a doublet of ‘‘cattle’’).
St. Basil and Aristotle are at one as to the advantage to the
weak slave of his having a powerful protector; and this, no


doubt, is the point of view from which slavery can be best
apolegized for,


ΟΝ TH weve Pikit.


33


CHAPTER XXI.


Proof from Scripture that the Spirit is called
Lora.


52. Bur why get an unfair victory for
our argument by fighting over these undigni-
fied questions, when it is within our power
to prove that the excellence of the glory is
beyond dispute by adducing more lofty con-
siderations? If, indeed, we repeat what we
have been taught by Scripture, every one of
the Pneumatomachi will peradventure raise
aloud and vehement outcry, stop their ears,
pick up stones or anything else that comes
to hand for a weapon, and charge against us.
But our own security must not be regarded
ΠΗ Betore the truth: “We. have ‘learnt
from the Apostle, “the Lord direct your
hearts into the love of God and into the
patient waiting for Christ”! for our tribula-
tions. Who is the Lord that directs into the
love of God and into the patient waiting for
Christ for tribulations? Let those men an-
swer us who are for making a slave of the
Holy Spirit. For if the argument had been
about God the Father, it would certainly
have said, ‘the Lord direct you into His own
love,’ or if about the Son, it would have
added * into His own patience.’ Let them
then seek what other Person there is who is


Christianity did indeed do much to better the condition of
the slave by asserting his spiritual freedom, but at first it did
little more than emphasize the later philosophy of heathen-
dom, εἰ σῶμα δοῦλον, add’ ὁ vous ἐλεύθερος (Soph., frag. incert.
xxii.), and gave the highest meaning to such thoughts as
those expressed in the late Efigram of Damascius (c. 530) on
a dead slave:

Ζωσίμη ἡ πρὶν ἐοῦσα μόνῳ τῷ σώματι δούλη,
Καὶ τῷ σώματι νῦν εὗρεν ἐλευθερίην.

It thought less of a slave’s servitude to fellow man than of
the slavery of bond and free alike toevil. cf. Auy., De Civit.
Det, iv. cap. 111, “ Bonus etiamst serviat liber est: malus
autem st regnat servus est; necest unius hominis, sed quod
gravius est tot domtnorum quot vittorum.” Chrysostom even
explains St. Paul’s non-condemnation of slavery on the ground
that its existence, with that of Christian liberty, was a greater
moral triumph than its abolition. (Jz Genes. Serm. v. 1.)
Even so late as the sixth century the legislation of Justinian,
though protective, supposed no natural liberty. ** Expedit enim
respublice ne quis re sud utatur male.” Instit. i. viii. quoted
by Milman, Lat. Christ. ii.14. We must not therefore be sur-
prised at not finding in a Father of the fourth century an anti-
cipation of a later development of Christian sentiment. At the
same time it was in the age of St. Basil that “ the language of
the Fathers assumes a bolder tone”? (cf. Dict. Christ. Ant. ii.

906), and ‘fin the correspondence of Gregory Nazianzen we
find him referring to a case where a slave had been made
bishop over a small community in the desert. The Christian
lady to whom he belonged endeavoured to assert her right of
ownership, for which she was severely rebuked by St. Basil.
(cf. Letter CXV.) After St. Basil’s death she again claimed
the slave, whereupon Gregory a .dressed her a letter of grave
remonstrance at her unchristian desire to recall his brother
bishop from his sphere of dutv. Ep. 79,” zd.

12 Tness.iii. 5. A note of the Kenedictine Editors on this
passage savs: “1 must be admitted that these words are not
found in the sacred text and are wanting in three manuscripts
of this work. Moreover, inthe Regrus Quintus they are only
inserted by a second hand, but since they are shortly after-
wards repeated by Basil, as though taken from the sacred
context, [am unwilling to delete them, and it is more probable
that they were withdrawn from the manuscripts from which
they are wanting because they were not found in the apostle,
than added, without any reason at all, to the manuscripts in
which they occur.”


a ΄ὖἅ΄ῤ΄ῤ΄ὖῤΦ0Ὄ0ᾶῸ΄Ὸ΄ῤ΄η.........--΄΄΄ΦΦὋΕ2ῪΨΝΕὭ.....


worthy to be honoured with the title of
Lord. And parallel with this is that other
passage, *‘and the Lord make you to in-
crease and abound in love one toward another,
and toward all men, even as we do towards
you; to the end He may establish your hearts
unblamable in holiness before God, even our
Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ with all His saints.”’ Now what
Lord does he entreat to stablish the hearts
of the faithful at Thessalonica, unblamable
in holiness before God even our Father, at
the coming of our Lord? Let those answer
who place the Holy Ghost among the minis-
tering spirits that are sent forth on service.
They cannot. Wherefore let them hear yet
another testimony which distinctly calls the
Spirit Lord); “The Lordy” it is said) “1s
that Spirit; ” and again ‘‘even as from the
Lord the Spirit.”? But to leave no ground
for objection, I will quote the actual words
of the Apostle;—‘‘ For even unto this day
remaineth the same veil untaken away in the
reading of the Old Testament, which veil is
done away in Christ. Neverthe-
less, when it shall turn to the Lord, the veil
shall be taken away. Now the Lord is that
Spirit.” ® Why does he speak thus? Be-
cause he who abides in the bare sense of the
letter, and in it busies himself with the ob-
servances of the Law, has, as it were, got his
own heart enveloped in the Jewish accept-
ance of the letter, like a veil; and this be-
falls him because of his ignorance that the
bodily observance of the Law is done away
by the presence of Christ, in that for the
future the types are transferred to the reality.
Lamps are made needless by the advent of
the sun; and, on the appearance of the truth,
the occupation of the Law is gone, and
prophecy is hushed into silence. He, on
the contrary, who has been empowered to
look down into the depth of the meaning of
the Law, and, after passing through the ob-
scurity of the letter, as through a veil, to
arrive within things unspeakable, is like
Moses taking off the veil when he spoke
with God. He, too, turns from the letter to
the Spirit. So with the veil on the face of
Moses corresponds the obscurity of the
teaching of the Law, and _ spiritual con-
templation with the turning to the Lord.
He, then, who in the reading of the Law
takes away the letter and turns to the
Lord, —and the Lord is now called the


S92 ness. 11. 12,13. ;

22Cor. iii.17, 18, R.V. In Adv. Eunom., iii. 3 St. Basil
had quoted v.17 of the Son, making πνεῦμα descriptive of our
Lord. ‘*This was written,’ adds Mr. C. F. H. Johnston,
‘during St. Basil’s presbyterate, at least ten years earlier.”

3 2 Cor, iii, 14, 16, 17.


34


«-----


Spirit, — becomes moreover like Moses,
who had his face glorified by the manifesta-
tion of God. For just as objects which lie
near brilliant colours are themselves tinted
by the brightness which is shed around, so
is he who fixes his gaze firmly on the Spirit
by the Spirit’s glory somehow transfigured
into greater splendour, having his heart
lighted up, as it were, by some light streaming
from the truth of the Spirit." And this is
‘‘being changed from’ the glory” of the
Spirit “‘into” His own ‘glory,’’ not in
niggard degree, nor dimly and indistinctly,
but as we might ‘expect any one to be who
is enlightened by? the Spirit. Do you not,
O man, fear the Apostle when he says ‘* Ye
are the temple of God, and the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you”?* Could he ever have
brooked to honour with the title of ‘‘ tem-
ple” the quarters of a slave? How can he
who calls Scripture ‘‘ God-inspired,” ° be-
cause it was written through the inspiration
of the Spirit, use the language of one who
insults and belittles Him?


CHAPTER, XXII.


Establishment of the natural communion of the
Spirit from Lis being, equally with the
Father and the Son, unapproachable in
thought.®


52. Moreover the surpassing excellence
of the nature of the Spirit is to be learned not
only from His having the same title as the
Father and the Son, and sharing in their
operations, but also from His being, like
the Father and the Son, unapproachable in
thought. For what our Lord says of the
Father as being above and beyond human
conception, and what He says of the Son,
this same language He uses also of the Holy
Ghost. ‘*O righteous Father,” He says,
‘¢the world hath not known Thee,”* mean-
ing here by the world not the complex whole
compounded of heaven and earth, but this
life of ours subject to death,® and exposed to
innumerable vicissitudes. And when dis-
coursing of Himself He says, ‘* Yet a little
while and the world seeth me no more, but

Wef, 2, οΥ. ii: 18.

2St. Basil gives ἀπό the sense of “δγ.", So Theodoret,
CEcum., Theophylact, Bengel. cf. Alford 7x loc. The German
is able to repeat the prep., as in Greek and Latin, *‘ von efner
EKlarhett zu der andern, als vom Herrn.”

3 ἀπό. τα Cor. lil: 16; 52 Tim. iii. 16.

Ὁ πρὸς θεωρίαν δυσέφικτον. The Benedictine Latin is * /n-
comprehenstbilis,” but this is rather ἀκατάληπτος. The “ in-
comprehensible” of the Ath. Creed is “* zmmensus.’?

7John xvii. 25.


8 ἐπίκηοος. The force of the word as applied to this life is
illustrated by the 61st Epigram of Callimachus :
Tis ξένος, ὦ νανηγέ; Λεόντιχος ἐνθάδε νεκρὸν
εὗρεν ἐπ᾽ αἰγιαλοῖς, χῶσε δὲ τῷδε τάφῳ
δακρύσας ἐπίκηρον εὸν βίον " οὐδὲ γὰρ αὐτὸς
ἥσυχος, αἰθνίῃς δ᾽ ἶσα θαλασσοπορεῖ.


ΒΆΘΗ:


ye see πη; ᾿"ὖ again in this passage, applying
the word world to those who being bound
down by this material and carnal life, and
beholding? the truth by material sight alone,?®
were ordained, through their unbelief in the
resurrection, to see our Lord no more with
the eyes of the heart. And He said the
same concerning the Spirit. ‘*The Spirit
of truth,” He says, ** whom the world cannot
receive, because it seeth Him not, neither
knoweth Him: but ye know Him, for He
dwelleth with you.”* For the carnal man,
who has never trained his mind to contem-
plation,® but rather keeps it buried deep in
the lust of the flesh,® as in mud, is powerless
to look up to the spiritual light of the truth.
And so the world, that is life enslaved by the
affections of the flesh, can no more receive
the grace of the Spirit than a weak eye the
light of a sunbeam. But the Lord, who by
His teaching bore witness to purity of life,
gives to His disciples the power of now beth
beholding and contemplating the Spirit. For
‘‘now,’’ He says,-** Ye ate clean through
the word which I have spoken unto you,’’?
wherefore ‘‘ the world cannot receive Him,
because itseeth Him not, . . . butye know
Him; for he dwelleth with you.”*® And so
says Isaiah; —‘** He that spread forth the
earth and that which cometh out of it; he that
giveth breath unto the people upon it, and
Spirit to them that trample on it”°; for they
that trample down earthly things and rise
above them are borne witness to as worthy
of the gift of the Holy Ghost. What then
ought to be thought of Him whom the world
cannot receive, and Whom saints alone can
contemplate through pureness of heart?
What kind of honours can be deemed ade-
quate to Him?


CHAPTER XXIII.


The glorifying of the Spirit ts the enumeration
of Lts attributes.


10 Now of the rest of the Powers each


54.


1 John xiv. 19.

_ 5 ἐπιβλέποντας, the reading of the Viennese MS. vulgo
ETLTISTOVTAS.

3 μόνοις ὀφθαλμοῖς.

5 ἀγύμναστον ἔχων τὸν νοῦν.

ὁ τῷ φρονήματι τῆς σαρκός.
τῆς σαρκὺς θάνατος. Ν

7 John xv. 3. 8 John xiv. 17.

9.15. xlii. 5, ΠΙΧΧ. πατοῦσιν αὐτὴν. So St. Basil’s argument
requires us to translate the lxx. The ‘‘ walk therein ” of A.V.
would not bear out his meaning. For this use of πατεῖν. cf.
Soph., Ant.745, οὐ yap σέβεις τιμάς γε τὰς θεῶν πατῶν; Sointhe
vulgate we read “et spirttum calcantibus eam,” —calcare
bearing the sense of “trample on,” as in Juvenal, Saf. x 86,
‘‘calcemus Cesaris hostem.’? The Hebrew bears uo such
meaning.

10 Here the Benedictine Editors begin Chanter xxiii., re-
marking that they do so “cum plures MSS. codices. tum
ipsam sermonis seriem et continuationem secuti. Liquet
enim hic Basilium ad aliud argumentum transire.” Another


4 John xiv. 17.
cf. Hebiiwedas
cf. Rom, viii. 6 τὸ yap φρόνημα


ON ‘THE


is believed to be in a circumscribed place.
The angel who stood by Cornelius’ was not
at one and the same moment with Philip; ἢ
ner yet did the angel who spoke with Zacha-
rias from the altar at the same time occupy
his own post in heaven. But the Spirit is
believed to have been operating at the same
time in Habakkuk and in Daniel at Baby-
lon,® and to have been at the prison with
Jeremiah,* and with Ezekiel at the Chebar.°
For the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world,°
and ‘** whither shall I go from thy spirit? or
whither shall I flee from thy presence?” 7
And, in the words of the Prophet, “ἢ For I
am with you, saith the Lord... and my
spirit remaineth among you.”* But what
nature is it becoming to-assign to Him who is
omnipresent, and exists together with God?
The nature which is all-embracing, or one
which is confined to particular places, like
that which our argument shews the rature
of angels to be? No one would so say.
Shall we not then highly exalt Him who
is in His nature divine, in His greatness infi-
nite, in His operations powerful, in the bless-
ings He confers, good? Shall we not give
Him glory? And I understand glory to
mean nothing else than the enumeration of
the wonders which are His own. It follows
then that either we are forbidden by our an-
tagonists even to mention the good things
which flow to us from Him, or on the other
hand that the mere recapitulation of His at-
tributes is the fullest possible attribution of
glory. For not even in the case of the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ and of
the Only begotten Son, are we capable of giv-
ing Them glory otherwise than by recounting,
to the extent of our powers, all the wonders
that belong to Them.


CHAPTER XXIV;


Proof of the absurdity of the refusal to glorify
the Spirit, from the comparison of things
glorified in creation.


55. FURTHERMORE manis ‘** crowned with
glory and honour,” ?® and * glory, honour and
peace” are laid up by promise ‘‘to every
man that worketh good.”'° There is more-


division of the text makes Chapter XXIII. begin with the
words ** But I do not mean by glory.”

L Acts: x, δὲ 2 Acts viii. 26. 8 Bel and the Dragon, 34.

4 Jer. xx. 2, LXX. εἰς τὸν καταῤῥάκτην ὃς Hv ἐν πύλῃ. Kartap-
ῥάκτης τῶν πυλῶν occurs in Dion. Halic. viii. 67, in the same
sense as the Latin cataracta (Livy xxvii. 27) a portcullis.
The Vulgate has 222 nervum, which may either be gyve or
gaol. The Hebrew =stocks, asin A.V.and R.V. καταῤῥάκτης
in the text of Basil and the lxx. may be assumed to mean
prison, from the notion of the barred grating over the door.
cf. Ducange s.v. cataracta.

5 HZ. τὸ τ. ViPS. KEEIK. ἢ.

6 Wis. i. 7. 8 Hag. ii. 4, 5.


9 PS, vill, §.
10 Rom. ii. 10,


SPIRIT. 35


over a special and peculiar glory for Isra-
elites ** to whom,” it is said ὁ" pertaineth the
adoption and the glory . . andtheservice,” '
and the Psalmist speaks of a certain glory of
his own, ‘*that my glory may sing praise to
Thee’ ;” and again ‘* Awake up my glory ” ®
and according to the Apostle there is a certain
glory of sun and moon and stars,’ and ‘* the
ministration of condemnation is glorious.” ἢ
While then so many things are glorified, do
you wish the Spirit alone of all things to be
unglorified? Yet the Apostle says ‘ the
ministration of the Spirit is glorious.” ὁ How
then can He Himself be unworthy of glory?
How according to the Psalmist can the
glory of the just man be great’ and accord-
ing to you the glory of the Spirit none?
How is there not a plain peril from such ar-
guments of our bringing on ourselves the
sin from which there is no escape? If the
man who is being saved by works of right-
eousness glorifies even them that fear the
Lord ® much less would he deprive the
Spirit of the glory which is His due.

Grant, they say, that He is to be glorified,
but not with the Father and the Son. But
what reason is there in giving up the place
appointed by the Lord for the Spirit, and in-
venting some other? What reason is there
for robbing of His share of glory Him Who
is everywhere associated with the Godhead ;
in the confession of the Faith, in the baptism
of redemption, in the working of miracles,
in the indwelling of the saints, in the graces
bestowed on obedience? For there is not
even one single gift which reaches creation
without the Holy Ghost; ° when not even a
single word can be spoken in defence of
Christ except by them that are aided by the
Spirit, as we have learnt in the Gospels
from our Lord and Saviour.”” And I know
not whether any one who has been par-
taker of the Holy Spirit will consent that we
should overlook all this, forget His fellowship
in all things, and tear the Spirit asunder
from the Father and the.Son. Where then
are we to take Him and rank Him? With
the creature? Yet all the creature is in bond-
age, but the Spirit maketh free. ‘And
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is lib-
erty.”'? Many arguments might be adduced
to them that it is unseemly to coordinate the
Holy Spirit with created nature, but for the
present I will pass them by. Were I indeed
to bring forward, in a manner befitting the


1 Rom. ix. 4. 5 2 Cor. iii. 9.

2.PS. KKIX~ 12. 6 2 Cor. iii. 8.

3 Ps. lvii. 8. Nigh, Ὡς ΤΈΩΣ

ef. 1 Core νᾶες Sef, Psi aN
_ ef. Matt. xxviii,-195_1 Cor. xii. 11; Rom. viii. 11;,1 Pet.
i. 2


10 Matt. x. 19, 20, 11 2 Cor. iii. 17.


36


BASIL


dignity of the discussion, all the proofs
always available on our side, and so over-
throw the objections of our opponents, a
lengthy dissertation would be required, and
my readers might be worn out by my pro-
lixity. I therefore propose to reserve this
matter for a special treatise,’ and to apply
myself to the points now more immediately
before us.

56. Let us then examine the points one
by one. He is'good by nature, in the same
way as the Father is good, and the Son is
good; the creature on the other hand shares
in goodness by choosing the good. He
knows ‘* The deep things of God;”?’ the
creature receives the manifestation of in-
effable things through the Spirit. He
quickens together with God, who produces
and preserves all things alive,’ and together
with the Son, who gives life. ‘‘ He that
raised up Christ from the dead,” it is said,
‘shall also quicken your mortal bodies by
the spirit that dwelleth in you;”* and again
‘¢my sheep hear my voice, and I
give unto them eternal life;”° but ‘‘ the
Spirit” also, it is said, ‘‘ giveth life,” ° and
again **the Spirit,” it is said, ‘‘is life, be-
cause of righteousness.”’ And the Lord
bears witness that ‘‘it is the Spirit that
quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing.” ὃ
How then shall we alienate the Spirit from
His quickening power, and make Him be-
long to lifeless nature? Who is so con-
tentious, who is so utterly without the
heavenly gift,? and unfed by God’s good
words, who is so devoid of part and lot in
eternal hopes, as to sever the Spirit from the
Godhead and rank Him with the creature?

57. Now it is urged that the Spirit is in us
as a gift from God, and that the gift is not
reverenced with the same honour as that
which is attributed to the giver. The Spirit
isa gift of God, but a gift of life, for the law of
‘¢the Spirit of life,” it is said, ** hath made”
us ‘‘ free; ”'® -and a gift of power, for ‘‘ ye
shall receive power after that the Holy
Ghost is come upon you.” ἢ Is He on this
account to be lightly esteemed? Did not God
also bestow His Sonas a free gift to mankind?


1 Mr. C. F. H. Johnston conjectures the allusion to be to
Flom. xxiv. ““ Contra Sabellianos et Aritum et Anomeos.”

21 Cor, 11. 10, 11.

8In1i Tim. vi.13, St. Paul writes τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ζωοπο:ιοῦντος
πάντα. In the text St. Basil writes τὰ πάντα ζωογονοῦντος.
The latter word is properly distinguished from the former as
meaning not to make alive aiter death, but to engender alive.
In Luke xvii. 33, it is rendered in A.V. ‘* preserve.’”? In Acts
vii. 19, it is ** to the end they might not Z/ve.””, On the meaning
of ζωογονεῖν in the Ixx. and the Socinian arguments based on
its use in Luke xvii. 33, cf. Pearson, On the Creed, Art. V.
note to p. 257 Ed. 1676.

4 Rom. viii. 11.

5 John x, 27-28.

6 2 Cor. iii. 6.

7 Rom, viii. 10,


8 John vi. 63.
cf. Heb. vi. 4.
10 Rom, viii. 2.
11 Acts i. 8.


‘¢ He that spared not His own Son,” it is
said, ** but delivered Him up for us all, how
shall He not with Him also freely give us
all things? ”’* And in another place, ‘* that
we might truly know the things that are
freely given us of God,” " in reference to the
mystery of the Incarnation. It follows then
that the maintainers of such arguments, in
making the greatness of God’s loving kind-
ness an occasion of blasphemy, have really
surpassed the ingratitude of the Jews.
They find fault with the Spirit because He
gives us freedom to call God our Father.
ες. For God hath sent forth the Spirit of His
Son into” our ** hearts crying Abba, Father,” *
that the voice of the Spirit may become the
very voice of them that have received him.


CHAPTER XXyV.


That Scripture uses the words “in” or
“by,” ἐν, f. note on p. 3, in place of “with.”
Wherein also it is proved that the word
“and” has the same force as “with.”


58. Ir is, however, asked by our oppo-
nents, how it is that Scripture nowhere
describes the Spirit as glorified together
with the Father and the Son, but carefully
avoids the use of the expression ‘‘ with the
Spirit,” while it everywhere prefers to as-
cribe glory **in Him” as being the fitter
phrase. I should, formy own part, deny that
the word in [or by] implies lower dig-
nity than the word * with;” I should main-
tain on the contrary that, rightly understood,
it leads us up to the highest possible mean-
ing. ‘This is the case where, as we have
observed, it often stands instead of wzth; as
for instance, **I will go into thy house zz
burnt offerings,” * instead of wzth burnt offer-
ings and ‘*he brought them forth also dy
silver and gold,’ that is to say w2th silver
and gold and ‘+ thou goest not forth zz our
armies”’® instead of wth our armies, and
innumerable similar passages. In short I
should very much like to learn from this new-
fangled philosophy what kind of glory the
Apostle ascribed by the word zz, according to
the interpretation which our opponents protler
as derived from Scripture, for I have nowhere
found the formula “Τὸ Thee, O Father,
be honour and glory, through Thy only
begotten Son, dy [or zz] the Holy Ghost,”
—a form which to our opponents comes, so
to say, as naturally as the air they breathe.
You may indced find each of these clauses


1 Rom. viii. 32. 23, Cor. 4/12, 3 Gal. iv. 6.


* Ps. levi. 15. Eten


5 Ps. Cv. 37. 6 Ps. aliv. 9.


ON) “EHEVSrikit:


37


separately,’ but they will nowhere be able to
show them to us arranged inthis conjunction.
If, then, they want exact conformity to what
is written, let them give us exact references.
If, on the other hand, they make conces-
sion to custom, they must not make us an
exception to such a privilege.

. As we find both expressions in use
among the faithful, we use both; in the
belief that full glory is equally given to
the Spirit by both. The mouths, how-
ever, of revilers of the truth may best be
stopped by the preposition which, while it
has the same meaning as that of the Scrip-
tures, is not so wieldy a weapon for our
opponents, (indeed it is now an object of
their attack) and is used instead of the con-
junction azd. For to say ‘* Paul and Sil-
vanus and Timothy” ’” is precisely the same
thing as to say Paul wh Timothy and Sil-
vanus; for the connexion of the names is
preserved by either mode of expression.
‘ihe izord says ** The Father, the Son and
the Holy Ghost.” ’ If I say the Father and
the Son wzth the Holy Ghost shall I make
any difference inthe sense? Of the connexion
of names by means of the conjunction and
faceinstances are many... We read “'The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love
of God and the fellowship of the Holy
Ghost,” * and again ‘* I beseech you for the
Bord. jesus Christ's. sake, ἀπε - for the
love of the Spirit.”° Now if we wish to use
with instead of azd, what difference shall we
have made? I do not see; unless any one
according to hard and fast grammatical rules
might prefer the conjunction as copulative
and making the union stronger, and reject the
preposition as of inferior force. But if we
had to defend ourselves on these points I do
not suppose we should require a defence of
many words. As it is, their argument is not
about syllables nor yet about this or that
scund of a word, but about things differing
most widely in power and in truth. It is for
this reason that, while the use of the syllables
is really a matter of no importance whatever,
our opponents are making the endeavour
to authorise some syllables, and hunt out
others from the Church. For my own part,
although the usefulness of the word is ob-
vious as soon as it is heard, I will nevertheless
set forth the arguments which led our fathers
to adopt the reasonable course of employing
the preposition ‘‘ wth.” * It does indeed,


1 In Eph. ii. 18 they are combined, but no Scriptural dox-
ology uses ἐν of the Spirit.

21 Thess.i.1. 49 Cor. XilAIg;

3 Matt. xxvili. 10. 5 Rom, xv. 30.

6**St, Basil’s statement of the reason of the use of pera,
σύν, in the Doxology, is not confirmed by any earlier or con-


equally well with the preposition * and,”
confute the mischief of Sabellius;' and it
sets forth quite as well as “" and” the dis-
tinction of the hypostases, as in the words
‘¢T and my Father will come,” ? and ‘* I and
my Father are one.” * In addition to this the
proof it contains of the eternal fellowship
and uninterrupted conjunction is excellent.
For to say that the Son is wztk the Father is
to exhibit at once the distinction of the hy-
postases, and the inseparability of the fellow-
ship. ‘The same thing is observable even in
mere human matters, for the conjunction
‘Cand” intimates that there is a common
element in an action, while the preposition
‘“Cwzth’’? declares in some sense as well the
communion in action. As, for instance ; —
Paul and Timothy sailed to Macedonia, but
both Tychicus and Onesimus were sent to
the Colossians. Hence we learn that they
did the same thing. But suppose we are
told that they sailed wth, and were sent
with? Then we are informed in addition
that they carried out the action in company
with one another. Thus while the word
ἐς with” upsets the error of Sabellius as no
other word can, it routs also sinners who
err in the very opposite direction; those,
I mean, who separate the Son from the
Father and the Spirit from the Son, by
intervals of time.‘

60. As compared with ‘‘ zz,” there is this
difference, that while *‘ w7#h” sets forth the
mutual conjunction of the parties associated,
—as, for example, of those who sail with,
or dwell with, or do anything else in com-
mon, “ὁ zz’ shews their relation to that matter
in which they happen to be acting. For we
no sooner hear the words ‘sail in” or
‘¢dwell in” than we form the idea of the
boat or the house. Such is the distinction


temporary writer, as far as the editor is aware, nor is it contra-
dicted.” Rev. C. F. H. Johnston.

1+“ Sabellius has been usually assigned to the middle of
third century, Mr. Clinton giving A.D. 256-270 as his active
period. The discovery of the Philosophumena of Hippolytus
has proved this to be a mistake, and thrown his period back to
the close of the second and beginning of the third century. ...
He was in full activity in Rome during the Episcopate of
Zephyrinus, A.D.198-217.”’ Professor Stokes in D.C. Biog. iv.
569. For Basil’s views of Sabellianism wrde Epp. CCX.,
CCXIV., CCXXXV. In his Her. Fab. Conf. ii. 9 Theodoret
writes: ‘‘Sabellius said that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
were one Hypostasis; one Person under three names; and he
describes the same now as Father, now as Son, now as Holy
Ghost. He says that in the old Testament He gave laws as
Father, was incarnate in the new as Son, and visited the
Apostles as Holy Ghost.” So in the "Ex@:ous τῆς κατὰ μέρος
πίστεως, a work falsely attributed to Gregory Thaumaturgus,
and possibly due to Apollinaris, (cf. Theod., Dra/. iii.) ‘* We
shun Sabellius, who says that Father and Son are the same,
calling Him who speaks Father, and the Word, remaining in
the Father and at the time of creation manifested, and, on the
completion of things returning to the Father, Son. He says
the same of the Hoiy Ghost.’”’

2 Apparently an inexact reference to John xiv. 23.

3 John x. 30.

47.¢., The Arians, who said of the Son, ‘* There was when
he was not;” and the Pneumatoinachi, who made the Spirit a
created being.


38


BASIL


between these words in ordinary usage; and
laborious investigation might discover further
illustrations. 1 have no time to examine
into the nature of the syllables. Since then
it has been shewn that ** w7#i”’ most clearly
gives the sense of conjunction, let it be
declared, if you will, to be under safe-conduct,
and cease to wage your savage and truceless
war against it. Nevertheless, though the
word is naturally thus auspicious, yet if any
one likes, in the ascription of praise, to couple
the names by the syllable ‘‘and,” and to
give glory, as we have taught in the Gospel,
in the formula of baptism, Father and Son
and Holy Ghost,’ be it so: no one will
make any objection. On these conditions, if
you will, let us come to terms. But our
foes would rather surrender their tongues
than accept this word. It is this that rouses
against us their implacable and _ truceless
war. We must offer the ascription of glory
to God, it is contended, zz the Holy Ghost,
and not azd to the Holy Ghost, and they
passionately cling to this word zz, as though
it lowered the Spirit. It will therefore be
not unprofitable to speak at greater length
about it; and I shall be astonished if they do
not, when they have heard what we have to
urge, reject the zz as itself a traitor to their
cause, and a deserter to the side of the glory
of the Spirit.


CHAPTER XXXVI.


That the word “in,” in as many senses as
22 bears, is understood of the Spirit.


61. Now, short and simple as this utter-
ance is, it appears to me, as I consider it,
that its meanings are many and _ various.
For of the senses in which * zz” is used, we
find that all help our conceptions of the
Spirit. Lorm is said to be zz Matter;
Power to be én what is capable of it; Aadz¢
to be zz him who is affected by it; and so
on.” Therefore, inasmuch as the Holy
Spirit perfects rational beings, completing
their excellence, He is analogous to Form.
For he, who no longer ‘‘lives after the
flesh,” * but, being ‘led by the Spirit of
God,” * is called a Son of God, being “ con-
formed to the image of the Son of Οοά,
is described as spiritual. And as is the
power of seeing in the healthy eye, so is
the operation of the Spirit in the purified


1 Matt. xxviii. 19.

2cf. Note on Char ἵν p. 4. In the Aristotelian philos-
ophy, εἶδος, or Forma, is the τὸ τί ἣν εἶναι, the essence or
formal cause. cf. Ar., Met. vi. 7, 4. εἶδος δὲ λέγω τὸ τί ἣν εἶναι
ἑκάστον καὶ THY πρώτην οὐσιαν. Δύναμις, Or Potentia, is poten-
tial action or existence, as opposed to ἐνέργεισ, actus, actual
action or existence, or ἐντελέχεια. cf. Ar., Met, viii. 3, 9, and
viii. 8,11. Sir W. Hamilton, Metaph. i, 178-180.

3 Rom. viii. 12. 4 Rom. viii. 14. δ Rom. viii. 29.


soul. Wherefore also Paul prays for the
Ephesians that they may have their ὁ’ eyes
enlightened”’ by ‘**the Spirit of wisdom.” Ὁ
And as the art in him who has acquired it,
so is the grace of the Spirit in the recipient
ever present, though not continuously in
operation. For as the art is potentially in
the artist, but only in operation when he
is working in accordance with it, so
also the Spirit is ever present with those
that are worthy, but works, as need re-
quires, in prophecies, or in healings, or
in some other actual carrying into effect
of His potential action.” Furthermore
as. if ‘our’ “bodies: is’ health;* or “heat? “or;
generally, their variable conditions, so,
very frequently is the Spirit in the soul;
since He does not abide with those who, on
account of the instability of their will, easily
reject the grace which they have received.
An instance of this 15 seen in 54], and the
seventy elders of the children of Israel,
except Eldad and Medad, with whom alone
the Spirit appears to have remained,’ and,
generally, any one similar to these in char-
acter. And like reason in the soul, which
is at one time the thought in the heart, and
at another speech uttered by the tongue,’
so is the Holy Spirit, as when He ‘ beareth
witness with our spirit,”° and when He
‘*cries in our hearts, Abba, Father,” * ‘or
when He speaks on our behalf, as it is said,
‘It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of
your Father which speaketh in you.” ®
Again, the Spirit is conceived of, in rela-
tion to the distribution of gifts, as a whole
in parts. For we all are ‘*members one of
another, having gifts differing according to
the grace that is given us.’”’® Wherefore
‘*the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no
need of thee; nor again the head to the feet,
I have no need of you,” ’*® but all together
complete the Body of Christ in the Unity
of the Spirit, and render to one another the
needful aid that comes of the gifts. ** But
God hath set the members in the body,


1 Eph. i. 17, 18.

2ἐν ἄλλοις τισι δυνάμεων ἐνεργήμασι. The Benedictine trans-
lation is 7” αἰ τς miraculorum operationitbus.” 10 is of course
quite true that δύναμις is one of the four words used in the New
Testament for miracle, and often has that sense, but here the
context suggests the antithesis between potential and actual
operation, and moreover non-miraculous (in the ordinary
sense) operations of the Spirit need not be excluded; in a deep
sense all His operations are miraculous. ἐνέργημα is an un-
common word, meaning the work wrought by ἐνέργεια or oper-
ation.

31 Sam. xvi. 14.

4 Numb. xi. 25, 26, LXX. and R.V. “did so no more” for
‘*did not cease” of A.V.

5 The distinction between the λόγος ἐνδιάθετος, thought, and
the Aoyos πορφορικός, Speech, appears first in Philo. 11. 154.
On the use of the term in Catholic Theology cf. Dr. Robert-
son’s note on Ath., De Syn. § xxvi. p. 463 of the Ed. in this
series. Also, Dorner, Div. I. i. p. 338, note.

ὁ Rom. viii. 16. 8 Matt. x. 20.

7 Gal. vi. 4. 9 Rom, xii. 5,6.


10:3 Cor, ἈΠ 21.


ON THE SPIRIT. 39


63. In relation to the originate,’ then, the
Spirit is said to de zz them ‘‘in divers por-
tions and in divers manners,”” while in
relation to the Father and the Son it is more
consistent with true religion to assert Him
not to de zz but to de wth. For the grace
flowing from Him when He dwells in those
that are worthy, and carries out His own
operations, is well described as existing in
those that are able to receive Him. On the
other hand His essential existence before the
ages, and His ceaseless abiding with Son
and Father, cannot be contemplated without
requiring titles expressive of eternal conjunc-
tion. For absolute and real co-existence is
predicated in the case of things which are
mutually inseparable. We say, for instance,
that heat exists in the hot iron, but in the
case of the actual fire it co-exists ; and, simi-
larly, that health exists in the body, but that
life co-exists with the soul. It follows that
wherever the fellowship is intimate, congen-
ital,? and inseparable, the word τοί is
more expressive, suggesting, as it does, the
idea of inseparable fellowship. Where on
the other hand the grace flowing from the
Spirit naturally comes and goes, it is prop-
erly and truly said to exist zz, even if on
account of the firmness of the recipients’ dis-
position to good the grace abides with them
continually. Thus whenever we have in
mind the Spirit’s proper rank, we contem-
plate Him as being wzth the Father and the
Son, but when we think of the grace that


every one of them, as it hath pleased Him.” ?
But ** the members have the same care for
oue another,” " according to the inborn spir-
itual communion of their sympathy. Where-
fore, ‘* whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it; or one member be
honoured, all the members rejoice with it.” °
And as parts in the whole so are we indi-
vidually in the Spirit, because we all ‘* were
baptized in one body into one spirit.” *

62. It is an extraordinary statement, but
it is none the less true, that the Spirit is fre-
quently spoken of as the Alwce of them that are
being sanctified, and it will become evident
that even by this figure the Spirit, so far from
being degraded, is rather glorified. For
words applicable to the body are, for the
sake of clearness, frequently transferred in
scripture to spiritual conceptions. Accord-
ingly we find the Psalmist, even in reference
to God, saying ** Be Thou to me a champion
God and a strong place to save me” ὃ and
concerning the Spirit ** behold there is a
place by me, and stand upon a rock.” Ὁ
Plainly meaning the place or contemplation
in the Spirit wherein, after Moses had en-
tered thither, he was able to see God intel-
ligibly manifested tohim. This is the special
and peculiar place of true worship; for it is
said ** Take heed to thyself that thou offer
not thy burnt offeringsin every place . . . but
in the place the Lord thy God shall choose.” *
Now what is a spiritual burnt offering?
ἐς The sacrifice of praise.” ° And in what
place do we offer it? In the Holy Spirit.
Where have we learnt this? From the
Lord himself in the words ‘‘ The true wor-
shippers shall worship the Father in spirit
and in truth.’?® ‘This place Jacob saw and
said 4°" Phe Διό 19. i tins, place.” °°" It
follows that the Spirit is verily the place of the
saints and the saint is the proper place for
the Spirit, offering himself as he does for the
iftdwelling of God, and called God’s Temple."
So Paul speaks in Christ, saying ‘‘ In the
sight of God we speak in Christ,” '? and Christ
in Paal, as he nimself says ‘* Since ye seek a
proof of Christ speaking in me.” '* So also
in the Spirit he speaketh mysteries,’* and
again the Spirit speaks in him.”®


1 ἐν τοῖς γενητοῖς, as in the Bodleian MS. The Benedictine
text adopts the common reading γεννητοῖς, with the note, ** Sed
discrimen {μα parvi momenti.” If St. Basil wrote γεννητοῖς,
he used it in the looser sense of mortal: in its strict sense of
‘‘begotten” it would be singularly out of place here, as the
antithesis of the reference to the Son, who is γεννητός, would
be spoilt. In the terminology of theology, so far from being
“parvi momenti,” the distinction is vital. In the earlier
Greek philosophy ἀγένητος and ἀγέννητος are both used as
nearly synonymous to express unoriginate oreternal. ¢f. Plat.,
Phed.245 D., ἀρχὴ δὲ ἀγένητόν, with Plat , Tim. 52 A., Τούτων
δὲ οὕτως ἐχόντων ὁμολογητέον ἕν μὲν εἶναι τὸ κατὰ ταὐτὰ εἶδος
ἔχον ἀγέννητον καὶ ἀνώλεθρον, And the earliest patristic use
similarly meant by yevvytés and ἀγέννητος created and un-
created, as in Ign., Ad £/h. vii., where our Lord is called
γεννητὸς καὶ ἀγέννητος, ἐν avdpoTw Θεὸς, ἐν θανάτῳ ζωὴ ἀληθινή.
cf. Bp. Lightfoot’s note. But ‘such language is not in ac-
cordance with later theological definitions, which carefully
distinguished between γενητός and γεννητός, between ἀγένητος
and ἀγέννητος; so that γενητός, ἀγένητος, respectively denied
and affirmed the eternal existence, being equivalent to κτιστός,
ἄκτιστος, while γεννητός, ayévynres described certain ontologi-
cal relations, whether in time or in eternity. In the later
theological language, therefore, the Son was γεννυτός even in
His Godhead. See esp. Joann. Damasc., De Fid. Orth. i. (I.


p. 135, Lequien), χρὴ yap εἰδέναι ore τὸ ἀγένητον, διὰ τοῦ ἑνὺς ν


11 Cor. xii, 18, slightly varied in order. p εἰδέϊ 7 ) L τοὺ eV
5. Cor Xl. 25: 6 Ex. xxxiii. 21, LXX. | γραφόμενον, τὸ ἄκτιστον ἢ TO μὴ γενόμενον ONMALVEL, TO δὲ ἀγέννη-
δ Οὐ . Xil. 26, 7 Dent. xii. 13, 14- τον, διὰ τῶν δύο vy γραφόμενον» δηλοῖ τὸ μὴ γεννηθέν ; whence he


draws the conclusion that μόνος ὁ πατὴο ἀγέννητος and μόνος ὁ
υἱὸς γεννητός.᾽ Bp. Lightfoot, Ap. Fathers, Pt. 11. Vol. IT.
p- 90, where the history of the words is exhaustively discussed.
At the time of the Arian controversy the Catholic disputants
were chary of employing these terms, because of the base uses
to which their opponents put them; so St. Basil, Contra
Eunom. iv. protests against the Arian argument εἰ ayev-
νῆτος ὁ πατὴρ γεννητὺς δὲ ὁ υἱὸς, OV τῆς αὐτῆς οὐσιος. q

cf. Ath., De Syn. in this series, p. 475, and De Decretis, on
Newman’s confusion of the terms, p. 149 and 16g.

2. Ι 6 ὲ ἢ Te ὃ συμφνής.


4 An inversion of 1 Cor. xii. 13. 8 Ps, 1.14, LXX.

δα xxi. xX.

9John iv. 23. With this interpretation, cf. Athan., Ef/st. i.
Ad pee § 33, ‘* Hence it is shewn that the Truth is the Son
Himself”. . for they worship the Father, but in Spirit and
in Truth, confessing the Son and the Spirit in him; for the
Spirit is inseparable from the Son as the Son is inseparable
᾿ from the Father.”
10 Gen. xxviii. 16. 13 2 Cor. xiii. 3.
11; Cor. vi. 19. 14 1 Cor, XiV. 2.
12 2 Cor. ii. 17. 15 y Peter i. 11.


40
flows from Him operating on those who par-
ticipate in it, we say that the Spirit is zz us.
And the doxology which we offer ‘‘in the
Spirit” is not an acknowledgment of His
rank; it is rather a confession of our own
weakness, while we shew that we are not
sufficient to glorify Him of ourselves, but
our sufficiency ' is in the Holy Spirit. En-
abled in, [or by,] Him we render thanks to
our God for the benefits we have received,
according to the measure of our purification
from evil, as we receive one a larger and
another a smaller share of the aid of the
Spirit, that we may offer ‘‘the sacrifice of
praise to God.” ? According to one use, then,
it is thus that we offer our thanksgiving, as
the true religion requires, zz the Spirit;
although it is not quite unobjectionable that
any one should testify of himself ‘‘the Spirit
of God is in me, and I offer glory after being
made wise through the grace that flows from
Him.” For to a Paul it is becoming to say
‘¢T think also that I have the Spirit of God,” ὃ
and again, ** that good thing which was com-
mitted to thee keep by the Holy Ghost which
dwelleth in us.”* And of Daniel it is
fitting to say that ** the Holy Spirit of God
is in him,” ὃ and similarly of men who are
like these in virtue.

64. Another sense may however be given
to the phrase, that just as the Father is seen
in the Son, so is the Son in the Spirit. The
ἐς worship in the Spirit” suggests the idea
of the operation of our intelligence being
carried on in the light, as may be learned
from the words spoken to the woman of
Samaria. Deceived as she was by the cus-
toms of her country into the belief that wor-
ship was local, our Lord, with the object of
giving her better instruction, said that wor-
ship ought to be offered *¢in Spirit and in
Truth,”*® plainly meaning by the Truth,
Himself. As then we speak of the worship
offered in the Image of God the Father as
worship in the Son, so too do we speak of
worship in the Spirit as shewing in Himself
the Godhead of the Lord. Wherefore even
in our worship the Holy Spirit is inseparable
from the Father and the Son. If you re-
main outside the Spirit you will not be able
even to worship at all; and on your becom-
ing in Him you will in no wise be able to
dissever Him from God; —any more than
you will divorce light from visible objects.
For it is impossible to behold the Image of
the invisible God except by the enlighten-
ment of the Spirit, and impracticable for


i¢f..2 Cor, ili. 5.
2 Heb. xiii. 15.
8 1 Cor. Vil. 40.


42 Tim. i. 14.
5 Dan. iv. δ, xx.
6 John iv. 24.


ΒΆΘΗ;


him to fix his gaze on the Image to dissever
the light from the Image, because the cause
of vision is of necessity seen at the same
time as the visible objects. Thus fitly and
consistently do we behold the ‘* Brightness
of the glory ” of God by means of the illumi-
nation of the Spirit, and by means of the
‘¢ Express Image” we are led up to Him of
whoin He is the Express Image and Seal,
graven to the like.’


CHAPTER XXVIII,


Of the origin of the word “with,” and what
Jorce tt has. Also concerning the unwritten
laws of the church.


65. THE word ‘‘zz,” say our opponents,
‘Cis exactly appropriate to the Spirit, and
sufficient for every thought concerning Him.
Why then, they ask, have we introduced
this new phrase, saying, ‘‘ wztk the Spirit”
instead of “zz the Holy» “Spirit,” thas
employing an expression which is quite un-
necessary, and sanctioned by no usage in the
churches? Now it has been asserted in the
previous portion of this treatise that the word
‘¢ 72’ has not been specially allotted to the
Holy Spirit, but is common to the Father
and the Son. It has also been, in my opin-
ion, sufficiently demonstrated that, so far
from detracting anything from the dignity of
the Spirit, it leads all, but those whose
thoughts are wholly perverted, to the sub-
limest height. It remains for me to ‘1ace
the origin of the word ‘‘ wzth;” to explain
what force it has, and to shew that it is in
harmony with Scripture.

66. * Of the beliefs and practices whether


1¢cf.note on ὃ τς. So Athan. tz Matt, xi. 22. Σφραγὶς yap
ἐστιν ἰσότυπος ἐν ἑαυτῷ δεικνὺς Tov πατέρα. cf. Athan., De Dec.
§ 20, and note ο in this series, p. τό2. of. also Greg. Nyss., Zz
Eunom. ii. 12.

2‘he genuineness of this latter portion of the Treatise was
objected to by Erasmus on the ground that the style is unlike
that of Basil’s soberer writings. Bp. Jeremy Taylor follow
Erasmus (Vol. vi. ed. 1852, p. 427). It was vindicated Νὰ
Casaubon, who recalls St. John Damascene’s quotation of the
Thirty Chapters to Amphilochius. Mr.C.¥F. H. Johnston re-
marks, ** The later discovery of the Syriac Paraphrases of the
whole book pushes back this argument to about one hundred
years from the date of St. Basil’s writing. The peculiar care
taken by St. Basil for the writing out of the treatise, and for
its safe arrival in Amphilochius’ hands, and the value set upon
it by the friends of both, make the forgery of half the present
book, and the substitution of it for the original within that
period, almost incredible.’”? Section 66 is quoted as an author-
itative statement on the right use of Tradition ‘‘ as a guide to
the right understanding of Holy Scripture, for the right min-
istration of the Sacraments, and the preservation of sacred
rights and ceremonies in the purity of their original institu-
tion,” in Philaret’s Longer Catechism of the Eastern Church.

St. Basil is, however, strong on the supremacy of Holy
Scripture, as in the passages quoted in Bp. H. Browne, Ox the
wxxix Articles: ‘ Believe those things which are written;
the things which are not written seek not.” (Hom. «xix. adv. .
Calum. S. Trin.) ‘It isa manifest defection from the faith,
and a proof of arrogance, either to reject anything of what is
written, or to introduce anything that is not.” (De Fide. i.)
cf. also Letters CV. and CLIX. On the right use of Tradition
cf. Hooker, Ecc. Pol. \xv. 2, “ Lest, therefore, the name of
tradition should be offensive to any, considering how tar by


ON


THECSPIRIT,


41


generally accepted or publicly enjoined which
are preserved in the Church’ some we pos-
sess derived from written teaching; others
we have received delivered to us “ἴῃ a


some it hath been and is abused, we*mean by traditions ordi-
ances made in the prime of Christian Religion, established
with that authority which Christ hath left to His Church for
matters indifferent, and in that consideration requisite to be
observed, till like authority see just and reasonable cause to
alter them. So that traditions ecclesiastical are not rudely
and in gross to be shaken off, because the inventors of thein
were men.”’

cf. Tert., De Presc. 36, 20, 21, ** Constat omnem doctrinam
quecum illis ecclestts apostolicts matricibus et originalibus
fidet conspiret veritati deputandam, td sine dubto tenentem
quod ecclesia ab apostolis, apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo
accepit.’” Vide Thomasius, Christ. Dogm. i. 105.

1 «τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἐκκλησίᾳ πεφυλαγμένων δογμάτων καὶ κηρυγμά-
των." To give the apparent meaning of the original seems
impossible except by some such paraphrase as the above. In
Scripture δόγμα, which occurs five tines (Luke ii. 1, Acts xvi.
4, Xvii.7, Eph. ii. 15, and Col. ii. 14), always has its proper
sense of decree or ordinances. cf. Bp. Lightfoot, on Col. ii.
14, and his contention that the Greek Fathers generally have
mistaken the force of the passage in understanding ὁόγματα in
both Col. and Eph. to mean the doctrines and precepts of the
Gospel. Kypvyua occurs eight times (Matt. xii. q1, Luke xi.
22. hom. xvi. 25,1 Cor. 1.21; il. 4, xv. 14,2 Tim, iv. 17, and
Tit. i. 3), always in the sense of preaching or proclamation.

““The later Christian sense of δόγμα, meaning doctrine,
came from its secondary classical use, where it was applied to
the authoritative and categorical ‘sentences’ of the philoso-
phers: cf. Just. Mart., Apo/.i.7. οἱ ἐν Βλλησι τὰ αὐτοῖς ἀρεστὰ
ὁογματίσαντες ἐκ παντὸς τῷ ενὶ ὀνόματι φιλοσοφίας προσαγορεύ-
οντα, καίπερ των δογμάτων ἐναντίων ὄντων.᾽" [All the sects in
general among the Greeks are known by the common name of
philosophy, though their doctrines are.different.] Cic., Acad.
li. 19, ‘De suis decretis que philosopht vocant δόγματα. 2. .
There is an approach towards the ecclesiastical meaning in
Ignat., Mag. 13, βεβαιωϑῆσαι ἐν τοῖς δόγμασι τοῦ κυρίου καὶ τῶν
ἀποστόλων." Bp. Lightfoot in Col. ii.14. The ‘doctrines ”
of heretics are also called δόγματα, as in Basil, Ff. CCLX/. and
Socr., £. H. iii. 10. cf. Bp. Bull, 7” Serm., 2, “The dogmata or
tenets of the Sadducees.” In Orig., c. Cels. iii. p. 135, Ed.
pent 1658, δόγμα is used of the gospel or teaching of our
Lord.

The special point about St. Basil’s use of δόγματα is that
he uses the word of doctrines and practices privately and
tacitly sanctioned in the Church (like ἀπόρρητα, which is used
of the esoteric doctrine of the Pythagoreans, Plat., Phed. 62.
B.), while he reserves κηρύγματα for what is now often under-
stood py δόγματα, 1.6, ““ legitima synodo decreta.”’ cf. Ep.
LIT., where he speaks of the great κήρυγμα of the Fathers at
Nicea. In this he is supported by Eulogius, Patriarch of
Alexandria, 579-607, of whom Photius (Cod. ccxxx. Migne
Pat. Gr. ciii. p. 1027) writes, ‘In this work,” 7.e. Or. II. “he
says that of the doctrines (διδαγμάτων) handed down in the
church by the ministers of the word, some are δόγματα, and
others κηρύγματα. The distinction is that δόγματα are an-
nounced with concealment and prudence, and are often de-
signedly compassed with obscurity, in order that holy things
may not be exposed to profane persons nor pearls cast before
swine. Kypvyuara, on the other hand, are announced without
any concealment.’? So the Benedictine Editors speak of Origen
(c. Cels. i. 7) as replying to Celsus, *‘predicationem Chris-
tianorum tot orbit notiorem esse quam placita philosophorum:
sed tamen fatetur, ut apud philosophos, ita etiam apud Chris-
tranos nonulla esse veluti intertora, que post exteriorem et
propositam omnibus doctrinam tradantur.”’ OF κηρύγματα
they note, “ Videntur hoc nomine destgnari leges ecclestastice
et canonum decreta que promulgart tn ecclesia mos erat, ut
neminem laterent.’? Mr. C. F.H. Johnston remarks: ** The
ὁμγούσιον, which many now-a-days would call the Nicene
dogma (τὰ Tov ὁμοουσίου δόγματα, Soc., E. H.iii. 10) because it
was put forth in the Council of Nicwea, was for that reason
called not δόγμα, but κήρυγμα, by St. Basil, who would have
said that it became the κήουγμα (definition) of that Coancil,
because it had alwavs been the δόγμα of the Church.”

In extra theological philosophy a dogma has all along
meant a certainly expressed opinion whether formally decreed
or not. So Shaftesbury, Misc. Ref. ii. 2, “" He who is certain,
or presumes to say he knows, is in that particular, whether he
be mistaken or in the right, a dogmatist.”’ cf. Littré, S. V. fora
similar usein French. In theology the modern Roman limita-
tion of dogma to decreed doctrine is illustrated by the state-
ment of Abbé Bérgier (Dict. de Théol. Ed. 1844) of the
Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin. “Or, nous
convenons que ce nest pas un dogme de fot,” because, though
a common opinion among Romanists, it had not been so as-
serted at the Council of Trent. Since the publication of Pius
IX’s Edict of 1854 it has become, to ultramontanists, a
*“ dogma of faith.”


mystery ”" by the tradition of the apostles;
and both of these in relation to true religion
have the same force. And these no one
will gainsay ; —no one, at all events, who is
even moderately versed in the institutions of
the Church. For were we to attempt to re-
ject such customs as have no written author-
ity, on the ground that the importance they
possess is small, we should unintentionally
injure the Gospel in its very vitals ; or, rather,
should make our public definition a mere
phrase and nothing more.* For instance,
to take the first and most general example,
who is there who has taught us in writing
to sign with the sign of the cross those who
have trusted in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ? What writing has taught us to
turn to the East at the prayer? Which of
the saints has left us in writing the words
of the invocation at the displaying? of the
bread of the Eucharist and the cup of bless-
ing? For we are not, as is well known,
content with what the apostle or the Gospel
has recorded, but both in preface and con-
clusion we add other words as being of great
importance to the validity of the ministry,
and these we derive from unwritten teaching.


11 Cor. ii. 7, Whether there is or is not here a conscious
reference to St. Paul’s words, there seems to be both in the
text and in the passage cited an employment of μυστήριον in
its proper sense of a secret revealed to the initiated.

2 2.6. if nothing were of weight but what was written, what
need of any authorisation at all? There is no need of κήρυγμα
for a δόγμα expressly written in Scripture.

ὃ ἐπὶ τῇ ἀναδείξει. The Benedictine note is: * Non respictt
Bastlius ad ritum ostenstonts Eucharistie, ut multi extsti-
marunt, sed potius ad verba Liturgie ipst ascripte, cum petit
sacerdos, ut veniat Spiritus sanctus ἁγιάσαι καὶ ἀναδεῖξαι Tov
μὲν ἄρτον τοῦτον αὐτὸ TO τίμιον σῶμα τοῦ κυρίου. Haec autem
verba ἐπὶ τῇ ἀναδειξει, sic reddit Erasmus, cum ostenditur.
Vituperat eum Duceus, sicqgue tpse vertit, cum conficitur,
atque hanc tnterpretationem multts BIC confirmat. Vide-
tur tamen nihil prorsus vitit habitura haec tnterpretatio, In-
vocationis verba cum ostenditur panis Eucharistiz, /d est, cum
panis non jam panis est, sed pants Eucharistia, sive corpus
Christt ostenditur; et tn liturgia, ut sanctificet et ostendat
hunc quidem panem, ipsum pretiosum corpus Domini. Mam
10 Cur eam vocem reformidemus, qua Latini uti non dubitant,
ubt de Eucharistia toguuntur? Quale est illud Cypriani in
epistola 63 ad Cectlium: Vino Christi sanguis ostenditur.
Ste ettam Tertullianus 1, Marc. c. 14: Panem quo ipsum
corpus Suum representat 20 Ut Gre@ce. ἀναδεῖξαι, ἀποφαίνειν,
ita etiam Latine, ostendere, corpus Christ? presens in Eu-
charistia significatione quodam modo exprimit. Hoc enim
verbum non solum panem fiert corpus Domini significat, sed
etiam fidem nostram excitat, ut illud corpus sub specie pants
videndum, tegendum, adorandum ostendi credamus. eae
admodum Ireneus, cum att lib. iv. cap. 33: Accipiens panem
suum corpus esse confitebatur, et temperamentum calicis
suum sanguinem conformavit, zon solum mutationem pants et
vint tn corpus et sanguinem Christ? exprimit, sed ipsam etiam
Christ? asseverationem, que hanc nobis mutationem persuadet:
ste gut corpus Christi in Eucharistia ostendi et representari
dicunt, non modo jejuno et exiliter logut non videntur, sed
etiam acriores Christi presentis adorandi stimulos subjicere.
Poterat ergo retinert interpretatio Erasmi; sed guia viris
eruditis displicuit, satius visum est guid sentirem in hac
nota exponere.”’

This view of the meaning of ἀναδείκνυσθαι and avdderé's as
being equivalent to ποιεῖν and ποίησις is borne out and illus-
trated by Suicer, S.V.“ Exhisjam satis liquerearbitror ἀναδει-
Eu apud Basilium td esse quod altt Greci patres dicunt ποιεῖν
vel ἀποφαίνειν σῶμα χριστοῦ."

It is somewhat curious to find Bellarmine (De Sacyv. Euch.
iv. ὃ 14) interpreting the prayer to God εὐλογῆσαι καὶ ἁγιάσ'ι
kat ἀναδεῖξαι to mean ‘‘ostende per effectum salutarem in
mentibus nostris tstum panem salutificatum non esse panem
vulgarem sed celestem.’


BASIL


enc ga ee a ey ee ee


Moreover we bless the water of baptism and
the oil of the chrism, and besides this the
catechumen who is being baptized. On
what written authority do we do this? Is
not our authority silentand mystical tradi-
tion? Nay, by what written word is the
anointing of oil’ itself taught? And whence
comes the custom of baptizing thrice?*? And
as to the other customs of baptism from
what Scripture do we derive the renuncia-
tion of Satan and his angels? Does not this
come from that unpublished and _ secret
teaching which our fathers guarded in a
silence out of the reach of curious meddling
and inquisitive investigation? Well had they
learnt the lesson that the awful dignity of
the mysteries is best preserved by silence.
What the uninitiated are not even allowed
to look at was hardly likely to be publicly
paraded about in written documents. What
was the meaning of the mighty Moses in
not making all the parts of the tabernacle
open toevery one? ‘The profane he stationed
without the sacred barriers; the first courts
he conceded to the purer; the Levites alone
he judged worthy of being servants of the
Deity; sacrifices and burnt offerings and the
rest of the priestly functions he allotted to
the priests ; one chosen out of all he admitted
to the shrine, and even this one not always
but on only one day in the year, and of this
one day a time was fixed for his entry so
that he might gaze on the Holy of Holies
amazed at the strangeness and novelty of
the sight. Moses was wise enough to know
that contempt attaches to the trite and to
the obvious, while a keen interest is natu-
rally associated with the unusual and the
unfamiliar. Inthe same manner the Apos-
tles and Fathers who laid down laws for the
Church from the beginning thus guarded
the awful dignity of the mysteries in secrecy
and silence, for what is bruited abroad at
random among the common folk is no mys-
tery at all. This is the’reason for our tra-
dition of unwritten precepts and practices,
that the knowledge of our dogmas may not
become neglected and contemned by the
multitude through familiarity. ‘* Dogma”
and ‘‘ Kerugma”, are two distinct things;
the former is observed in silence; the latter
is proclaimed to all the world. One form of
this silence is the obscurity employed in
Scripture, which makes the meaning of
**dogmas ” difficult to be understood for
the baptized, Tertullian, De Bat. vii.; of the confirmed, 7d.
viii.; of the sick v#de Plumptre on St. James v. 14, in Cam-
bridge Bible for Schools. cf. Letter clxxxviii.

2 For trine immersion an early authority is Tertullian, c.


Praxeam xxvi. cf. Greg. Nyss., De Baft. ὕδατι ἑαυτοὺς ἐγκρύπ-
TOMEV « » « Καὶ τρίτον τοῦτο ποιήσαντες. Dict. Ch. Ant.i. 161.


the very advantage of the reader: Thus
we all look to the East! at our prayers, but
few of us know that we are seeking our
own old country,’ Paradise, which God
planted in Eden in the East.* We pray
standing,* on the first day of the week, but
we do not all know the reason. On the day of
the resurrection (or “ standing again” Grk.
ἀνάστασις) We remind ourselves of the grace
given to us by standing at prayer, not
only because we rose with Christ,° and are
bound to ‘*seek those things which are
above,” “ but because the day seems to us to be
in some sense an image of the age which we
expect, wherefore, though it is the beginning
of days, it is not called by Moses γε, but
one.’ For he says ‘*There was evening,
and there was morning, one day,” as though
the same day often recurred. Now ‘ one”
and ‘* eighth” are the same, in itself dis-
tinctly indicating that really ‘*one” and
‘‘eichth” of which the Psalmist makes
mention in certain titles of the Psalms, the
state which follows after this present time,
the day which knows no waning or eventide,
and no successor, that age which endeth
not or groweth οἱ. Of necessity, then,
the church teaches her own foster children
to offer their prayers on that day standing, to
the end that through continual reminder of
the endless life we may not neglect to make
provision for our removal thither. More-
over all Pentecost is a reminder of the resur-
rection expected in the age to come. For
that one and first day, if seven times
multiplied by seven, completes the seven
weeks of the holy Pentecost; for, beginning
at the first, Pentecost ends with the same,
making fifty revolutions through the like
intervening days. And so it is a likeness of
eternity, beginning as it does and ending, as
in a circling course, at the same point. On
this day the rules of the church have edu-
cated us to prefer the upright attitude of
prayer, for by their plain reminder they, as
it were, make our mind to dwell no longer
in the present but in the f.iture. Moreover
every time we fall upon our knees and rise


1¢f. my note on Theodoret in this series, p. 112.

2bMeb. xi. 14, ΝΘ. 3 Gen. ii. 8.

4The earliest posture of prayer was standing, with the
hands extended and raised towards heaven, and with the face


| turned to the East. cf. early art, and specially the figures of


‘‘oranti.” Their rich dress indicates less their actual station
in this life than the expected felicity of Paradise. Vide, Dict.
Christ, Ant. ii. 1684.

5 ** Stood again with”? ---συναναστάντες.

8 Col. lia.

7Gen.i.s. Heb. LXX. Vulg. R.V. cf. p. 64.

8 Vide Titles to Pss. vi. and xii.in A.V. ‘upon Sheminith,”
marg. ‘‘the eighth.” LXX. ὑπὲρ τῆς ὀγδόης. Vulg. pro octava.
On various explanations of the Hebrew word vide Dict. Bib.
S. V. where Dr. Aldis Wright inclines to the view thatitis a
tune or key, and that the Hebrews were not acquainted witna
the octave,


ON


PH “SPIRIT,


43


from off them we shew by the very deed
that by our sin we fell down to earth, and
by the loving kindness of our Creator were
called back to heaven.

67. Time will fail me if I attempt to re-
count the unwritten mysteries of the Church.
Of the rest I say nothing; but of the very
confession of our faith in Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, what is the written source? If
it be granted that, as we are baptized, so
also under the obligation to believe, we make
our confession in like terms as our baptism,
in accordance with the tradition of our bap-
tism and in conformity with the principles
of true religion, let our opponents grant us
too the right to be as consistent in our ascrip-
tion of glory as in our confession of faith.
If they deprecate our doxology on the ground
that it lacks written authority, let them give
us the written evidence for the confession
of our faith and the other matters which we
have enumerated. While the unwritten
traditions are so many, and their bearing
on ‘‘ the mystery of godliness’ is so impor-
tant, can they refuse to allow us a single
word which has come down to us from the
Fathers; — which we found, derived from
untutored custom, abiding in unperverted
churches ; —a word for which the arguments
are strong, and which contributes in no
small degree to the completeness of the force
of the mystery?

68. The force of both expressions has
now been explained. I will proceed to state
once more wherein they agree and wherein
they differ from one another ; — not that they
are opposed in mutual antagonism, but that
each contributes its own meaning to true
religion. The preposition ‘* zz” states the
truth rather relatively to ourselves; while
‘¢ wth’ proclaims the fellowship of the Spirit
with God. Wherefore we use both words, by
the one expressing the dignity of the Spirit ;
by the other announcing the grace that is
withus. Thus we ascribe glory to God both
‘¢in” the Spirit, and ‘¢ with” the Spirit ; and
herein it is not our word that we use, but we
follow the teaching of the Lord as we might
a fixed rule, and transfer His word to things
connected and closely related, and of which
the conjunction in the mysteries is necessary.
We have deemed ourselves under a neces-
sary obligation to combine in our confession
of the faith Him who is numbered with Them
at Baptism, and we have treated the confes-
sion of the faith as the origin and parent of
the doxology. What, then, is to be done?
They must now instruct us either not to


11 Tim. iii, 16,


baptize as we have received, or not to believe

as we were baptized, or not to ascribe glory

as we have believed. Let any man prove

if he can that the relation of sequence in

these acts is not necessary and unbroken; _
or let any man deny if he can that innova-

tion here must mean ruin everywhere.

Yet they never stop dinning in our ears that

the ascription of glory ‘“‘wzth” the Holy

Spirit is unauthorized and unscriptural and

the like. We have stated that so far as the

sense goes it is the same to say *‘ glory be to

the Father and to the Son and to the Holy

Ghost,” and glory be to the Father and to

the Son wzth the Holy Ghost.” It is im-

possible for any one to reject or cancel the

syllable ‘and,’ which is derived from the
very words of our Lord, and there is nothing
to hinder the acceptance of its equivalent.

What amount of difference and similarity
there is between the two we have already
shewn. And our argument is confirmed by
the fact that the Apostle uses either word
indifferently, — saying at one time ‘in the
name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of
our God;’’' at another ‘* when ye are gathered
together, and my Spirit, with the power of
our Lord Jesus,” ? with no idea that it makes
any difference to the connexion of the
names whether he use the conjunction or
the preposition.


CHAPTER: SXVUOL,


That our opponents refuse to concede in the
case of the Spirit the terms which Scripture
uses in the case of men, as reigning together
with Christ.


69. Bur let us see if we can bethink us
of any defence of this usage of our fathers;
for they who first originated the expression
are more open to blame than we ourselves.
Paul in his Letter to the Colossians says,
‘¢ And you, being dead in your sins and the
uncircumcision . . . hath He quickened
together with” * Christ. Did then God give
to a whole people and to the Church the boon
of the life with Christ, and yet the life with
Christ does not belong to the Holy Spirit?
But if this is impious even to think of, is it
not rightly reverent so to make our confes-
sion, as They are by nature in close con-
junction? Furthermore what boundless lack
of sensibility does it not shew in these men
to confess that the Saints are with Christ, (if,
as we know is the case, Paul, on becoming
absent from the body, is present with the


1 y Cor. Vi. It.


3 Col. ii, 13.
31 Cor. v. 4. ;


44


BASIL


Lord,! and, after departing, is with Christ ἢ)
and, so far as lies in their power, to refuse to
allow to the Spirit to be with Christ even to
the same extent as men? And Paul calls him-
self a ‘* labourer together with God” ® in the
dispensation of the Gospel; will they bring
an indictment for impiety against us, if we
apply the term ‘‘fellow-labourer” to the
Holy Spirit, through whom in every creature
under heaven the Gospel bringeth forth
fruit?* The life of them that have trusted in
the Lord ‘¢ is hidden,” it would seem, ‘* with
Christ in God, and when Christ, who is our
life, shall appear, then shall” they themselves
also “ὁ appear with Him in glory;”° and is
the Spirit of life Himself, ‘* Who made us
free from the law of sin,” ® not with Christ,
both in the secret and hidden life with Him,
and in the manifestation of the glory which
we expect to be manifested in the saints?
We are ‘heirs of God and joint heirs with
Christ,” 7 and is the Spirit without part or lot
in the fellowship of God and of His Christ?
ςς The Spirit itself beareth witness with our
spirit that we are the children of God;’’®
and are we not to allow to the Spirit even
that testimony of His fellowship with God
which we have learnt from the Lord? For
the height of folly is reached if we through
the faith in Christ which is in the Spirit ®
hope that we shall be raised together with
Him and sit together in heavenly places,’
whenever He shall change our vile body
from the natural to the spiritual,’ and yet
refuse to assign to the Spirit any share in the
sitting together, or in the glory, or anything
else which we have received from Him. Of
all the boons of which, in accordance with
the indefeasible grant of Him who has prom-
ised them, we have believed ourselves worthy,
are we to allow none to the Holy Spirit, as
though they were all above His dignity? It
is yours according to your merit to be ** ever
with the Lord,” and you expect to be caught
up ““ in the clouds to meet the Lord in the
air and to be ever with the Lord.” You
declare the man who numbers and ranks the
Spirit with the Father and the Son to be
guilty of intolerable impiety. Can you really
now deny that the Spirit is with Christ?

70. Iam ashamed to add the rest. You
expect to be glorified together with Christ ;
(‘* if so be that we suffer with him that we
may be also glorified together ;”'*) but you


4 cf. Col. i. 6.


Weg AO Chet ae act

Defoe Wis is 22. 5 Col, iii. 3,4.

RC or, jit 9, 6 Rom. viii. 2.

8 Rom. vili. 16,17. In this passage A.V. follows the neuter
of the Greek original. R.V. has substituted himself.” cf.
note on p. 15.

‘Cf, Gal. y. 5. 10 cf, Eph. ii. 6.

11 cf, Phil. iii. 21, and 1 Cor. xv. 44.

42 5 Thess. iv. 17. 13 Rom. viii. 17.


7 Rom. viii. 17.


do not glorify the ‘‘ Spirit of holiness”! to-
gether with Christ, as though He were not
worthy to receive equal honour even with
you. You hope to ‘reign with” * Christ;
but you ‘* do despite unto the Spirit of grace” ὅ
by assigning Him the rank of a slave and a
subordinate. And I say this not to demon-
strate that so much is due to the Spirit in the
ascription of glory, but to prove the unfair-
ness of those who will not ever give so much
as this, and shrink from the fellowship of the
Spirit with Son and Father as from impiety.
Who could touch on these things without a
sigh?* Is it not so plain as to be within the
perception even of a child that this present
state of things preludes the threatened eclipse
of the faith? The undeniable has become
the uncertain. We profess belief in the
Spirit, and then we quarrel with our own
confessions. We are baptized, and begin to
fight again. We call upon Him as the
Prince of Life, and then despise Him as a
slave like ourselves. We received Him with
the Father and the Son, and we dishonour
Him as a part of creation. Those who
‘¢know not what they ought to pray for,” ®
even though they be induced to utter a word
of the Spirit with awe, as though coming
near His dignity, yet prune down all that
exceeds the exact proportion of their speech.
They ought rather to bewail their weakness,
in that we are powerless to express in words
our gratitude for the benefits which we are
actually receiving ; for He ‘ passes all under-
standing,” © and convicts speech of its natural
inability even to approach His dignity in the
least degree; as it is written in the Book of
Wisdom,’ **Exalt Him as much as you
can, for even yet will He far exceed; and
when you exalt Him put forth all your
strength, and be not weary, for you can
never go far enough.” Verily terrible is the
account to be given for words of this kind
by you who have heard from God who can-
not lie that for blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost there is no forgiveness.*


CHAPTER XXIX.


Enumeration of the tlustrious men in the
Church who in their writings have used the
word “ with.”

71. In answer to the objection that the dox-


ology in the form “ with the Spirit” has no
written authority, we maintain that if there is


3 Heb. x. 20.


2 2 AM, ens ς
. . cemperet a lacry-


1 Rom. i. 4.

4 cf. Verg., in. ii. Quis talia fando .

mis ?
5 Rom. viii. 26. 6 Phil. iv. 7. a
7 7.6. of Jesus the Son of Sirach, or Ecclus. xliii. 30.
8 Luke xii, 10.


ON “THE


ar LIT: 45


no other instance of that which is unwritten,
then this must not be received. But if the
greater number of our mysteries are admitted
into our constitution without written author-
ity, then, in company with the many others,
ἴεν isn recenver this;one. For 1. παῖδ τη
apostolic to abide also by the unwritten
traditions. ‘‘I praise you,’’ it is ‘said; ** that
ye remember me in all things, and keep the
ordinances as I delivered them to you;”
and ‘** Hold fast the traditions which ye
have been taught whether by word, or
our Epistle.”’? One of these traditions is
the practice which is now before us, which
they who ordained from the beginning,
rooted firmly in the churches, delivering it
to their successors, and its use through long
custom advances pace by pace with time.
If, as in a Court of Law, we were at a loss
for documentary evidence, but were able to
bring before you a large number of witnesses,
would you not give your vote for our ac-
quittal? I think so; for “ at the mouth of
two or three witnesses shall the matter be
established.”* And if we could prove
clearly to you that a long period of time was
in our favour, should we not have seemed to
you to urge with reason that this suit ought
not to be brought into court against us? For
ancient dogmas inspire a certain sense of
awe, venerable as they are with a hoary an-
tiquity. I will therefore give you a list of
the supporters of the word (and the time too
must be taken into account in relation to
what passes unquestioned). For it did not
originate with us. How could it? We, in
comparison with the time during which this
word has been in vogue, are, to use the words
of Job). '* but of yesterday.* -I myself, 1{1
must speak of what concerns me individually,
cherish this phrase as a legacy left me by my
fathers. It was delivered to me by one®
-who spent a long life in the service of God,
and by him I was both baptized, and admitted
to the ministry of the church. While ex-
amining, so far as I could, if any of the blessed
men of old used the words to which objection
is now made, I found many worthy of credit
both on account of their early date, and also —
a characteristic in which they are unlike the
men of to-day — because of the exactness of
their knowledge. Of these some coupled the
word in the doxology by the preposition,
others by the conjunction, but were in no
case supposed to be acting divergently, — at

22 Thess. 1i..15. 4 Job viii. 9.

5 1.e. Dianius, bp. of the Cappadoci in Czsarea, who baptized
St. Basil c. 357 on his return from Athens, and ordained him
Reader. He was a waverer, and siened the creed of Ariminum


in 359; Basil consequently left him, but speaks reverentially
of himin Ep. 51.


least so far as the right sense of true religion
is concerned.

2. There is the famous Irenzus,! and
Clement of Rome ;’ Dionysius of Rome,’ and,
strange to say, Dionysius of Alexandria,
in his second Letter to his namesake, on
‘sConviction and Defence,” so concludes.
I will give you his very words. ‘‘ Follow-
ing all these, we, too, since we have re-
ceived from the presbyters who were before
us a form and rule, offering thanksgiving in
the same terms with them, thus conclude our
Letter to you. To God the Father and the
Son our Lord Jesus Christ, with the Holy
Ghost, glory and might for ever and ever;
amen.” And no one can say that this pas-
sage has been altered. He would not have
so persistently stated that he had received a
form and rule if he had said * ¢z the Spirit.”
For of this phrase the use is abundant: it
was the use of ‘‘ wzth”’ which requifed de-
fence. Dionysius moreover in the middle
of his treatise thus writes in opposition to the
Sabellians, ** If by the hypostases being three
they say that they are divided, there are
three, though they like it not. Else let them
destroy the divine Trinity altogether.” And
again: **most divine on this account after
the Unity is the Trinity.” * Clement, in more
primitive fashion, writes, ** God lives, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy
Ghost.” ® And now let us hear how Irenzus,
who lived near the times of the Apostles,
mentions the Spirit in his work ‘ Against
the Heresies.” ® ‘*The Apostle rightly calls
carnal them that are unbridled and carried
away to their own desires, having no desire for
the Holy Spirit,” 7 and in another passage
Ireneus says, ** The Apostle exclaimed that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom
of the heavens lest we, being without share
in the divine Spirit, fall short of the king-
dom of the heavens.” If any one thinks
Eusebius of Palestine ° worthy of credit on


if ic. 200. 2+ 100. 3 t 260.

#Dionysius was Patriarch of Alexandria A.D. 247-265.
Basil’s ‘strange to say”? is of a piece with the view of
Dionysius’ heretical tendencies expressed in Letter ix. g.v.
Athanasius, however, (De Sent. Dionysi’) was satisfied as to
the orthodoxy of his predecessor. Bp. Westcott (Lyct. C.
Birog. i. 851) quotes Lumper (/iist. Pat. xii. 86) as supposing
that Basil’s charge against Dionysius of sowing the seeds of
the Anomeean heresy was due to imperfect acquaintance with
his writings. In Letter clxxxviii. Basil calls him ‘the
Great,” which implies general approval.

5Clem. Rom., £p.ad Cor. lviii. Bp. Lightfoot’s Ap.
Fathers, Pt. 1. ii. 169.

6 lrenzus is near the Apostles in close connexion, as well
as in time, through his personal knowledge of Polycarp. Vide
his Ep to Florinus quoted in Euseb., Ecc. Hist. v.20. Inhis
work On the Ogdoad, quoted in the same chapter, Irenzus says
of himselt that he τὴν πρωτὴν τῶν ᾿Αποστολῶν κατειληφέναι τὴν
διαδοχήν “πα himself had the nearest succession of the
Apostles.”’

7 The reference is presumably to 1 Cor. ii. 11 and iii. 1.

8 2.6. Eusebius of Czsarea, the historian, so called to dis-
tinguish him from his namesake of Nicomedia. cf. Theodo-
ret, Ecc. Hist. 1.1. The workis not extant. It may be that


46


BASIL


account of his wide experience, I point
further to the very words he uses in discuss-
ing questions concerning the polygamy of
the ancients. Stirring up himself to his
work, he writes ‘¢ invoking the holy God of
the Prophets, the Author of light, through our
Saviour Jesus Christ, with the Holy Spirit.”

. Origen, too, in many of his exposi-
tions of the Psalms, we find using the form
of doxology “" with the Holy Ghost. The
opinions which he held concerning the
Spirit were not always and everywhere
sound; nevertheless in many passages even
he himself reverently recognises the force
of established usage, and expresses him-
self concerning the Spirit in terms consist-
ent with true religion. It is, if I am not
mistaken, in the Sixth’ Book of his Com-
mentary on the Gospel of St. john that he
distinctly makes the Spirit an object of wor-
ship. ᾿ His words are: — *¢ The washing of
water is a symbol of the cleaning of the soul
which is washed clean of all filth that comes
of wickedness; ” but none the less is it also by
itself, to him who yields himself to the God-
head of the adorable Trinity, through the
power of the invocations, the origin and
source of blessings.” And again, in his 2) χ-
position of the Epistle to the Romans ‘‘the


holy powers,” he says *‘ are able to receive the


Only-begotten, and the Gcdhead of the Holy
Spirit.” Thus I apprehend, the powerful
influence of tradition’ frequently impels the
men to express themselves in terms contra-
dictory to their own opinions. Moreover
this form of the doxology was not unknown


mentioned by Eusebius in his Prep. Evang. vii. 8, 20 under the
title of περὶ τῆς τῶν παλαιῶν ἀνδρῶν πολυπαιδίας.

τ The quotation is from the Lighth Book.

RiGee beh. litt.

8 As to Origen’s unorthodoxy concerning the Holy Spirit
St. Basil may have had in his mind such a passage as the
following from the First Book of the De Principiis, extant in
the origiral in Justinian, 9. αα Mennam. Migne, Pat. Gr.
Xi. Pp. 150. ὅτι ὃ μὲν θεὸς καὶ πατὴρ συνέχων TA πάντα φθάνει εἰς
εκαστον τῶν ὄντων μεταδιδοὺς ἑκάστῳ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἰδίου τὸ εἶναι " BV
γὰρ ἔστιν" ἐλάττων δὲ παρὰ τὸν πατέρα ὃ Ὑἱὸς φθάνει ἐπὶ μόνα τὰ
λογικά" δεύτερος γάρ ἐστι τοῦ πατρός" ἔτι δὲ ἧττον τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ
ἅγιον ἐπὶ μόνους τοὺς ἁγίους διικνούμενον " ὥστε κατὰ τοῦτο μείζων
ἡ δύναμις τοῦ ἸΤατρὸς παρὰ. τὸν Υἱὸν καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον πλείων
δὲ ἡ τοῦ Υἱοῦ παρὰ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον. The work does not even
exist as a whole in the translation of Rufinus, who ‘omitted
portions, and St. Jerome thought that Rufinus had misrepre-
sented it. Photius (B7b/roth. cod. viii.) says that Origen, in
asserting in this work that the Son was made by the Father,
and the Spirit by the Son, is most blasphemous. Bp. Harold
Browne, however (Exposition of the xxxix. Art. p. 113,n. 1),
is of opinion that if Rufinus fairly translated the following
passage, Origen cannot have been fairly charged with heresy
concerning the Holy Ghost: “ Ne guts sane existimet nos ex
eo quod diximus Spiritum sanctum solis sanctis prestart.
Patris vero et ΕἾ τὶ beneficta vel inoperationes perveniré ad
bonos et malos, justos et injustos, pretulisse per hoc Patri et
Filto Spiritum Sanctum, vel majorem ejus per hoc asserere
dignitatem; quod utique valde inconsequens est. Proprieta-
tem namque grati@ ejus operisque descripsimus. Porro autem
nihil in Trinitate majus minusve dicendum est, quum unius
Divinitatis Fons verbo ac ratione sua teneat universa, Spiritu
vero oris sui que digna sunt, sanctificatione sanctificet, sicut
in Psalmo scriptum est verbo domini cceli firmati sunt et
Spiritu oris ejus omnis virtus eorum.’”? De Princ.1. iii. 7.

On the ohliestions of both Basil and Gregory of Nazianzus
to Origen, cf. Socrates iv. 26.


even to Africanus the historian. In the
Fifth Book of his Epctome of the Times he
says ‘*we who know the weight of those
terms, and are not ignorant of the grace of
faith, render thanks to the Father, who be-
stowed on us His own creatures, Jesus
Christ, the Saviour of the world and our
Lord, to whom be glory and majesty with
the Holy Ghost, for ever.”! The rest of
the passages may peradventure be viewed
with suspicion; or may really have been
altered, and the fact of their having been tam-
pered with will be difficult to detect because
the difference consists in a single syllable.
Those however which I have quoted at
length are out of the reach of any dishonest
manipulation, and can easily be verified from
the actual works.

I will now adduce another piece of evi-
dence which might perhaps seem _insignifi-
cant, but because of its antiquity must in no-
wise be omitted by adefendant who is indicted
on acharge of innovation. It seemed fitting
to our fathers not to receive the gift of the
light at eventide in silence, but, on its appear-
ing, immediately to give thanks. Who was
the author of these words of thanksgiving at
the lighting of the lamps, we are not able to
say. ‘The people, however, utter the ancient
form, and no one has ever reckoned guilty of
impiety those who say ‘* We praise Father,
Son, and God’s Holy Spirit.” And if any
one knowsthe Hymnof Athenogenes,’ which,
as he was hurrying on to his perfecting by
fire, he left asa kind of farewell gift* to his
friends, he knows the mind of the martyrs as
to the Spirit. Onthis head I shali say no more.

74. But where shall I rank the great
Gregory,’ and the words uttered by him?
Shall we not place among Apostles and


1 Of the chief writings of Julius Africanus (called Sextus
Africanus by Suidas), who wrote at Emmaus and Alexandria
c. 220, only fragments remain. A Letter to Origen is com-
plete. His principal work was a Chronicon from the Creation
to A.D. 221, in Five Books. Of this Dr. Salmon (D.C.B. i. 56)
thinks the doxology quoted by Basil was the conclusion, —

2 Ps. cxli. was called ὃ ἐπιλύχνιος ψαλμός (AP, Const. vill.
35). Inthe Vespers of the Eastern Church an evening hymn
is sung, translated in D.C.A. i. 634, gy yes Light of the holy
glory of the immortal Father, the heavenly, the holy, the
blessed Jesus Christ, we having come to the setting of the Sun
and beholding the evening light, praise God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. It is meet at all times that thou_shouldest be
hymned with auspicious voices, Son of God, Giver of Life:
wherefore the world glorifieth thee.” oy

8 Identified by some with two early hymns, Δόξα ἐν ὑψίστοις,
and Φῶς tAaoov.

4 The MSS. vary between ἐξιτήριον and ἀλεξιτήριον, farewell
gift and amulet or charm. In 2. cciii. 299 Basil says that our
Lord gave His disciples peace as an ἐξιτήριον δῶρον, using the
word, but in conjunction with δῶρον. Greg. Naz., Orat. xiv.
223 speaks of our Lord leaving peace “ὥσπερ ἄλλο τι ἐξιτή-

tov.”

Ae i.e. Gregory, bishop of Neocesarea, known as Gregorius
Thaumaturgus, or Gregory the Wonder-worker. To the mod-
ern reader ‘* Gregory the Great’? more naturally suggests
Gregory of Nazianzus, but this he hardly was to his friend
and contemporary, though the title had accrued to him by the
time of the accepted Ephesine Council in 431 (vzde Labbe,
vol. iv. p. 1192) Gregory the Wonder-worker, 7 c. 270.


ON THE SPIRIT:


47


Prophets a man who walked by the same
Spirit as they;’ who never through all his
days diverged from the footprints of the
saints; who maintained, as long as he lived,
the exact principles of evangelical citizen-
ship? [Iam sure that we shall do the truth
a wrong if we refuse to number that soul
with the people of God, shining as it did
like a beacon in the Church of God; for by the
fellow-working of the Spirit the power which
he had over demons was tremendous, and
so gifted was he with the grace of the word
ον yoledience:to the. faith among, aii. eas
the nations,”® that, although only seven-
teen Christians were handed over to him, he
brought the whole people alike in town and
country through knowledge to God. He too
by Christ’s mighty name commanded even
rivers to change their course,® and caused a
lake, which afforded a ground of quarrel to
some covetous brethren, to dry up.* More-
over his predictions of things to come were
such as in no wise to fall short of those of the
great prophets. To recount all his wonderful
works in detail would be too long a task.
By the superabundance of gifts, wrought in
him by the Spirit in all power and in signs
and in marvels, he was styled a second Moses
by the very enemies of the Church. Thus in
all that he through grace accomplished, alike
by word and deed, a light seemed ever to be
shining, token of the ‘heavenly power from
the unseen which followed him. To this
day he is a great object of admiration to the
‘people of his own neighbourhood, and his
memory, established in the churches ever
fresh and green, is not dulled by length of
time. Thus not a practice, not a word, not
a mystic rite has been added to the Church
besides what he bequeathed to it. Hence
truly on account of the antiquity of their in-
stitution many of their ceremonies appear to
be defective.’ For his successors in the ad-
ministration of the Churches could not endure
to accept any subsequent discovery in adidi-
tion to what had had his sanction. Now
one of the institutions of Gregory is the very
form of the doxology to which objection 15
now made, preserved by the Church on
the authority of his tradition; a statement
which may be verified without much trouble
by any one who likes to make a short journey.
That our Firmilian held this belief is testified


by the writings which he has left.° The


12 Cor. xii. 18. 2 Rom. i.

3 σισ. according to the legend, the Lycus.
Essays on Miracles, Ὁ. 267,

4 [he story is told by Gregory of Nyssa, Life of Greg.
Thaum, Migne xlvi. 926-930.

5 The Neocesareans appear to have entertained a Puritan
objection to the antiphonal psalmody becoming general in the
Church in the time of Basil. cf. Ep. ccvii.

6 Firmilian, like Gregory the Wonder-worker, a pupil of


cf. Newman,


contemporaries also of the illustrious Mele-
tius say that he was of this opinion. But
why quote ancient authorities? Now in the
East are not the maintainers of true religion
known chiefly by this one term, and sepa-
rated from their adversaries as by a watch-
word? Ihave heard from a certain Mesopo-
tamian, a man at once well skilled in
the language and of unperverted opinions,
that by the usage of his country it is impos-
sible for any one, even though he may wish
to do so, to express himself in any other
way, and that they are compelled by the
idiom of their mother tongue to offer the
doxology by the syllable ‘* and,” or, I should
more accurately say, by their equivalent ex-
pressions. We Cappadocians, too, so speak
in the dialect of our country, the Spirit having
so early as the division of tongues foreseen
the utility of the phrase. And what of the
whole West, almost from Illyricum to the
boundaries of our world? Does it not sup-
port this word?

75. How then can 1 be an innovator and
creator of new terms, when I adduce as
originators and champions of the word whole
nations, cities, custom going back beyond
the memory of man, men who were pillars
of the church and conspicuous for all know-
ledge and spiritual power? For this cause
this banded array of foes is set in motion
against me, and town and village and re-
motest regions are full of my calumniators.
Sad and painful are these things to them
that seek for peace, but great is the reward
of patience for sufferings endured for the
Faith’s sake. So besides these let sword
flash, let axe be whetted, let fire burn fiercer
than that of Babylon, let every instrument of
torture be set in motion against me. ‘To me
nothing is more fearful than failure to fear
the threats which the Lord has directed
against them that blaspheme the Spirit.’
Kindly readers will find a satisfactory defence
in what I have said, that I accept a phrase
so dear and so familiar to the saints, and
confirmed by usage so long, inasmuch as,
from the day when the Gospel was first
preached up to our own time, it is shewn to
have been admitted to all full rights within the
churches, and, what is of greatest moment,
to have been accepted as bearing a sense in
accordance with holiness and true religion.
But before the great tribunal what have I pre-
pared to say in my defence? This; that 1
was in the first place led to the glory of the
Spirit by the honour conferred by the Lord


Origen, was bishop of Cesarea_ from before A.D. 232 (Euseb.
vi. 26) to 272 (Euseb, vii. 30). By some his death at Tarsus is
placed in 264 or δ.

1 cf, Matt. xii. 316


48


BASIL


in associating Him with Himself and with
His Father at baptism; ' and secondly by
the introduction of each of us to the knowl-
edge of God by such an initiation; and above
all by the fear of the threatened punishment
shutting out the thought of all indignity and
unworthy conception. But our opponents,
what will they say? After shewing neither
reverence for the Lord’s honour’ nor fear
of His threats, what kind of defence will
they have for their blasphemy? It is for
them to make up their mind about their
own action or even now to change it. For
my own part I would pray most earnestly
that the good God will make His peace
rule in the hearts of all,* so that these men
who are swollen with pride and set in battle
array against us may be calmed by the Spirit
of meekness and of love; and that if they
have become utterly savage, and are in an
untamable state, He will grant to us at least
to bear with long suffering all that we have
to bear at their hands. In short ‘‘to them
that have in themselves the sentence of
death,” 4 it is not suffering for the sake of
the Faith which is painful; what is hard to
bear is to fail to fight its battle. The athlete
does not so much complain of being wounded
in the struggle as of not being able even to
secure admission into the stadium. Or per-
haps this was the time for silence spoken of
by Solomoa the wise.? For, when life is
buffeted by so fierce a storm that all the in-
telligence of those who are instructed in the
word is filled with the deceit of false reason-
ing and confounded, like an eye filled with
dust, when men are stunned by strange and
awful noises, when all the world is shaken
and everything tottering to its fall, what
profits it to cry, as I am really crying,
to the wind?


CHAPTER . XXX.


Exposition of the present state of the Churches.


76. To what then shall I liken our pres-
ent conditicn? It may be compared, I think,
to some naval battle which has arisen out of
time old quarrels, and is fought by men who
cherish a deadly hate against one another, of
long experience in naval warfare, and eager
for the fight. Look, I beg you, at the pic-
ture thus raised before your eyes. See the
rival fleets rushing in dread array to the
attack. With a burst of uncontrollable fury


1 Matt. xxviii. 19.

2 The Benedictine version for τὰς τιμὰς τοῦ κυρίου is hon-

orem quem Dominus tribuit Spiritut,

MS. is tas φωνάς. There is authority for either sense of the

enitive with τιμή, 2.6. the honours due to the Lord or paid
ἔ; the Lord.

cf, Col, 111. 15.


42 Cor. i. 9. 5 Eccl. iii. 7.


The reading of one’


they engage and fight it out. Fancy, if you
like, the ships driven to and fro by a raging
tempest, while thick darkness falls from the
clouds and blackens all the scene, so that
watchwords are indistinguishable in the
confusion, and all distinction between friend
and foe is lost. ‘To fill up the details of the
imaginary picture, suppose the sea swollen
with billows and whirled up from the deep,
while a vehement torrent of rain pours
down from the clouds and the terrible waves
rise high. From every quarter of heaven
the winds beat upon one point, where both
the fleets are dashed one against the other.
Of the combatants some are turning traitors ;
some are deserting in the very thick of the
fight; some have at one and the same mo-
ment to urge on their boats, all beaten by the
gale, and to advance against their assailants.
Jealousy of authority and the lust of individ-
ual mastery splits the sailors into . parties
which deal mutual death to one another.
Think, besides all this, of the confused
and unmeaning roar sounding over all the
sea, from howling winds, from crashing
vessels, from boiling surf, from the yells of
the combatants as they express their varying
emotions in every kind of noise, so that not
a word from admiral or pilot can be heard.
The disorder and confusion is tremendous,
for the extremity of misfortune, when life is
despaired of, gives men license for every
kind of wickedness. Suppose, too, that the
men are all smitten with the incurable plague
of mad love of glory, so that they do not
cease from their struggle each to get the
better of the other, while their ship is ac.
tually settling down into the deep.

77. ‘Turn now I beg you from this figura-
tive description to the unhappy reality. Did
it not at one time’ appear that the Arian
schism, after its separation into a sect opposed
to the Church of God, stood itself alone in
hostile array? But when the attitude of our
foes against us was changed from one of long
standing and bitter strife to one of open war-
fare, then, as is well known, the war was
split up in more ways than I can tell into
many subdivisions, so that all men were
stirred to a state of inveterate hatred alike by
common party spirit and individual suspi-
cion.” - But what storm at sea was ever so


a a I a ke ον ΣΘΘΘΘΘΒΕῚᾺ

1 7,6. after the condemnation of Arius at Nicza.

2In Ep. cexlii. written in 376, St. Basil says: ‘* This is the
thirteenth year since the outbreak of the war of heretics
against us.” 363 is the date of the Acacian Council of An-
tioch; 364 of the accession of Valens and Valentian, of the
Semi-Arian Synod of Lampsacus, and of St. Basil’s ordination
to the priesthood and book against Eunomius. On the propa-
gation by scission and innumerable subdivisions of Arianism
Canon Bright writes:

ἐς The extraordinary versatility, the argumentative subtlety,
and thé too frequent profanity of Arianism are matters of
which a few lines can give noidea. But it is necessary, in


ON. THE °SPIRIT,


49


fierce and wild as this tempest of the
Churches? In it every landmark of the
Fathers has been moved; every foundation,
every bulwark of opinion has been shaken ;
everything buoyed up on the unsound is
dashed about and shaken down. We attack
one another. We are overthrown by one
another. If our enemy is not the first to
strike us, we are wounded by the comrade at
our side. If a foeman is stricken and falls,
his fellow soldier tramples him down.
There is at least this bond of union between
us that we hate our common foes, but no
sooner have the enemy gone by than we find
enemies in one another. And who could
make a complete list of all the wrecks? _ Some
have gone to the bottom on the attack of
the enemy, some through the unsuspected
treachery of their allies, some from the blun-
dering of their own officers. We see, as it
were, whole churches, crews and all, dashed
and shattered upon the sunken reefs
of disingenuous heresy, while others of the
enemies of the Spirit’ of Salvation have
seized the helm and made shipwreck of the
faith.” And then the disturbances wrought
by the princes of the world * have caused the
downfall of the people with a violence un-
matched by that of hurricane or whirlwind.
The luminaries of the world, which God set
to give light to the souls of the people, have
been driven from their homes, and a darkness
verily gloomy and disheartening has settled


even the briefest notice of this long-lived heresy, to remark on
the contrast between its changeable inventiveness and the
simnple steadfastness of Catholic doctrine. On the one side,
some twenty different creeds (of which several, however, were
rather negatively than positively heterodox) and three main
sects, the Semi-Arians, with their formula of Homoiousion,

7.6. the Son is like in essence to the Father; the Acacians,

vaguely calling Him like (Homoion); the Aetians, boldly

calling Him unlike, as much as to say He is in nosense Divine.

On the other side, the Church with the Nicene Creed, confess-

ing Him as Homoousion, ‘of one essence with the Father,’

meaning thereby, as her great champion repeatedly bore wit-
ness, to secure belief in the reality of the Divine Sonship, and
therefore in the real Deity, as distinguished from the titular
deity which was so freely conceded to Him by the Arians,”

Canon Bright, St, Leo on the /ncarnation, p. 140.

Socrates (ii. 41), pausing at 360, enumerates, after Nicza:

ee any κε ances (omitted the ὁμοούσιον, A.D. 341).

ἃ. The Creed brought to Constans in Gaul by Narcissus and
other Arians in 342.

The Creed ‘sent by Endoxius of Germanicia into Italy,”
z.e. the “ Macrostich,” or ‘* Lengthy Creed,” rejected at
Milan in 346.

5. The 1st Creed of Sirmium; 7.6. the Macrostich with 26 ad-

ditional clauses, 35+.

6. The 2d Sirmian Creed. The ‘‘ manifesto;” ealled by

Athanasius (De Synod. 28) ‘‘ the blasphemy,” 357.
7. The 3d Sirmian, or ‘*dated Creed,’’ in the consulship of
Flavius Eusebius and Hypatius, May 22d, 359.
5. The Acacian Creed of Seleucia, 359.
g. The Creed of Ariminum adopted at Constantinople, as re-
vised at Nike.
1QOn the authority of the MS. of the tenth century at Paris,
called by the Ben. Editors Regius Secundus, they read for
πνεύματος πάθους, denying πνευματος to be consistent with the
style and practice of Basil, who, they say, never uses the epi-
thet σωτήριος of the Spirit. Mr. Ὁ. F. H. Johnston notes that

St. Basil “ always attributes the saving efficacv of Baptism to

the presence of the Spirit, and here applies the word to Him.”

In ὃ 35 we have τὸ σωτήριον βάπτισμα.

3 1 Tim, i. 19. 3 1 Cor, ii. 6.


on the Churches.’ The terror of universal
ruin is already imminent, and yet their mu-
tual rivalry is so unbounded as to blunt all
sense of danger. Individual hatred is of
more importance than the general and com-
mon warfare, for men by whom the immedi-
ate gratification of ambition is esteemed more
highly than the rewards that await us in a
time to come, prefer the glory of getting the
better of their opponents to securing the
common welfare of mankind. So all men
alike, each as best he can, lift the hand of
murder against one another. Harsh rises
the cry of the combatants encountering one
another in dispute ; already all the Church is
almost full of the inarticulate screams, the
unintelligible noises, rising from the ceaseless
agitations that divert the right rule of the
doctrine of true religion, now in the direction
of excess, now in that of defect. On the one
hand are they who confound the Persons and
are carried away into Judaism; on the
other hand are they that, through the oppo-
sition of the natures, pass into heathenism.?
Between these opposite parties inspired
Scripture is powerless to mediate; the tra-
ditions of the apostles cannot suggest terms
of arbitration. Plain speaking is fatal to
friendship, and disagreement in opinion all
the ground that is wanted for a quarrel. No
oaths of confederacy are so efficacious in
keeping men true to sedition as their likeness
in error. Every one is a theologue though
he have his soul branded with more spots
than can be counted. The result is that
innovators find a plentiful supply of men
ripe for faction, while self-appointed scions
of the house of place-hunters* reject the
government ὅ of the Holy Spirit and divide
the chief dignities of the Churches. The in-
stitutions of the Gospel have now every-
where been thrown into confusion by want of
discipline ; there is an indescribable pushing
for the chief places while every self-advertiser


1Among the bishops exiled during the persecution of
Valens were Meletius of Antioch. Eusebius of Samosata,
Pelagius of Laodicea, and Barses of Edessa. cf. Theodoret,
Hist. Ecc. iv. 12sg. cf. Ep. 195.

2 The identification of an unsound Monarchianism with
Judaism is illustrated in the zs¢ Apology of Fustin Martyr.
δι. ἴῃ § Ixxxiii. (Reeves’ Trans.). * The Jews, therefore, for
maintaining that it was the Father of the Universe who had
the conference with Moses, when it was the very Son of God
who had it, and who is styled both Angel and Apostle, are
justly accused by the prophetic spirit and Christ Himself, tor
knowing neither the Father nor the Son; for they who affirm
the Son to be the Father are guilty of not knowing the Father.
and likewise of being ignorant that the Father of the Universe
has some who, being the Logos and First-begotten of God,
is God.”

3 ¢.e. the Arians, whose various ramifications all originated
in a probably well-meant attempt to reconcile the principles of
Christianity with what was best in the:old philosophy, and a
failure to see that the ditheism of Arianism was of a piece
with polytheism.

4The word σπουδαρχίδης is a comic patronymic of om-
δάργης, a place-hunter, occurring in the Acharnians of Aris-
tophanes, 595. 5 οἰκονομία.


50


BASIL. “ON THE) ΒΕ.


tries to force himself into high office. The
result of this lust for ordering is that our
people are in a state of wild confusion for
lack of being ordered;' the exhortations of
those in authority are rendered wholly pur-
poseless and void, because there is not a man
but, out of his ignorant impudence, thinks
that it is just as much his duty to give orders
to other people, as it is to obey any one else.

78. So, since no human voice is strong
enough to be heard in such a disturbance, |
reckon silence more profitable than speech,
for if there is any truth in the words of the
Preacher, ‘* The words of wise men are
heard in quiet,” ἢ in the present condition of
things any discussion of them must be any-
thing but becoming. I am moreover re-
strained by the Prophet’s saying, "" There-
fore the prudent shall keep silence in that
time, for it is an evil time,” * a time when
some trip up their neighbours’ heels, some
stamp on a man when he is down, and others
clap their hands with joy, but there is not
one to feel for the fallen and hold out a help-
ing hand, although according to the ancient
law he is not uncondemned, who passes _ by
even his enemy’s beast of burden fallen under
his load. This is not the state of things
now. Why not? The love of many has
waxed cold; ° brotherly concord is destroyed,
the very name of -unity is ignored, brotherly
admonitions are heard no more, nowhere is
there Christian pity, nowhere falls the tear
of sympathy. Now there is no one to re-
ceive πὸ weak in faith,” δ but mutual
hatred has blazed so high among fellow
clansmen that they are more delighted at a
neighbour’s fall than at their own success.
Just as in a plague, men of the most regular
lives suffer from the same sickness as the
rest, because they catch the disease by com-
munication with the infected, so nowadays
by the evil rivalry which possesses our souls
we are carried away to an emulation in
wickedness, and are all of us each as bad as
the others. Hence merciless and sour sit the
judges of the erring; unfeeling and hostile
are the critics of the well disposed. And to
such a depth is this evil rooted among us


5 Matt. xxiv. 12.
6 Roum. xiv. 1.


1 ἀναρχία ἀπὸ φιλαρχίας.
2 Eccl. ix. 17.
3 Amos y, 13.


that we have become more brutish than the
brutes; they do at least herd with their fel-
lows, but our most savage warfare is with our
own people.

79. For all these reasons I ought to have
kept silence, but 1 was drawn in the other
direction by love, which ‘* seeketh not her
own,”' and desires to overcome every diffi-
culty put in her way by time and circum-
stance. I was taught too by the children at
Babylon,’ that, when there is no one to sup-
port the cause of true religion, we ought
alone and all unaided to do our duty. They
from out of the midst of the flame lifted up
their voices in hymns and praise to God,
recking not of the host that set the truth at
naught, but sufficient, three only that they
were, with one another. Wherefore we too
are undismayed at the cloud of our enemies,
and, resting our hope on the aid of the Spirit,
have, with all boldness, proclaimed the truth.
Had I not so done, it would truly have been
terrible that the blasphemers of the Spirit
should so easily be emboldened in their at-
tack upon true religion, and that we, with
so mighty an ally and supporter at our side,
should shrink from the service of that doc-
trine, which by the tradition of the Fathers
has been preserved by an unbroken sequence
of memory to our own day. A further pow-
erful incentive to my undertaking was the
warm fervour of your ‘* love unfeigned,” ®
and the seriousness and taciturnity of your
disposition ; a guarantee that you would not
publish what I was about to say to all the
world, — not because it would not be worth
making known, but to avoid casting pearls
before swine.* My task is now done. If
you find what I have said satisfactory, let
this make an end to our discussion of these
matters. If you think any point requires
further elucidation, pray do not hesitate to
pursue the investigation with all diligence,
and to add to your information by putting any
uncontroversial question. Either through me
or through others the Lord will grant full
explanation on matters which have yet to
be made clear, according to the knowledge
supplied to the worthy by the Holy Spirit.
Amen. 4


3 Rom. xii. 9 and 2 Cor. vi. 6.


11 Cor, xiii. 5. cares c
att. vii. 6,


2 Dan. iii. 12 564.


INTRODUCTION: TOC Pie ΠΕ Ar MERON.


The Hexaemeron is the title of nine homilies delivered by St. Basil on the cosmo-
gony of the opening chapters of Genesis. When and where they were delivered is quite
uncertain. They are Lenten sermons, delivered at both the morning and evening. ser-
vices, and appear to have been listened to by working men. (fom. iii. 1). Some words in
Fiom. viii. have confirmed the opinion that they were preached extempore, in accordance
with what is believed to have been Basil’s ordinary practice.' Internal evidence points in
the same direction, for though a marked contrast might be expected between the style of a
work intended to be read, like the De Sp/rztau Sancto, and that of orations to be spoken
in public, the /Zexaemeron shews signs of being an unwritten composition.

In earlier ages it was the most celebrated and admired cf Basil’s works. Photius
(Migne, Pat. Gr. cxli) puts it first of all, and speaks warmly of its eloquence and force.
As an example of oratory he would rank it with the works of Plato and Demosthenes.

Suidas singles it out for special praise. Jerome (De Vir/s ///ust.) among Basil’s works
names only the Hexaemeron, the De Sp. Scto, and the treatise Contra Eunomium.

That Basil’s friends should think highly of it is only what might be expected.
‘¢ Whenever I take his Hexaemeron in hand,” says Gregory of Nazianzus, (Ογχαΐ. xliii.
67) **and quote its words, [am brought face to face with my Creator: I begin to under-
stand the method of creation: I feel more awe than ever I did before, when I only looked
at God’s work with my eyes.”

Basil’s brother Gregory, in the Prowmzum to his own Hexacmeron, speaks in exagger-
ated terms of Basil’s work as inspired, and as being, in his opinion, as admirable as that of
Moses.

The -lexaemeron of Ambrose is rather an imitation than a translation or adaptation
of that of Basil. Basil’s Mexaemeron was translated into Latin by Eustathius Afer
(c. A.D. 440) and is said to have been also translated by Dionysius Exiguus, the Scythian
monk of the 6th C. to whom 1s due our custom of dating from the Saviour’s birth.

More immediately interesting to English readers is the Anglo-Saxon abbreviation at-
tributed to /#lfric, Abbot of St. Albans in 969, and by some identified with the /Elfric
who was Archbishop of Canterbury from 996 to 1006. This is extant in a MS. numbered
Junius 23 in the Bodleian Library, and was collated with the MS. Jun. 47 in the same, a
transcript of a MS. in the Hatton Collection, by the Rev. Henry W. Norman for his
edition and translation published in 1848. It is nowhere a literal translation, but combines
with the thoughts of St. Basil extracts from the Commentary upon Genesis of the Vener-
able Bede, as well as original matter. It is entitled


STI ΒΑΘ EXAMERON, ὁ. ἘΤ Is ΒΕ GoDES Six DAGA WEORCVM.


‘¢T’Hexaméron,”’ writes Fialon, ‘‘ est explication de |’ceuvre des six jours, explication
souvent tentée avant et apres Saint Basile. ‘I1] n’est personne parmi les hommes, disait
Théophile d’Antioche au deuxieme siecle, qui puisse dignement faire le récit et exposer
toute ’ecomomie de l’ceuvre des six jours; eut il mille bouches et mille langues. ‘
Beaucoup d@écrivains ont tenté ce récit; ils ont pris pour sujet, les uns la création du
monde, les autres l’origine de Vhomme, et peut-étre n’ont ils pas fait jaillir une étincelle
qui fat digne de la vérité.’” Nous ne pouvons savoir ce que fut |’Hexaméron de Saint Hip-
polyte et nous ne savons guere qu’une chose de celui d’Origene: c’est qu'il dénaturait
completement le récit mosaique et n’y vovait que des allégories. L’Hexaméron de Saint
Basile, par la pureté de la doctrine et la beauté du style, fit disparaitre tous ceux: qut
Vavaient précédé.”* So, too, bishop Fessler. ‘* Sapienter, pie, et admodum eloquenter


1¢f. Rufinus ii. 9. 2 Theophilus of Antioch, 77. Ad Autolycum. 8 Ftude sur St. Basile, 206.
SI


52 DELL


iste homilia confecte sunt; quedam explicationes physic profecto juxta placita scientiz
illius eetatis dijudicande sunt.” ' On the other hand the prominence of the ** scientiz illius
wtatis’ is probably the reason why the Hexaemeron has received from adverse critics less
favour than it deserves. ‘* Diese letztern,” z.e. the Homilies in question, says Bohringer,
‘*erlangten im Alterthum eine ganz unverdiente Beriihmtheit. . . Die Art, wie Basil
seine Aufgabe loste, ist diese ; er nimmt die mosaische Erzahlung von der Schopfung Vcrs
fur Vers vor, erklart sie von dem naturhistorischen Standpunkt seiner Zeit aus, wobei er
Gelegenheit nimmt, die Ansichten der griechischen Philosophen von der Weltschépfung
u. s. w. zu widerlegen, und schliesst dann mit moralischer und religidser Nutzandwendung,
um den Stoff auch fur Geist und Herz seiner ZuhGrer fruchtbar zu machen. Es braucht
indess kaum bemerkt zu werden, dass vom naturwissenschaftlichen wie exegetischen
Standpunkt unserer Zeit diese Arbeit wenig Werth mehr hat.” Zhe Three Cappado-
clans, p. 61. But in truth the fact that Basil is not ahead of the science of his time is not
to his discredit. It is to his credit that he is abreast with it; and this, with the exception
of his geography, he appears to be. Of him we may say, as Bp. Lightfoot writes of St.
Clement, in connexion with the crucial instance of the Pheenix, ‘**it appears that he is
not more credulous than the most learned and intelligent heathen writers of the preceding
and following generations.” He reads the Book of Genesis in the light of the scientific
knowledge of his age, and in the amplification and illustration of Holy Scripture by the


supposed aid of this supposed knowledge, neither he nor his age stands alone.


turies may possibly not accept all the science


FLOMILY 1.


Ln the Beginning God made the Heaven and the
Larth,


1. Ir is right that any one beginning to
narrate the formation of the world should
begin with the good order which reigns in
visible things. I am about to speak of the
creation of heaven and earth, which was not
spontaneous, as some have imagined, but
drew its origin from God. What ear is
worthy to hear such a tale? How earnestly
the soul should prepare itself to receive such
high lessons! How pure it should be from
carnal affections, how unclouded by worldly
disquietudes, how active and ardent in its
researches, how eager to find in its surround-
ings an idea of God which may be werthy
of Him!

But before weighing the justice of these
remarks, before examining all the sense con-
tained in these few words, let us see who
addresses them to us. Because, if the weak-
ness of our intelligence does not allow us to
penetrate the depth of the thoughts of the
writer, yet we shall be involuntarily drawn
to give faith to his words by the force of his
authority. Now it is Moses who has com-
posed this history ; Moses, who, when still
at the breast, is described as exceeding fair ;?
Moses, whom the daughter of Pharaoh adopt-
el; who received from her a royal education,
an 1 who had for his teachers the wise men
of Egypt; ° Moses, who disdained the pomp
of royalty, and, to share the humble condi-


1 Inst. Pat., Ed. B. Jungmann 180ο.
2'cf. Joseph, 11. X. 2.
4 Nuun. xii. 6, 7, 8.


9
So Justin M., Cohort. ad gent., Philo, Vit.


Later cen-
of the XI Xth.


tion cf his compatriots, preferred to be per-
secuted with tlie people of God rather than
to enjoy the fleeting delights of sin; Moses,
who received from nature such a love of jus-
tice that, even before the leadership of the
people of God was committed to him, he
was impelled, by a natural horror of evil,
to pursue malefactors even to the point of
punishing them by death; Moses, who, ban-
ished by those whose benefactor he had
been, hastened to escape from the tumults of
Egypt and took refuge in Ethiopia, living
there far from former pursuits, and passing
forty years in the contemplation of nature;
Moses, finally, who, at the age of eighty, saw
God, as far as it is possible for man to see
Him; or rather as it had not previously been
granted to man to see Him, according to the
testimony of God Himself, **if there be a
prophet among you, I the Lord will make
myself known unto him in a vision, and will
speak unto him in a dream. My servant
Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine
house, with him will I speak mouth to
mouth, even apparently and not in dark
speeches.” * It is this man, whom God judged
worthy to behold Him, face to face, like the
angels, who imparts to us what he has
learnt from God. Let us listen then to these
words of truth written without the help of
the ““ enticing words of man’s wisdom” ?” by
the dictation of the Holy Spirit ;; words des-
tined to produce not the applause of those
who hear them, but the salvation of those
who are instructed by them.


‘Acts vii. 22, A.V. :
Moys, and Clem, Al., Strom. i.
51 Cor. ti. 4.


Vide Fialon, Et. Hist. 302,


THE HEXAEMERON.


53


2. ‘*In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth.” ' I stop struck with
admiration at this thought. What shall I
first say? Where shall I begin my story?
Shall I show forth the vanity of the Gentiles?
Shall I exalt the truth of our faith? The
philosophers of Greece have made much ado
to explain nature, and not one of their sys-
tems has remained firm and unshaken, each
being overturned by its successor. It is vain
to refute them; they are sufficient in them-
selves to destroy one another. Those who
were too ignorant to rise to a knowledge of
a God, could not allow that an_ intelligent
cause presided at the birth of the Universe ;
a primary error that involved them in sad
consequences. Some had recourse to ma-
terial principles and attributed the origin of
the Universe’ to the elements of the world.
Others imagined that atoms,* and indivisible
bodies, molecules and ducts, form, by their
union, the nature of the visible world. Atoms
reuniting or separating, produce births and
deaths and the most durable bodies only owe
their consistency to the strength of their
mutual adhesion: a true spider’s web woven
by these writers who give to heaven, to earth,
and to sea so weak an origin and so little con-
sistency! It is because they knew not how
to say **In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth.” Deceived by their
inherent atheism it appeared to them that
nothing governed or ruled the universe, and
that was all was given up to chance.* To
guard us against this error the writer on the
creation, from the very first words, enlight-
ens our understanding with the name of
God; ‘In the beginning God created.”
What a glorious order! He first estab-
lishes a beginning, so that it might not be
supposed that the world never had a begin-
ning. Then he adds ‘‘ Created” to show
that that which was made was a very small
part of the power of the Creator. In the
same way that the potter, after having made


1 Gen. i. 1.

2 cf. note on Letter viii. on the στοιχεῖα or elements which
the Ionian philosophers made the ἀρχαι of the universe. Vide
Plato, Legg. x. ὃ 4 and Arist., Met. i. 3.

3 Posidonius the Stoic names Moschus, or Mochus of
Sidon, as the originator of the atomic theory ‘‘ before the
Trojan period.” Vide Strabo, xvi.'757. But the most famous
Atomists, Leucippus and Democritus of Abdera, in the sth c.
B.C., arose in opposition to the Eleatic school, and were fol-
lowed in the 3d by Epicurus. Vide Diog. Laert. ix. § 30, sg.
and Cicero, De Nat. Deor. i. 24-26. Ista enim flagitia Demo-
critt, sive etiam ante Leucippi, esse corpuscula quedam levia,
alia aspera, rotunda alia, partim autem angulata, curvata
quelam, et quasi adunca; ex his effectum esse celum atque
terram, nulla cogente natura, sed CONCUISU guodam Sortuito.
Atqut, sf haec Democritea non audisset, quid audterat ? quid
est in physicts Epicuri non a Democrito? Nam. etst quedam
commodavit, ut, quod paulo ante 4 tnclinatione atomorum
dixt: tamen pleraque dixtt eatem ; atomos, tnane, imagines,
tnfinttatem locorum, tnnumerabilitatenque mundorum ecrum
ortus. tnterttus. omnta fere. quibus nature ratio continetur.

4 cf. the Fortuna gubernans of Lucretius (v. 108).


with equ:l pains a great number of vessels,
has not exhausted either his art or his
talent; thus the Maker of the Universe,
whose creative power, far from being bounded
by one world, could extend to the infinite,
needed only the impulse of His will to bring
the immensities of the visible world into
being. If then the world has a beginning,
and if it has been created, enquire who gave
it this beginning, and who was the Creator:
or rather, in the fear that human reasonings
may make you wander from the truth, Moses
has anticipated enquiry by engraving in our
hearts, as a seal and a safeguard, the awful
name of God: ‘*In the beginnings God
created ’’— It is He, beneficent Nature, Good-
ness without measure, a worthy object of
love for all beings endowed with reason, the
beauty the most to be desired, the origin of
all that exists, the source of life, intellectual
light, impenetrable wisdom, it is He who
‘Cin the beginning created heaven and earth.”

3. Donot then imagine, O man! that the
visible world is without a beginning; and
because the celestial bodies move in a circu-
lar course, and it is difficult for our senses to
define the point where the circle begins, do
not believe that bodies impelled by a circular
movement are, from their nature, without a
beginning. Without doubt the circle (I mean
the plane figure described bya single line) is
beyond our perception, and it is impossible
for us to find out where it begins or where it
ends; but we ought not on this account to
believe it to be without a beginning. ΑἹ-
though we are not sensible of it, it really
begins at some point where the draughtsman
has begun to draw it at a certain radius from
the centre.’ Thus seeing that figures which
move in a circle always return upon them-
selves, without for a single instant interrupt-
ing the regularity of their course, do not
vainly imagine to yourselves that the world
has neither beginning nor end. ‘‘For the
fashion of this world passeth away ”’? and
ἐς Heaven and earth shall pass away.”* The
dogmas of the end, and of the renewing of the
world, are announced beforehand in these
short words put at the head of the inspired
history. ‘¢In the beginning God made.”
That which was begun in time is condemned
to come to anend in time. If there has been
a beginning do not doubt of the end.* Of
what use then are geometry—- the calcula-
tions of arithmetic — the study of solids and

1Fialon refers to Aristotle (e Calo. i. 5) on the non-infini-
tude of the circle. ‘The conclusion 15 Ὅτι μὲν οὖν τὸ κύκλῳ
κινούμενον οὐκ ἔστιν ἀτελεύτητον οὐδ᾽ ἄπειρον, ἀλλ᾽ ἔχει τέλος,
φανερόν.

21 Cor. vii. 31. 3 Matt. xxiv. 35.


467. Arist. Ve Calo.i. 12,10 Δῆλον δ᾽ ὅτι καὶ εἰ γενητὸν ἢ
φθαρτόν, οὐκ ἀίδιον.


54


BASIL.


far-famed astronomy, this laborious vanity, if
those who pursue them imagine that this visi-
ble world is co-eternal with the Creator of all
things, with God Himself; if they attribute
to this limited world, which has a material
body, the same glory as to the incomprehen-
sible and invisible nature ; if they cannot con-
ceive that a whole, of which the parts are
subject to corruption and change, must of
necessity end by itself submitting to the fate
of its parts? But they have become “ὁ vain
in their imaginations and their foolish heart
was darkened. Professing themselves to be
wise, they became fools.”’ Some have af-
firmed that heaven co-exists with God from
all eternity; * others that it is God Himself
without beginning or end, and the cause of
the particular arrangement of all things.®

4. One day, doubtless, their terrible con-
demnation will be the greater for all this
worldly wisdom, since, seeing so clearly into
vain sciences, they have wilfully shut their
eyes to the knowledge of the truth. These
men who measure the distances of the stare
and describe them, both those of the North,
always shining brilliantly in our view, and
those of the southern pole visible to the
inhabitants of the South, but unknown to us;
who divide the Northern zone and the circle
of the Zodiac into an infinity of parts, who
observe with exactitude the course of the
stars, their fixed places, their declensions,
their return and the time that each takes to
make its revolution; these men, I say, have
discovered all except one thing: the fact that
God is the Creator of the universe, and the
just Judge who rewards all the actiors of
lite according to their merit. They have not
known how to raise themselves to the idea
of the consummation of all things, the con-
sequence of the doctrine of judgment, and to
see that the world must change if souls pass
from this life toa new life. In reality, as the
nature of the present life presents an affinity
to this world, so in the future life our souls
will enjoy a lot conformable to their new
condition. But they are so far from apply-
ing these truths, that they do but laugh when

1 Rom. i. 21, 22.

2 Arist., De Calo. ii.1. 1. calls it εἷς καὶ ἀΐδιος. cf. the end of
the Timeus.

5 cf. Cic., De nat. Deo.i.14, “ Cleanthes”’ (of Assos, c. 264
B C., adisciple of Zeno) “autem tum tpsum mundum Deum
dictt esse; tum tottus nature ment atque animo tribuit hoc
nomen ; tum ullimum,et altissimum, atque undique circum-
fusum, et extremum, omnia cingentem atgue complexum,
ardorem, qui eather nominetur, certissimum Deum judicat,”
ae ses Ihe Chrysippus® (of Tarsus, t/c..2ta B.C os
“ipsum mundum Deum dicit 6556." ‘Yet the Hymn of Clean-
thes (apud Stobwum) begins:

Κύδιστ᾽ αθανάτων, πολυώνομε, παγκρατὲς aici,
Ζεὺς, hvrews ἀοχηγὲ, νόμον μέτα πάντα κυβερνῶν.

cf. Orig., v. Celsum V. σαφῶς δὴ τὸν ὅλον κόσμον (Ἑλληνες)
λέγουσιν εἷναι θεόν, Στωϊκοὶ μὲν τὸν πρῶτον. οἱ δ᾽ ἀπὸ Πλάτωνος


τὸν δεύτερον, τινὲς δ᾽ αὐτῶν τὸν τρίτον; and Athan., De Jucarn.
§ 2.


we announce to them the end of all things
and the regeneration of the age. Since the
beginning naturally precedes that which is
derived from it, the writer, of necessity,
when speaking to us of things which had
their origin in time, puts at the head of his
narrative these words—‘‘In the beginning
God created.”

δ. It appears, indeed, that even before
this world an order of things! existed of
which our mind can form an idea, but of
which we can say nothing, because it is too
lofty a subject for men who are but begin-
ners and are still babes in knowledge. The
birth of the world was preceded by a condi-
tion of things suitable for the exercise of su-
pernatural powers, outstripping the limits of
time, eternal and infinite. The Creator and
Demiurge of the universe perfected His works
in it, spiritual light for the happiness of all
who love the Lord, intzilectual and invisible
natures, all the orderly arrangement ἢ of pure
intelligences who are beyond the reach of
our mind and of whom we cannot even dis-
cover the names. They fill the essence of
this invisible world, as Paul teaches us.
‘¢For by him were all things created that
are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible
and invisible whether they be thrones or do-
minions or principalities or powers ”* or
virtues or hosts of angels or the dignities of
archangels. To this world at last it was
necessary to add a new world, both a
school and training place where the souls
of men should be taught and a home for
beings destined to be born and to die. Thus
was created, of a nature analogous to that
of this world and the animals and _ plants
which live thereon, the succession of time,
for ever pressing on and _ passing away
and never stopping in its course. Is not
this the: nature of time, where the past is
no more, the future does not exist, and the
present escapes before being recognised?
And such also is the nature of the creature
which lives in time, — condemned to grow or
to perish without rest and without certain sta-
bility. It is therefore fit that the bodies of
animals and plants, obliged to follow a sort of
current, and carriedaway by the motion which
leads them to birth or to death, should live
in the midst of surroundings whose nature is
in accord with beings subject to change.*


1 cf. Origen, De Principiis, ii. 1, 3.

2 διακότμησις. cf. Arist., Met.i.6§, 2.

3 Col. i. 16.

4 cf, Plato, Tima@us, ὃ 14, χρόνος δ᾽ οὖν μετ᾽ οὐρανοῦ γέγονεν
ἵνα ἅμα γεννηθέντες ἅμα καὶ λυθῶσιν, ἄν ποτε λύσις τις αὐτῶν
γίγνηται καὶ κατὰ τὸ παρᾶὰδειγμα τῆς αἰωνὶας φύσεως ἵν, ὡς δὁμοιό-
τατος αὐτῷ κατὰ δύναμιν ἢ. Fialon (p. 311) quotes Cousin’s
translation at greater length, and refers also to Plotinus, Enz.
II. vii. 10-12, The parallel transitoriness of time and things
has become the commonplace of poets. ‘‘ Jmmortalia ne


THE


Thus the writer who wisely tells us of the
birth of the Universe does not fail to put
these words at the head of the narrative.
ὁ In the beginning God created;” that is to
say, in the beginning of time. Therefore,
if he makes the world appear in the begin-
ning, it is not a proof that its birth has pre-
ceded that of all other things that were made.
He only wishes to tell us that, after the in-
visible and intellectual world, the visible
world, the world of the senses, began to
exist.

The first movement is called beginning.
“ΤῸ do right is the beginning of the good
way.” ὁ Just actions are truly the first steps
towards a happy life. Again, we call “" be-
ginning”? the essential and first part from
which a thing proceeds, such as the foundation
of a house, the keel of a vessel; it is in this
sense that it is said, ‘* The fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom,” ” that is to say
that piety is, as it were, the groundwork
and foundation of perfection. Art is also
the beginning of the works of artists, the
skill of Bezaleel degan the adornment ot the
tabernacle.” Often even the good which is
the final cause is the degvnning of actions.
Thus the approbation of God is the begin-
ning of almsgiving, and the end laid up
for us in the promises the beginning of all
virtuous efforts.

6. Such being the different senses of the
word beginning, see if we have not all
the meanings here. You may know the
epoch when the formation of this world
began, if, ascending into the past, you en-
deavour to discover the first day. You will
thus find what was the first movement of
time; then that the creation of the heavens
and of the earth were like the foundation
and the groundwork, and afterwards that an
intelligent reason, as the word beginning in-
dicates, presided in the order of visible
things.* You will finally discover that the
world was not conceived by chance and
without reason, but for an uséful end and for
the great advantage of all beings, since
it is really the school where reasonable souls


speres monet annus et almum Que rapit hora diem.” Yor.,
Carm., iv. 7.

1 Prov. xvi. 5, LXX. 2 Prov. ix, 10.

3 cf. Arist., Met. iv. 1. “Apxn ἡ μὲν λέγεται ὅθεν ἄν τι τοῦ
πράγματος κινηθείη πρῶτον" oiov τοῦ μήκους, καὶ ὁδοῦ... ἡ δὲ
ὅθεν ἂν κάλλιστα ἕκαστον γένοιτο " οἷον καὶ μαθήσεως, οὐκ ἀπὸ τοῦ
πρώτου καὶ τῆς τοῦ πράγματος ἀρχῆς ἐνίοτε ἀρκτέον, ἀλλ᾽ ὅθεν
pact’? ἂν μάθοι, ἡ δὲ, ὅθεν πρῶτον γινεται ἐνυπάρχοντος " οἷον ὡς
πλοίον τρόπις, καὶ οἰκίας θεμέλιος.

4In the Homily of Origen extant in the Latin of Rufinus
(Migne Pat. Gr. xii, 146) ἀοχή is used of the Divine Word,
“In principio. Quod est omnium principium nist Dominus
noster Christus lesus?... In hoc ergo principio, hoc est in
Verbo suo, Deus celum et terram fecit.”’ An interpretation
of John viii. 25, τὴν ἀρχὴν ὅτι Kal λαλὼ ὑμιν widely prevalent at
all events in the Latin church, was “ Zuttium quod et loguor
vobis ; "41 am the Beginning, that which I am even saying
to you.” See note to Sp. Comment. on John viii. ad fin.


HEXAEMERON.


55


exercise themselves, the training ground
where they learn to know God; since by
the sight of visible and sensible things the
mind is led, as by a hand, to the contem-
plation of invisible things. ὁ" For,’’ as the
Apostle says, ‘‘ the invisible things of him
from the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that
are made.” ' Perhaps these words ‘*In the
beginning God created” signify the rapid
and imperceptible moment of creation. ‘The
beginning, in eflect, 1s indivisible and in-
stantaneous. The beginning of the road is
not yet the road, and that of the house is
not yet the house; so the beginning of time
is not yet time and not even the least par-
ticle of it. If some objector tell us that the
beginning is a time, he ought then, as he
knows well, to submit it to the division of
time —a beginning, a middle and an end.
Now it is ridiculous to imagine a beginning
of a beginning. Further, if we divide the
beginning into two, we make two instead of
one, or rather make several, we really make
an infinity, for all that which is divided is
divisible to the infinite.” Thus then, if it is
said, ‘*‘ In the beginning God created,” it is
to teach us that at the will of God the world
arose in less than an instant, and it is to
convey this meaning more clearly that other
interpreters have said: ** God made summa-
rily’’ that is to say all at once and ina
moment.* But enough concerning the be-
ginning, if only to puta few points out of
many.

7. Among arts. some have in view pro-
duction, some practice, others theary.* The
object of the last is the exercise of thought,
that of the second, the motion of the body.
Shouid it cease, all stops; nothing more is
to be seen. Thus dancing and music have
nothing behind; they have no object but
themselves. In creative arts on the con-
trary the work lasts after the operation.
Such is architecture—such are the arts
which work in wood and brass and weay-
ing, all those indeed which, even when the
artisan has disappeared, serve to show an
industrious intelligence and to cause the
architect, the worker in brass or the weaver,
to be admired on account of his work.
Thus, then, to show that the world is a
work of art displayed for the beholding of
all people; to make them know Him who


1 Rom. i. 20.

2 On the inconceivability either of an absolute minimum of
space or of its infinite divisibility, cf. Sir Wm. Hamilton, Jed,
lingghs

3 Aquila’s version in the Hexapla of Origen for ἐν ἀρχγ has
ἐν κεφαλαίῳ ἔκτισεν.

4 ἡ ἅπασα διάνοια ἣ πρακτικὴ ἢ ποιητικὴ ἢ θεωρητική. Arist.,
Met.v.i.


56


BASIL.


created it, Moses does not use another word.
‘In the beginning,” he says **God cre-
ated.” He does not say ** God worked,”
**God formed,” but ‘* God created.” Among
those who have imagined that the world
co-existed with God from all eternity, many
have denied that it was created by God, but
say that it exists spontaneously, as the
shadow of this power. God, they say, is
the cause of it, but an involuntary cause, as
the body is the cause of the shadow and the
flume is the cause of the brightness.’ It is
to correct this error that the prophet states,
with so much precision, **In the beginning
God created.” He did not make the thing
itself the cause of its existence.” Being
good, He made it an useful work. Being
wise, He made it everything that was most
beautiful. Being powerful He made it very
στοαί. ἢ Moses almost shows us the finger
of the supreme artisan taking possession of
the substance of the universe, forming the
diflerent parts in one perfect accord, and
making a harmonious symphony result from
the whole.*

‘¢ Tn the beginning God made heaven and
earth.” By naming the two extremes, he
suggests the substance of the whole world,
according to heaven the privilege of senior-
itv, and putting earth in the second rank.
All intermediate beings were created at the
same time as the extremities. Thus, al-
though there is no mention of the elements,
fire, water and air,® imagine that they were
all compounded together, and you will find
water, air and fire, in the earth. For fire
leaps out from stones; iron which is dug
from the earth produces under friction fire
in plentiful measure. A marvellous fact!
Fire shut up in bodies lurks there hidden
without harming them, but no sooner is it re-
leased than it consumes that which has hither-
to preserved it. The earth contains water,
as diggers of wells teach us. It contains


1 The one and the perfect continually overflows, and from
it Being, Reason, and Lite are perpetually derived, without
deducting anything from its substance, inasmuch as it is
simple ir its nature, and not, like matter, compound. (Ez.
vi. ix, 9.) This derivation of all things from unity does not
resemble creation, which has reference to time, but takes place
purely in conformity with the principles of causality and
order, without volition, because to will is to change. (Eun.
iv. δ, 1. 6.) Tennemann on Plotinus, Af7st. Phil. § 207.

* The Ben. note is ‘‘ neque fdipsum in causa fuit cur esset,
hoc est, non res ceca,non res coacta, non res invite et preter
voluntatem agens tu causa fult cur mundus exstitertt. Hoc
tgitur dicit Basilius Deum aliter agere atque corpora opaca
aut lucida. Nam corpus producit umbram vi atque necessi:
tate, nec libertus agit corpus lucidum: Deus vero omnia
nutu conficit et voluntate. Illud ἐποιησεν, etc., alio modo in-
tellexit et tnterpretatus est Eustathius. Illius subjicimus
verba: non causam prestitit ut esset solum, sed fecit ut bonus
utilem.’’

8 cf. Plat., Tim. § 10. ᾿Αγαθὸς ἦν, ἀγαθῷ dé ovdeis περὶ οὐδενὸς
οὐδέποτε ἐγγίγνεται φθόνος, τούτου δ᾽ ἐκτὸς ὧν πάντα ὅτι μάλιστα
γενέσθαι ἐβουλήθη παοαπλήσια ἑαυτῶ.

4 ο΄. Huxley, Lay Sermons, xii. p. 286, on the “ delicate
finger” of the ‘ hidden artist” in the changes in an egg.

δ cf, note on Letter viii.


air too, as is shown by the vapours that
it exhales under the sun’s warmth? when it
is damp. Now, as according to their nature,
heaven occupies the higher and earth the
lower position in space, (one sees, in fact,
that all which is light ascends towards
heaven, and heavy substances fall to the
ground); as therefore height and depth are
the points the most opposed to each other it
is enough to mention the most distant parts
to signify the inclusion of all which fills up
intervening space. Do not ask, then, for
an enumeration of all the elements; guess,
from what Holy Scripture indicates, all that
is passed over in silence.

ὃ. * In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth.” If we were to wish to
discover the essence of each of the beings
which are offered for our contemplation, or
come under our senses, we should be drawn
away into long digressions, and the solution
of the problem would require more words
than I possess, to examine fully the matter.
To spend time onsuch points would not prove
to be to the edification of the Church. Upon
the essence of the heavens we are contented
with what Isaiah says, for, in simple language,
he gives us sufficient idea of their nature,
ςς The heaven was made like smoke,’’ 2 that
is to say, He created a subtle substance,
without solidity or density, from which to
form the heavens. As to the form of them
we also content ourselves with the language
of the same prophet, when praising God
‘that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain
and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell
in.” 5. In. the same> way;*as “concerns the
earth, let us resolve not to torment ourselves
by trying to find out its essence, not to tire
our reason by seeking for the substance
which it conceals. Do not let us seek for any
nature devoid of qualities by the conditions
of its existence, but let us know that all the
phenomena with which we see it clothed


| regard the conditions of its existence and com-


plete its essencé. Try to take away by reason
each of the qualities it possesses, and you
will arrive at nothing. Take away black,
cold, weight, density, the qualities which
concern taste, in one word all these which
we see in it, and the substance vanishes.‘


1 φαμὲν δὲ πῦρ Kal ἀέρα καὶ ὕδωρ γίγνεσθαι ἐξ ἀλλήλων καὶ
ἕκαστον ἐν ἑκάστῳ ὑπάρχειν τούτων δυνάμει. Arist., Meteor. i. 3.

2154.11.6,1,ΧΧ. 3\Isa. xl. 22, LXX.

4¥Fialon points to the coincidence with Arist., AZe?. vii. 3.
᾿Αλλὰ μὴν ἀφαιρουμένου μήκους καὶ πλάτους καὶ βάθους, οὐδεν
ὁρῶμεν ὑπολειπόμενον πλὴν El τι ἐστὶ τὸ ὁριζόμενον ὑπὸ τούτων, ὥστε
τὴν ὕλην ἀνάγκη φαϊνεσθαι μόνην οὐσίαν οὕτω σκοπουμένοις. Λέγω
δ᾽ ὕλην ἢ καθ᾽ αὑτὴν μήτε τὶ, μήτε ποσὸν, μήτε ἄλλο μηδὲν λέγεται
οἷς ὥρισται τὰ ὄν " ἔστι γὰρ τι καθ᾽ οὗ κατηγορεῖται τούτων ἕκαστον,
ᾧ τὸ εἶναι ἕτερον, καὶ τῶν κατηγορεῶν ἑκάστῃ. Τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἄλλα
τῆς οὐσίας κατηγορεῖται" αὕτη δὲ, τῆς ὕλης. Ὥστε τὸ ἔσχατον,
καθ᾽ αὑτὸ οὔτε τὶ, οὔτε ποσὸν, οὔτε ἄλλο οὐδέν ἐστιν " οὐδὲ δὴ αἱ
ἀποφάσεις.


THE HEXAEMERON.


If I ask you to leave these vain questions,
I will not expect you to try and find out the
earth’s point of support. The mind would
reel on beholding its reasonings losing them-
selves without end. Do you say that the


carth reposes on a bed of air?’ How,
then, can this soft substance, without
consistency, resist the enormous weight


which presses upon it? How is it that it
does not slip away in all directions, to avoid
the sinking weight, and to spread itself over
the mass which overwhelms it? Do you
suppose that water is the foundation of the
earth?? You will then always have toask
yourself how it is that so heavy and opaque
a body does not pass through the water ; how
a mass of such a weight is held up by a
nature weaker than itself. Then you must
seek a base for the waters, and you will be
in much difficulty to say upon what the
water itself rests.

9. Do you suppose that a heavier body
prevents the earth from falling into the
ubyss? Then you must consider that this
support needs itself a support to prevent it
from falling. Can we imagine one? Our
reason again demands yet another support,
and thus we shall fall into the infinite, always
imagining a base for the base which we have
already found.* And the further we advance
in this reasoning the greater force we are
obliged to give to this base, so that it may be
able to support all the mass weighing upon
it. Put then a limit to your thought, so that
your curiosity in investigating the incompre-
hensible may not incur the reproaches of
Job, and you be not asked by him, ‘* Where-
upon are the foundations thereof fastened ? ” *
If ever you hear in the Psalms, ** I bear up
the pillars of it;”° see in these pillars the
power which sustains it. Because what
means this other passage, ‘He _ hath
founded it upon the sea,”® if not that the
water is spread all around the earth? How
then can water, the fluid element which flows
down every declivity, remain suspended
without ever flowing? You do not reflect
that the idea of the earth suspended by it-
self throws your reason into a like but even
greater difficulty, since from its nature it is

1 cf. Arist., De Calo. ii. 13,16. ᾿Αναξιμένης δὲ καὶ ᾿Αναξάγο
pas kat Δημόκριτος τὸ πλάτος αἴτιον εἶναί φασι τοῦ μένειν αὐτήν"
οὐ γὰρ τέμνειν ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιπωματίζειν (covers like a lid) τὸν ἀέρα
τὸν κάτωθεν, ὅπερ φαίνεται τὰ πλάτος ἔχοντα τῶν σωματων ποιεῖν.

2 The theory of Thales. cf. note on Lefter viii. 2 and Arist.,
De Ceelo. ii. 13, 13, where he-speaks of Thales describing the
earth floating like wood on water.

3 cf. Arist., De Cao. ii. 13 (Grote’s tr.) : * The Kolophonian
Xenophanes afiirmed that the lower depths of the earth were
rooted downwirds to infinity, in order to escape the trouble-
some obligation of looking tor a reason why it remained sta-
tionary.” To this Empedokles_ objected, and suggested
velocity of rotation for the cause of the earth’s maintaining its


position


4 job XXXViil. 6. 5 Ps, 1Xxv. 23. 6 Ps, xxiv. 2.


50


heavier. But let us admit that the earth
rests upon itself, or let us say that it rides o11
the waters, we must still remain faithful to
thought of true religion and recognise that
all is sustained by the Creator’s power. Let
us then reply to ourselves, and let us reply
to those who ask us upon what support this
enormous mass rests, ‘* In His hands are the
ends of the earth.”' It is a doctrine as in-
fallible for our own information as profitable
for our hearers.

10. There are inquirers into nature * who
with a great display of words give reasons
for the immobility of the earth. Placed, they
say, in the middle of the universe and not
being able to incline more to one side than
the other because its centre is everywhere
the same distance from the surface, it neces-
sarily rests upon itseif; since a weight which
is everywhere equal cannot lean to either
side. It is not, they go on, without reason
or by chance that the earth occupies the
centre of the universe. It is its natural and
necessary position. As the celestial body
occupies the higher extremity of space all
heavy bodies, they argue, that we may sup-
pose to have fallen from these high regions,
will be carried from all directions to the
centre, and the point towards which the
parts are tending wil! evidently be the one to
which the whole mass will be thrust together.
If stones, wood, all terrestrial bodies, fall from
above downwards, this must be the proper
and natural place of the whole earth. If,
on the contrary, a light body is separated
from the centre, it is evident that it will
ascend towards the higher regions. Thus
heavy bodies move from the top to the bot-
tom, and following this reasoning, the bot-
tom is none other than the centre of the
world. Do not then be surprised that the
world never falls: it occupies the centre of
the universe, its natural place. By ali
necessity it is obliged to remain in its place,
unless a movement contrary to nature should
displace it.? If there is anything in this
system which might appear probable to you,
keep your admiration for the source of such
perfect order, for the wisdom of God. Grand
phenomena do not strike us the less when
we have discovered something of their
wenderful mechanism. Is it otherwise here?
At all events let us prefer the simplicity of
faith to the demonstrations of reason.

11. We might say the same thing of the


1Ps, xcv. 4, LXX.

2 oi φυσικοὶ was the name given to the Ionic and other phi-
losophers who preceded Socrates. Lucian (Ver. 4) calls
Thales φυσικώτατος.

8 cf. De Colo. ii. 14,4. Ἔτι δ᾽ ἡ φορὰ τῶν μορίων Kai ὅλης
αὐτῆς ἡ κατὰ φύσιν ἐπὶ τὸ μέσον τοῦ παντός ἐστιν, διὰ τοῦτο γὰρ
καὶ τυγχάνει κειμένη νῦν ἐπὶ τοῦ κέντρου.


58


BASS


heavens. With what a noise of words thesages
of this world have discussed their nature!
Some have said that heaven is composed of
four elementsas being tangible and visible, and
is made up of earth on account of its power
of resistance, with fire because it is striking
to the eye, with air and water on account of
the mixture.’ Others have rejected this sys-
tem as improbable, and introduced into the
world, to form the heavens, a fifth element
after their own fashioning. There exists,
they say, an ethereal body which is neither
fire, air, earth, nor water, nor in one word
any simple body. These simple bodies have
their own natural motion in a straight line,
light bodies upwards and heavy bodies down-
wards; now this motion upwards and down-
wards is not the same as circular motion;
there is the greatest possible difference be-
tween straight and circular motion. It
therefore follows that bodies whose motion
is SO various must vary also in their essence.
But, it is not even possible to suppose that
the heavens should be formed of primitive
bodies which we call elements, because the
reunion of contrary forces could not produce
an even and spontaneous motion, when
each of the simple bodies is receiving a
different impulse from nature. Thus it is a
labour to maintain composite bodies in con-
tinual movement, because it is impossible to
put even a single one of their movements
in accord and harmony with all those that
are in discord; since what is proper to the
light particle, is in warfare with that of a
heavier one. If we attempt to rise we are
stopped by the weight of the terrestrial ele-
ment; if we throw ourselves down we
violate the igneous part of our being in
dragging it down contrary to its nature.
Now this struggle of the elements effects
their dissolution. A body to which violence
is done and which is placed in opposition to
nature, after a short but energetic resistance,
is soon dissolved into as many parts as it had
elements, each of the constituent parts return-
ing to its natural place. It is the force of
these reasons, say the inventors of the fifth
kind of body for the genesis of heaven and
the stars, which constrained them to reject
the system of their predecessors and to have
recourse to their own hypothesis.” But
1This is the doctrine of Plato vide Tim. The Combef.
MSS. reads not μίξις, mixture, but μέθεξις, participation.

2 Here appears to be a reference to Arist., De Gen. Ann, ii.
3,11, πάσης μὲν οὖν ψυχῆς δύναμις ἑτέρον σώματος ἐόικε κεκοινωνη-
κέναι καὶ θειοτέρου τῶν καλουμένων στοιχείων " ὡς δὲ διαφέρουσι
τιμιότητι αἱ ψυχαὶ καὶ ἀτιμίᾳ ἀλλήλων οὕτω καὶ ἡ τοιαύτη διαφέρει
φύσις, and again. πνεῦμα. . . ἀνάλογον οὖσα τῷ τῶν ἄστρων
στοιχείῳ. On the fifth element of Aristotle cf. Cic., Tusc. Disp.
i. 10. Aristoteles...cum quatuor tlla genera principiorum
erat complexus, equibus omnia ortrentur, guintam quandam


naturam censet esse. equasit mens. Aug., De Civ. Det xxii. 11.
2, and Cudworih’s /ut. Syst, (Harrison’s Ed, 1845) iii. p. 465.


yet another fine speaker arises and disperses
and destroys this theory to give predomi-
nance to an idea of his own invention.

Do not let us undertake to follow them for
fear of falling into like frivolities; let them
refute each other, and, without disquieting
ourselves about essence, let us say with
Moses ‘* God created the heavens and the
earth.” Let us glorify the supreme Artificer
for all that was wisely and skillfully made ;
by the beauty of visible things let us raise
ourselves to Him who is above all beauty ;
by the grandeur of bodies, sensible and
limited in their nature, let us conceive of
the infinite Being whose immensity and
omnipotence surpass all the efforts of the
imagination. Because, although we ignore
the nature of created things, the objects
which on all sides attract our notice are so
marvellous, that the most penetrating mind
cannot attain to the knowledge of the least
of the phenomena of the world, either to
give a suitable explanation of it or to render
due praise to the Creator, to Whom belong
all glory, all honour and all power world
without end. Amen.


HOMILY 11.


“ The earth was invisible and unfinished.” '


1. In the few words which have occupied
us this morning we have found such a depth
of thought that we despair of penetrating
further. If ssuch),is πὸ. fote:courtionehe
sanctuary, if the portico of the temple is so
grand and magnificent, ifthe splendour of its
beauty thus dazzles the eyes of the soul,
what will be the holy of holies? Who will
dare to try to gain access to the innermost
shrine? Who will look into its secrets? To
gaze into it is indeed forbidden us, and lan-
guage is powerless to express what the mind
conceives. However, since there are re-
wards, and most desirable ones, reserved by
the just Judge for the intention alone of
doing good, do not let us hesitate to continue
our researches. Although we may not at-
tain to the truth, if, with the help of the


Hence the word ‘‘ quintessence,” for which the Dictionaries
quote Howard’s Translation of Plutarch, ‘‘ Aristoteles hath
put ... for elements foure; and for a fifth quintessence,
the heavenly body which is immutable.” Skeat 5. v. points
out that ‘*the idea is older than Aristotle: cf. the five Skt.
bhitas, or elements, which were earth, air, fire, and water, and
wether. Thus the fifth essence is zther, the subtlest and high-
est.”” It is evident that Milton had these theories in mind
when he wrote (Par. Lost, iii. 716) :


‘¢ Swift to their several quarters hasted then
The cumbrous elements, earth, flood, air, fire;
And this ethereal quintessence of heaven
Flew upward, spirited with various forms,
That rolled orbicular, and turned to stars
Numberless.”


1 Gen. i. 2, LXX.


THE HEXAEMERON,


59


Spirit, we do not fall away from the meaning
of Holy Scripture we shall not deserve to be
rejected, and, with the help of grace, we


shall contribute to the edification of the |


Church of God.

‘¢The earth,” says Holy Scripture, ‘* was
invisible and unfinished.” The heavens and
the earth were created without distinction.
How then is it that the heavens are perfect
whilst the earth is still unformed and incom-
plete? In one word, what was the unfinished
condition of the earth? And for what reason
was it invisible? The fertility of the earth
is its perfect finishing; growth of all kinds
of plants, the upspringing of tall trees, both
productive and sterile, flowers’ sweet scents
and fair colours, and all that which, a little
later, at the voice of God came forth from the
earth to beautify her, their universal Mother.
As nothing of all this yet existed, Scripture
is right in calling the earth ‘* without form.”
We could also say of the heavens that they
were still imperfect and had not received
their natural adornment, since at that time
they did not shine with the glory of the sun
and of the moon and were not crowned by the
choirs of the stars." These bodies were not
yet created. Thus you will not diverge from
the truth in saying that the heavens also were
ἐς without form.” The earth was invisible
for two reasons: it may be because man, the
spectator, did not yet exist, or because being
submerged under the waters which over-
flowed the surface, it could not be seen,
since the waters had not yet been gathered
together into their own places, where God
afterwards collected them, and gave them the
name of seas. What is invisible? First of
all that which our fleshly eye cannot per-
ceive; our mind, for example; then that
which, visible in its nature, is hidden by
some body which conceals it, like iron in the
depths of the earth. It isin this sense, be-
cause it was hidden under the waters, that
the earth was still invisible. However, as
light did not yet exist, and as the earth lay
in darkness, because of the obscurity of the
air above it, it should not astonish us that for
this reason Scripture calls it ‘* invisible.”

-2. But the corrupters of the truth, who,
incapable of submitting their reason to Holy
Scripture, distort at will the meaning of
the Holy Scriptures, pretend that these
words mean matter. For it is matter, they
say, which from its nature is without form
and invisible, — being by the conditions of
its existence without quality and without form


1 ε΄. Hom., 771. xviii. 485, ἐν δὲ τὰ τείρεα πάντα τά τ᾽ οὐρανὸς
ἐστεφάνωται, ἀπά Tennyson’s ‘When young night divine
crowned dying day with stars.” (Palace of Art.)


and figure.’ The Artificer submitting it to
the working of His wisdom clothed it with a
form, organized it, and thus gave being to
the visible world.

If matter is uncreated, it has a claim to the
same honours as God, since it must be of
equal rank with Him. Is this not the
summit of wickedness, that an extreme de-
formity, without quality, without form, shape,
ugliness without configuration, to use their
own expression, should enjoy the same pre-
rogatives with Him, Who 15 wisdom,
power and beauty itself, the Creator and the
Demiurge of the universe? This is not all.
If matter is so great as to be capable of being
acted on by the whole wisdom of God, it
would in a way raise its hypostasis to an
equality with the inaccessible power of God,
since it would be able to measure by itself all
the extent of the divine intelligence. If it is
insufficient for the operations of God, then
we fall into a more absurd blasphemy, since
we condemn God for not being able, on ac-
count of the want of matter, to finish Hisown
works. The poverty of human nature has
deceived these reasoners. Each of our crafts
is exercised upon some special matter —the
art of the smith upon iron, that of the car-
penter on wood. In all, there is the subject,
the form and the work which results from the
form. Matter is taken from without — art
gives the form —and the work is composed
at the same time of form and of matter.’

Such is the idea that they make for them-
selves of the divine work. The form of the
world is due to the wisdom of the supreme
Artificer; matter came to the Creator from
without; and thus the world results from a
double origin. It has received from outside
its matter and its essence, and from God its
form and figure.* They thus come to deny
that the mighty God has presided at the
formation of the universe, and pretend that
He hasonly brought a crowning contribution
toa common work, that He has only con-
tributed some simall portion to the genesis of
beings: they are incapable from the debase-


1On prime matter and its being ἄσωματος and ἄμορφος viiie
Cudworth, /ut. Syst. v. ii. § 27, and Mosheim’s note. ‘* Jzgens
vero quondam summorum et inclytorum virorum numerus ab
corum semper stetit partibus, quibus ex qua dixi ratione, ma-
tertam placuit decernere ἀσώματον esse, sive corpore carere.
Cicero omnes saa Platonem philosophos hoc dogma perhibet
tenutsse, Acad. Quest. t.7,‘ sed subjectam putant omnibus sine
ulla δι λδρ θη: atque carentem omni illa qualitate materiam
guandam ex qua omnia expressa atque effecta sint.’ Sed jam
din ante Platonem Pythagor@orum multi et addicti fuerunt,
guod ex Timei Locri, nobilis hujus schole et perantiqut phi-
losopht, De Anima Mundi libello (Cap. t. p. 544, Ed. Galet)
intelligitur: τὰν ὕλαν ἄμοοφον δὲ καθ᾽ αὐτὰν και ἀχρημάτιστον
δεχόμενον δὲ πᾶσαν μορφάν.᾽"

2cf. Arist., Met. vi. 7, πάντα" δὲ τὰ γιγνόμενα ὑπό τέ τινος
γίγνεται, καὶ ἔκ τινος, καὶ Ti. . - τὸ δὲ ἐξ οὗ γίγνεται, ἣν λέγομεν
ὕλην ... τὸ δὲ ὑφ᾽ οὗ, τῶν φύσει τι ὄντων - - - Eidos δὲ λέγω τὸ τί ἣν
εἶναι ἑκάστον. καὶ τὴν πρώτην οὐσίαν.

2 Cudworth, 754. Syst. iv.6, and remarks there on Cic.,
Acad. Quest.i.6. Arist. (Metaph. i. 2) says Θεὸς yap δοκει τὸ
αἴτιον πασιν εἰναι καὶ ἀρχή τις, but does this refer only to form?


60


BASIL.


ment of theirreasonings of raising theirglances
to the height of truth. Here below arts are
subsequent to matter — introduced into life
by the indispensable need of them. Wool
existed before weaving made it supply one
of nature’s imperfections. Wood existed be-
fore carpentering took possession of it, and
transformed it each day to supply new wants,
and made us see all the advantages derived
from it, giving the oar to the sailor, the
winnowing fan to the labourer, the lance to
the soldier. But God, before all those things
which now attract our notice existed, after
casting about in His mind and determining
to bring into being that which had no being,
imagined the world such as it ought to be,
and created matter in harmony with the form
which He wished to give it." He assigned
to the heavens the nature adapted for the
heavens, and gave to the earth an essence 1n
accordance with its form. He formed, as He
wished, fire, air and water, and gave to each
the essence which the object of its existence
required. Finally, He welded all the diverse
parts of the universe by links of indissoluble
attachment and established between them so
perfect a fellowship and harmony that the
most distant, in spite of their distance, ap-
peared united in one universal sympathy.
Let those men therefore renounce their fabu-
lous imaginations, who, in spite of the weak-
ness of their argument, pretend to measure a
power as incomprehensible to man’s reason
as it is unutterable by man’s voice.

3. God created the heavens and the earth,
but not only half;—-He created all the
heavens and all the earth, creating the
essence with the form. For He is not an in-
ventor of figures, but the Creator even of the
essence of beings. Further let them tell us
how the efficient power of God could deal
with the passive nature of matter, the lat-
ter furnishing the matter without form, the
former possessing the science of the form
without matter, both being in need of each
other; the Creator in order to display His
art, matter in order to cease to be without
form and to receive a form.’ But let us stop
here and return to our subject.

1 Gen. ii. 5, ‘‘ every herb of the field before it grew.” There
seems here an indication of the actual creation, ποίησις, being
in the mind of God.

2 Fialon quotes Bossuet: “ $e ne trouve point que Dieu,
qui acréé toutes choses, ait eu besoin, comme un ouvriter vul-
gatre, de trouver une matiére préparée sur laquelle il trav-
atllat, et de laquelle 11 dit son ouvrage. Mats, n’ayant
besoin pour agir que de lut-méme et de sa propre puissance ila
fait tout son ouvrage. Il west potnt un simple faiseur de
formes et de figures dans une matirre préexistante; tl a fait
et la matiére et la forme, cest-a-dire son ouvrage dans son
tout; autrement son ouvrage ne lut doit pas tout, et dans son
fond tl est indépendamment de son ouvrier....

“0 Dieu quelle a été lV’ ignorance des sages du monde, qu'on
a appelés philosophes d'avotr cru que vous, parfatt architecte


et absolu formateur de tout ce qui est, vous aviez trouvé sous
vos mains une matiére qui vous otait co-éternelle, informe


“©The earth was invisible and unfin-
ished.” In saying ‘*In the beginning God
created the heavens and the earth,” the
sacred writer passed over many things in
silence, water, air, fire and the results from
them, which, all forming in reality the true
complement of the world, were, without
doubt, made at the same time as the universe.
By this silence, history wishes to train the
activity of our intelligence, giving it a weak
point for starting, toimpel it to the discovery
of the truth. Thus, we are not told of the
creation of water; but, as we are told that
the earth was invisible, ask yourself what
could have covered it, and prevented it from
being seen? Fire could not conceal it.
Fire brightens all about it, and spreads light
rather than darkness around. No more was
it air that enveloped the earth. Air by nat-
ure is of little density and transparent. It re-
ceives all kinds of visible object, and trans-
mits them to the spectators. Only one sup-
position remains; that which floated on the
surface of the earth was water —the fluid
essence which had not yet been confined to
its own place. Thus the earth was not only
invisible ; it was still incomplete. Even to-
day excessive damp is a hindrance to the pro-
ductiveness of the earth. The same cause
at the same time prevents it from being seen,
and from being complete, for the proper
and natural adornment of the earth is its
completion: corn waving in the valleys —
meadows green with grass and rich with
many coloured flowers —fertile glades and
hill-tops shaded by forests. Of all this
nothing was yet produced; the earth was in
travail with it in virtue of the power that she
had received fromthe Creator. But she was
waiting for the appointed time and the divine
order to bring forth.

4. ‘* Darkness was upon the face of the
deep.” ? A new source for fables and most
impious imaginations if one distorts the sense
of these words at the will of one’s fancies.
By ‘* darkness” these wicked men do not
understand what is meant in reality — air not
illumined, the shadow produced by the inter-


néamoins, et qut attendait de vous sa perfection! Aveugles,
qui n’entendatent pas que d’étre capabie de forme, Cest deja
quelque forme; cest quelque perfection, que @étre capable de
perfection ; et st la matiére avait d’elle-méme ce commence-
ment de perfection et de forme, elle en pouvatt aussitot avoir
@’elleméme lV entier accomplissement.

‘* Aveugles, conducteurs d’aveugles, quit tombez dans le
ahaa δὲ τ et y jetez ceux qui vous suivent \ St. Matthieu xv.
14), dites-mots qui a assujeti ἃ Dieu ce qu il n'a pas fat, ce
gut est de sot aussi bien que Dieu. ce gui est indépendamment
de Dieu méme? Par or a-t-tl trouvé prise sur ce qui lut est
étranger et independant et sa puissance; et par quel art ou
guel pouvotr se Pest-tl soumis?. .. Mats qu’est-ce aprés tout
gue cette matrére st parfait, qu'elle att wietene ce fond de
son étre; et st tmparfatte, quelle attende sa perfection d’un
autre? Dieu aura fait l’accident et n’aura pas fait la sub-
stance? (Bossuet, Elévations sur les mystéres, 96 semaine,
2e elevat.) 1 Gen, i. 2.


THE HEXARMERON.


61


position of a body, or finally a place for
some reason deprived of light. For them
εἰ darkness” is an evil power, or rather
the personification of evil, having his origin
in himself in opposition to, and in perpetual
struggle with, the goodness of God. 1
God is light, they say, without any doubt
the power which struggles against Him
must be darkness, ‘‘ Darkness” not owing
its existence to a foreign origin, but an evil
existing. by . itself. .‘* Darkness” is the
enemy of souls, the primary cause of death,
the adversary of virtue. The words of
the Prophet, they say in their error, show
that it exists and that it does not proceed
from God. From this what perverse and
impious dogmas have beenimagined! What
grievous wolves,’ tearing the flock of the
Lord, have sprung from these words to cast
themselves upon souls! Isit not from hence
that have come forth Marcions and Valen-
tini,” and the detestable heresy of the Man-
icheans,? which you may without going far
wrong call the putrid humour of the
churches.

O man, why wander thus from the truth,
and imagine for thyself that which will cause
thy perdition? ‘The word is simple and


within the comprehension of all. ‘**The
earth was invisible.” Why? Because the
** deep ” was spread over its surface. What


is**the deep”? A mass of water of extreme
depth. But we know that we can see many
bodies through clear and transparent water.
How then was it that no part of the earth
appeared through the water? Because the
air which surrounded it was still without
light and in darkness. The rays of the sun,
penetrating the water, often allow us to see
the pebbles which form the bed of the river,
but ina dark night it is impossible for our
glance to penetrate under the water. Thus,
these words ‘‘the earth was invisible” are
explained by those that follow; ‘‘ the deep ”
covered it and itself was indarkness. Thus,
the deep is not a multitude of hostile powers,
as has been imagined ;* nor δ΄ darkness” an


1 Acts xx. 29.

2 Marcion and Valentinus are roughly lumped together as
types of gnostic dualism. On the distinction between their
systems see Dr. Salmon in D.C.&. iii. $20. Marcion, said to
have been the son of a bishop of Sinope, is the most Christian
of the gnostics, and ‘tries to fit in his dualism with the
Christian creed and with the scriptures.’”? But he expressly
“ asserted the existence of two Gods.” The Valentinian ideas
and emanations travelled farther afield.

3On Manicheism, v/de Beausobre’s Critical History of Man-
tcheism, and Walch, /iist. Ketz. i. 770. With its theory of
two principles it spread widely over the empire in the 4th
c., Was vigorous in Armenia in the oth, and is said to have
appeared in France inthe 12th. (cf. Bayle, Dict. s.v.) On the
view taken of the heresy in Basil’s tine cf. Gregory of Nyssa,
Against Eunomtius i. § 35.

4 7,6. by those who would identify the ἄβυσσος (Tehém) of
Gen. i. 2 with that of Luke i. 31, and understand it to mean
the abode in prison of evil spirits. The Hebrew word occurs
in Job xxviii. 14 and Deut, xxxiii. 13 for the depth of waters,


evil sovereign force in enmity with good. In
reality two rival principles of equal power,
if engaged without ceasing in a war o
mutual attacks, will end in self destruction.
But if one should gain the mastery it would
completely annihilate the conquered. Thus,
to maintain the balance in the struggle
between good and evil is to represent them as
engaged in a war without end and in perpet-
ual destruction, where the opponents are at
the same time conquerors and conquered. [1
good is the, stronger, what is there to pre-
vent evil being completely annihilated? But
if that be the case, the very utterance of
which is impious, I ask myself how it is
that they themselves are not filled with
horror to think that they have imagined
such abominable blasphemies.

It is equally impious to say that evil has
its origin from God; ' because the contrary
cannot proceed from its contrary. Life docs
not engender death; darkness is not the
origin of light; sickness is not the maker of
health.? In the changes of conditions there
are transitions from one condition to the con-
trary; but in genesis each being proceeds
from its like, and not from its contrary. If
then evil is neither uncreate nor created by
God, from whence comes its nature? Cer-
tainly that evil exists, no one living in the
world will deny. What shall we say then?
Evil is not a living animated essence; it is
the condition of the soul opposed to virtue,
developed in the careless on account of their
falling away from good.?

5- Do not then go beyond yourself to
seek for evil, and imagine that there is an
original nature of wickedness. Each of us,


1 With this view Plutarch charges the Stoics. Αὐτοὶ τῶν
κακῶν ἀρχὴν ἀγαθὸν ὄντα τὸν Θεὺν ποιοῦσι. (ς. Stotcos, 1976.)
But it is his deduction from their statements — not their own
statement. cf. Mosheim’s note on Cudworth iv. §13. Origen
(c. Celsum vi.) distinguishes between τὴν κακίαν καὶ Tas an’
αὑτῆς πράξεις, and κακόν aS punitive and remedial; if the latter
can rightly be called evil in any sense, God is the author of it.
cf. Amos iii. 6. Vide, also, Basil’s treatment of this ques-
tion in his Treatise ὅτι οὐκ ἐστιν aitios τῶν κακὼν ὃ Geos.
cf. Schroeck. Kirchengeschichte xiii. 194.

2 Fialon points out the correspondence with Plat. Phed.
§ 119, καί τις εἰπε τῶν παρόντων ἀκούσας. .. πρὸς Θεν, οὐκ ἐν
τοῖς πρόσθεν ἡμιν λόγοις αὐτὸ τὸ ἐναντίον τῶν νυνὶ λεγομένων
ὡμολογεῖτο, ἐκ τοῦ ἐλάττονος τὸ μεῖζον γίγνεσθαι, καὶ ἐκ TOU μει-
ζονος τὸ ἔλαττον, καὶ ἀτεχνῶς αὕτη εἶναι ἡ γένεσις τοῖς ἐναντίοις
ἐκ τῶν ἐναντίων ; νῦν δέ μοι δοκεῖ λέγεσθαι OTL τοῦτο οὐκ ἄν ποτε
γένοιτο. Καὶ ὃ Σωκράτης ..- .- ἔφη. .-.- οὐκ ἐννοεῖς τὸ διαφέρον τοῦ
τι νῦν λεγομένον καὶ τοῦ τότε" τότε μὲν γὰρ ἐλέγετο ἐκ τοῦ
ἐναντίου πράγματος τὸ ἐναντίον πρᾶγμα γίγνεσθαι, νῦν δὲ ὅτι αὐτὸ
τὸ ἐναντίον ἑαυτῷ ἐναντίον οὐκ ἂν ποτε γένοιτο, οὔτε τὸ ἐν ἡμῖν
οὔτε τὸ ἐν φύσει: τότε μὲν γὰρ περὶ τῶν ἐχόντων τῶν ἐναντίων
ἐλέγομεν, ἐπονομάζοντες αὐτὰ τῇ ἐκείνων ἐπωνυμίᾳ, νῦν δὲ περὶ
ἐκείνων αὐτῶν ὧν ἐνόντων, ἔχει τὴν ἐπωνυμίαν TA ὀνομαζόμενα,
αὐτὰ δ᾽ ἐκείνα οὐκ ἄν ποτέ φαμεν ἐθελῆσαι γένεσιν ἀλλήλων
δέξασθαι.

3 ** Cette phrase est prise textuellement dans Denys I’ Aréop-
agite,ou du moins dans Pouvrage qui lut est attvibué. (De
Biv. Nom.tv 18. Laur. Lyd. de mensib. ed. Reth. 186, 28.).”
Fialon. In the Treatise referred to, περὶ Θείων ’Ovoudtwr,
“ὁ evil” is said to be “" nothing real and positive, but a defect, a
negation only. Στέρησις ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ κακὸν, καὶ ἔλλειψις, και
ἀσθένεια, καὶ ἀσυμμετρία.᾽" D.C.B. i. 846.

cf.“ Evil is null, is nought, is silence implying sound.”
Browning. Abt Vogler.


62


let us acknowledge it, is the first author of
his own vice. Among the ordinary events
of life, some come naturally, like old age
and sickness, others by chance like unforeseen
occurrences, of which the origin is beyond
ourselves, often sad, sometimes fortunate, as
for instance the discovery of a treasure when
digging a well, or the meeting of a mad dog
when going to the market place. Others
depend upon ourselves, such as ruling one’s
passions, or not putting a bridle on one’s
pleasures, to be master of our anger, or to
raise the hand against him who irritates us,
to tell the truth, or to lie, to have a sweet
and well-regulated disposition, or to be fierce
and swollen and exalted with pride.’ Here
ou are the master of your actions. Do not
look for the guiding cause beyond your-
self, but recognise that evil, rightly so called,
has no other origin than our voluntary falls.
If it were involuntary, and did not depend
upon ourselves, the laws would not have so
much terror for the guilty, and the tribunals
would not be so without pity when they
condemn wretches according to the measure
of their crimes. _ But enough concerning
evil rightly so called. Sickness, poverty,
obscurity, death, finally all human afflictions,
ought not to be ranked as evils; since we
do not count among the greatest boons
things which are their opposites.” Among
these afflictions, some are the effect of nature,
others have obviously been for many a source
of advantage. Let us then be silent for the
moment about these metaphors and _alle-
gories, and, simply following without vain
curiosity the words of Holy Scripture, let
us take from darkness the idea which it
gives us.

But reason asks, was darkness created
with the world? Is it older than light?
Why in spite of its inferiority has it pre-
ceded it? Darkness, we reply, did not
exist in essence; it is a condition produced
in the air by the withdrawal of light. What
then is that light which disappeared sud-
denly from the world, so that darkness
should cover the face of the deep? If any-
thing had existed before the formation of
this sensible and_ perishable world, no doubt
we conclude it would have been in light.
The orders of angels, the heavenly hosts,
_ lof. Epictetus, Ench. i. ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν ὑπόληψις, ὁρμὴ, ὄρεξις,
ἔκελισις, καὶ ἑνὶ λόγῳ, ὅσα ἡμέτερα ἔργα.

2cf. Μ. Aurelius II, xi. ὃ γὰρ χείρω μὴ ποιεῖ ἄνθρωπον, πῶς
δὴ τοῦτο βιον ἀνθρώπου χείρω ποιήσειεν ; - - - θάνατος δέ γε
καὶ ζωὴ, δόξα καὶ ἀδοξία, πόνος καὶ ἡδονὴ, πλοῦτος καὶ πενία,
πάντα ταῦτα ἐπίσης συμβαίνει ἀνθρώπων τοῖς τε ἀγαθοῖς καὶ τοῖς
κατοῖς, οὔτε καλὰ ὄντα οὔτε αἰσχρά * οὐτ᾽ ἀρ᾽ ἀγαθὰ οὔτε κακά ἐστι.
Also Greg. Nyss., Orat. Cat. viii. and Aug., De Οἷν. Det. i. 8.
Ista vero temporalia bona et mala utrisque voluit esse com-
munia, ut nec bona cuptdius appetantur, que malt quoque


habere cernuntur, nec mala turpiter evitentur, quibus et bont
plerumque afictuntur.


BASLE:


all intellectual natures named or unnamed,
all the ministering spirits,’ did not live in
darkness, but enjoyed a condition fitted for
them in light and spiritual joy.”

No one will contradict this; least of all he
who looks for celestial light as one of the
rewards promised to virtue, the light which,
as Solomon says, is always a light to the
righteous,* the light which made the Apostle
say ““ Giving thanks unto the Father, which
hath made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saintsin light.” * Finally,
if the condemned are sent into outer dark-
ness° evidently those who are made worthy
of God’s approval, are at rest in heavenly
light. When then, according to the order
of God, the heaven appeared, enveloping all
that its circumference included, a vast and
unbroken body separating outer things from
those which it enclosed, it necessarily kept
the space inside in darkness for want of
communication with the outer light. Three
things are, indeed, needed to form a shadow,
light, a body, a dark place. The shadow of
heaven forms the darkness of the world.
Understand, I pray you, what I mean, by a
simple example; by raising for yourself at
mid-day a tent of some compact and im-
penetrable material, and shutting yourself
up init in sudden darkness. Suppose that
original darkness was like this, not subsist-
ing directly by itself, but resulting from
some external causes. If it is said that’ it
rested upon the deep, it is because the ex-
tremity of air naturally touches the surface
of bodies; and as at that time the water
covered everything, we are obliged to say
that darkness was upon the face of the deep.

6. And the Spirit of God was borne upon
the face of the waters. Does this spirit
mean the diffusion of air? ‘The sacred writer
wishes to enumerate to you the elements of
the world, to tell you that God created the
heavens, the earth, water, and air and that
the last was now diffused and in motion; or
rather, that which is truer and confirmed by
the authority of the ancients, by the Spirit of
God, he means the Holy Spirit. It is, as
has been remarked, the special name, the
name above all others that Scripture delights
to give to the Holy Spirit, and always by
the spirit of God the Holy Spirit is meant,


1 of, Heb. i. 14.

2cf. Theod. (Quest. in Gen.vi.) who is ready to accept the
creation of angels before the creation of the world. Origen,
Hom.it.in Gen. Hom. ἐσ. ἴθ 15. taught the existence of angels
‘‘ before the zons.”” Greg. Naz., Orat. xxxvili. The Ixx. Trans,
of Job xxxviii. 7, yvetuv me πάντες ἄγγελοί μου may have aided
in the formation of the yeveral opinion of the Greek Fathers,
The systematization of the hierarchies is due to the pseudo,
Dionysius, and was trinsmitted to the west through John
Erigena. cf. Milman, Lut. Christ. ix. 59.

8 Prov. xiii. 9, 1xx. 5 cf, Matt, xxii. 13.

Col. i. 12. © Gen. i. 2, xxx,


THE HEXAEMERON.


63


the Spirit which completes the divine and
blessed Trinity. . You will find it better
therefore to take it in this sense. How then
did the Spirit of God move upon the waters?
The explanation that I am about to give you
is not an original one, but that of a Syrian,’
who was as ignorant in the wisdom of this


world as he was versed in the knowledge of


the Truth, He said, then, that the Syriac
word was more expressive, and that being
more analogous to the Hebrew term it was
a nearer approach to the scriptural sense.
This is the meaning of the word; by ‘* was
borne” the Syrians, he says, understand: it
cherished * the nature of the waters as one
sees a bird cover the eggs with her body and
impart to them vital force from her own
warmth. Such is, as. nearly as possible,
the meaning of these words — the Spirit was
borne: let us understand, that is, prepared
the nature of water to produce living beings :3
a sufficient proof for those who ask if the
Holy Spirit took an active part in the crea-
tion of the world.

7. And God said, Let there be light:
The first word of God created the nature of
light; it made darkness vanish, dispelled
gloom, illuminated the world, and gave to all
beings at the same time a sweet and gracious
aspect. The heavens, until then enveloped
in darkness, appeared with that beauty which
they still present to our eyes. The air was
lighted up, or rather made the light circulate
mixed with its substance, and, distributing its
splendour rapidly in every direction, so
dispersed itself to its extreme limits. Up it
sprang to the very zther and heaven. In
an instant it lighted up the whole extent of
the world, the North and the South, the East
and the West. For the ether also is sucha
subtle substance and so transparent that it
needs not the space of a moment for light to
pass through it. Just as it carries our


1 Tillemont understands Eusebius of Samosata. The Ben.
note prefers Ephrem Syrus, and compares Jerome, Quest. Lieb.
Col. 50S.

2 Gen. i. 2. Vide R.V. margin. The word rachaph,
**brood,” is not used of wind, and itself appears to fix the
meaning of the Spirit in the place. An old interpretation of
the Orphic Poem Argonautica would identify the brooding
Spirit of Genesis with the All. Wise Love of the Greek poet:


πρῶτα μὲν ἀρχαίου χάεος μεγαλήφατον ὕμνον,
ὡς ἐπάμειψε φύσεις, ws τ᾽ οὐρανὸς ἐς πέρας ἦλθεν,
γῆ; τ᾽ εὐρυστέρνου γένεσιν, πυθμένας τε θαλάσσης,
πρεσβύτατόν τε καὶ αὐτοτελῆ πολ 'μητιν ἔρωτα,
ὄσσα τ᾽ ἔφυσεν ἅπαντα, τὰ δ᾽ ἔγγιθεν ἄλλου az’ ἄλλο.
Orph., Angon, 423-427.
On the translation of rachaph by ““ brooding,” cf. Milton,
Last, vii. :
** darkness profound
Covered the abvss; but on the watery calm +
1115 brooding wings the Spirit of God outspread,
And vital virtue infused, and vital warmth,
Throughout the fluid mass.’’
8 ζωογονία. cf. De Sp. S.§ 55, and Bp. Pearson, on the Creed.
Vis


Art.
*Gea.t. 3.


sight instantaneously to the object of vision,!
so without the least interval, with a rapidity
that thought cannot conceive, it receives
these rays of light in its uttermost limits.
With light the zther becomes more pleasing
and the waters more limpid. These last,
not content with receiving its splendour,
return it by the reflection of light and in all
directions send forth quivering flashes. The
divine word gives every object a more cheer-
ful and a more attractive appearance, just as
when men in deep sea pour in oil they make
the place about them clear. So, with a sin-
gle word and in one instant, the Creator of
all things gave the boon of light to the
world.?

Let there be light. The order was it-
self an operation, and a state of things was
brought into being, than which man’s mind
cannot even imagine a pleasanter one for our
enjoyment. It must be well understood that
when we speak of ‘the voice, of the word, of
the command of God, this divine language
does not mean to us a sound which escapes
from the organs of speech, a collision of air?
struck by the tongue; it is a simple sign of
the will of God, and, if we give it the form
of an order, it is only the better to impress
the souls whom we instruct.*

And God saw the light, that ἐξ was good.®
How can we worthily praise light after the
testimony given by the Creator to its good-
ness? ‘The word, even among us, refers the


judgment to the eyes, incapable of raising


itself to the idea that the senses have already
received.® But, if beauty in bodies results
from symmetry of parts, and the harmonious


1 T.ight is said to travel straight at the rate of about 195,000
English miles a second; a-velocity estimated by observations
on the eclipses of Jupiter’s satellites. The modern undulatory
theory of light, of which Huyghens (f 1695) is generally re-
garded as the author, describes light as propagated by the
vibrations of the imponderable matter termed Ether or _Zther.

2 The simile seems hardly worthy of the topic. The prac-
tice is referred to by Plutarch, Symp. Quest. i.g, and by Pliny,
Ifist. Nat. ii. 106.‘ Omne oleo tranquillart ; et ob id urin-
antes cre spargere, guoniam miliget naturam asperam lu-
cemque deportet.’”? “ gerere”? says the Delph, note, ‘ tum
credas oleum vicem conspiciliorum.”

3A statement not unlike the ‘‘ Vibrations of the elastic
medium,’ to which sound might now be referred. Sed
vocem Stotct corpus esse contendunxt: eamgque esse dicunt
ictum aera: Plato autem non esse vocem corpus esse pitat.
Non enim percussus, inguit, aer, sed plaga ipsa atque per-
CUSSIO, VOX est: οὐκ ἁπλὼς πληγὴ a€pos ἐστὶν ἡ φωνή πλήττει
γὰρ τὸν ἀέρα καὶ δάκτυλος παραγόμενος, καὶ οὐδέπω ποιεῖ φωνήν "
ἀλλ᾽ ἡ πόση πληγὴ, καὶ σφοδρὰ, καὶ τότη δὲ ὥστε ἀκουστὴν γενέσ-
Oar.” Aul. Gell., ΛΓ... ν. τς. So Diog. Laert. in Vita Zeno-
NUS 3 ἔστι φωνὴ anp TeTANYUEVOS.

4 Fialon quotes Bossuet 4me élév. 3me sem.: “ Le vot dit
Qu’on marche; et Varmée marche; gu’cn fasse telle évolu-
tion, et elle se fait ; toute une armée se remue au seul com-
mandement @un prince, cesta dire,a un seul petit mouvement
de ces livres, c'est, parmi les choses humaines, Vimage la plus
excellente de la puissance de Dieu; mais au fond que c'est
image est défectueuse! Dien n'a point de levees ἃ remuer ἢ
Dreu ne frappe point Latr pour en tirer quelque son ; Dieu n'a
qua voulotr en lut méme; et tout ce qu'il veut éternellement
s'accomplit comme il l’a voulu, et au temps qu'il a marque.’

Gens 1. 4.

6 St. Basil dwells rather on the sense of “ beautiful” in the
Ixx. καλόν. The Vulgate has pulchra.


64


appearance of colours, how ina simple and
homogeneous essence like light, can this
idea of beauty be preserved? Would not
the symmetry in light be less shown in its

arts than in the pleasure and delight at the
sight of it? Such is also the beauty of gold,
which it owes not to the happy mingling of
its parts, but only to its beautiful colour which
has a charm attractive to the eyes.

Thus again, the evening star is the most
beautiful of the stars:' not that the parts of
which it is composed form a harmonious
whole; but thanks to the unalloyed and
beautiful brightness which meets our eyes.
And further, when God proclaimed the
goodness of light, it was not in regard to the
charm of the eye but as a provision for fut-
ure advantage, because at that time there
were as yet no eyes to judge of its beauty.
“ And God divided the light from the dark-
ness;* that is to say, God gave them natures
incapable of mixing, perpetually in opposi-
tion to each other, and put between them
the widest space and distance.

8. ** And God called the light Day and
the darkness he called Night.” * Since the
birth of the sun, the light that it diffuses in
the air, when shining on our hemisphere, is
day ; and the shadow produced by its disap-
pearance is night. But at that time it was
not after the movement of the sun, but fol-
lowing this primitive light spread abroad in
the air or withdrawn in a measure deter-
mined by God, that day came and was fol-
lowed by night.

-ς And the evening and the morning were
the first day.”* Evening is then the bound-
ary common to day and night; and in the
same way morning constitutes the approach
of night to day. It was to give day the pri-
vileges of seniority that Scripture put the end
of the first day before that of the first night,
because night follows day: for, before the
creation of light, the world was not in night,
but in darkness. It is the opposite of day
which was called night, and it did not receive
its name until after day. Thus were created
the evening and the morning.’ Scripture
means the space of a day and a night, and
afterwards no more says day and night, but
calls them both under the name of the more
important: a custom which you will find


1 cf, Bion. xvi. 1:


ἽἜσπερε, κυανέας ἱερὸν, φίλε, νυκτὸς ἄγαλμα,
Τόσσον ἀφαυρότερος μήνας ὅσον ἔξοχος ἄστρων,
and Milton, P.L. iv. 605:
** Hesperus, that led
The starry host, rode brightest.”
2 Gen. i. 4. 3 Gen. 1. 5. τ θη τος
δΊΧχ, ‘The Heb.=literally “Απᾶ evening happened and
morning happened, one day.’? On the unique reckoning
of the day from evening to morning, sce the late Dr. McCaul
in Replics to Essays and Reviews.


BASIL.


—


throughout Scripture. Everywhere the
measure of time is counted by days, without
mention of nights. ‘*The days of our
years,” ' says the Psalmist. ‘‘ Few and evil
have the days of the years of my life been,” ἢ
said Jacob, and elsewhere ‘all the days of
my life.’* Thus under the form οὗ his-
tory the law is laid down for what is to
follow.

And the evening and the morning were
one day." Why does Scripture say ‘one
day ” not ** the first day”’? Before speaking
to us of the second, the third, and the fourth
days, would it not have been more natural to
call that one the first which began the series?
If it therefore says *¢ one day,” it is from a
wish to determine the measure of day and
night, and to combine the time that they con-
tain. Now twenty-four hours fill up the
space of one day — we mean of a day and of
anight; and if, at the time of the solstices,
they have not both an equal length, the time
marked by Scripture does not the less cir-
cumscribe their duration. It is as though it
said: twenty-four hours measure the space
of a day, or that, in reality a day is the time
that the neavens starting from one point take
to return there. Thus, every time that, in
the revolution of the sun, evening and morn-
ing occupy the world, their periodical suc-
cession never exceeds the space of one day.

But must we believe in a mysterious reason
for this? God who made the nature of time
measured it out and determined it by inter-
vals of days; and, wishing to give it a week
as a measure, he ordered the week to revolve
from period to period upon itself, to count
the movement of time, forming the week of
one day revolving seven times upon itself:
a proper circle begins and ends with itsclf.
Such is also the character of eternity, to
revolve upon itself and to end nowhere. It
then the beginning of time is called ‘‘ one
day” rather than ‘the first day,” it is be-
cause Scripture wishes to establish its rela-
tionship with eternity. It was, in reality,
fit and natural to call “Ἅ one” the day whose
character is to be one wholly separated and
isolated from all the others. If Scripture
speaks to us of many ages, saying every-
where, ‘‘ age of age, and ages of ages,” we
do not see it enumerate them as first, second,
and third. It follows that we are hereby
shown not so much limits, ends and succes-
sion of ages, as distinctions between various
states and modes of action. ‘** The day of
the Lord,” Scripture says, "ὁ is great and very
terrible,” > and elsewhere ‘** Woe unto you


8 Ps, xxiii. 6, LXX. δ 706] ai. 11-
4 σεη.ἰ. 5, LXX. and Heb.


1 Ps. XC. Io.
2 Gen. xlvii. 9.


THE HEAAEMERON.


————


that desire the day of the Lord: to what end '
isa for you?’ ‘T he day of the Lord is dark-
ness and not light.” ' A day of darkness for
those who are worthy of darkness. No; this
day without evening, without succession,
and without end is not unknown to Script-
ure, and it is the day that the Psalmist calls
the eighth day, because it is outside this
time of weeks.” Thus whether you call it
day, or whether you call it eternity, you ex-
press the same idea. Give this state the
name of day; there are not several, but only
one. If you call it eternity still it is unique
and not manifold. Thus it is in order
that you may carry your thoughts forward
towards a future life, that Scripture marks by
the word ‘‘one” the day which is the type
of eternity, the first fruits of days, the con-
temporary of light, the holy Lord’s day,
honoured by the Resurrection of our Lord.
And the evening and the morning were one
day.”

But, whilst I am conversing with you
about the first evening of the world, evening
takes me by surprise, and puts an end to my
discourse. May the Father of the true light,
Who has adorned day with celestial light,
Who has made the fire to shine which illu-
minates us during the night, Who reserves
for us in the peace of a future age a spiritual
and everlasting light, enlighten your hearts
in the knowledge of truth, keep you from
stumbling, and grant that ** you may walk
honestly as in the day.” * Thus shall you
shine as the sun in the midst of the glory
of the saints, and I shall glory in you in
the day of Christ, to Whom belong all glory
and power for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY III.


On the Firmament.


* WE have now recounted the works of
the first day, or rather of one day. Far be it
from me indeed,‘to take from it the privilege
it enjoys of having been for the Creator a
day apart, a day which is not counted in the
same order as the others. Our discussion yes-
terday treated of the works of this day, and
divided the narrative so as to give you food
for your souls in the morning, and joy in the
evening. To-day we pass on to the wonders
of the second day. And here I do not wish
to speak of the narrator’s talent, but of the
grace of Scripture, for the narrative is so
naturally told that it pleases and delights all

1 Amos v. 18.

2 The argument here is due to a misapprehension of the
meaning i the term eighth in Psalm vi, and xi, title. cf. ἢ.
on De Sp. S. § 66


§ Rom. xiii, 13.


lhe friends οὐ truth.


05


It is this charm of truth
which the Psalmist expresses so emphati-
cally when he says, ‘*‘ How sweet are thy
words unto my taste, yea, sweeter than honey
to my mouth.”* Yesterday then, as far as
we were able, we delighted our souls by
conversing about the oracles of God, and
now to-day we are met together again on the
second day to contemplate the wonders of
the second day.

I know that many artisans, belonging to
mechanical trades, are crowding around me.
A day’s labour hardly suffices to maintain
them; therefore I am compelled to abridge
my discourse, so as not to keep them too
long from their work. What shall I say to
them? The time which you lend to God is
not lost: he will return it to you with large
interest. Whatever difficulties may trouble
you the Lord will disperse them. To those
who have preferred spiritual welfare, He
will give health of body, keenness of mind,
success in business, and unbroken prosperity.
And, even if in this life our efforts should
not realise our hopes, the teachings of the
Holy Spirit are none the less a rich treasure
for the ages to come Deliver your heart,
then, from the cares of this life and give close
heed to my words. Of what avail will it be
to you if you are here in the body, and your
heart is anxious about your earthly treasure?

2. And God said ‘*Let there be a firma-
ment in the midst of the waters, and let it
divide the waters from the waters.”* Yes-
terday we heard God’s decree, ‘‘ Let there
be light.”” To-day it is, ‘* Let there be a
firmament.’ There appears to be something
more in this. The word is not limited to a
simple command. It lays down the reason
necessitating the structure of the firmament:
it is, it is said, to separate the waters from
the waters. And first let us ask how God
speaks? Is it in our manner? Does His
intelligence receive an impression from
objects, and, after having conceived them,
make them known by particular signs ap-
propriate to each of them? Has He conse-
quently recourse to the organs of voice to
convey His thoughts? Is He obliged to
strike the air by the articulate movements of
the voice, to unveil the thought hidden in
His heart? Would it not seem like an idle
fable to say that God should need such a cir-
cuitous method to manifest His thoughts? And
is it not more conformable with true religion
to say, that the divine will and the first im-
petus of divine intelligence are the Word of
God? It is He whom Scripture vaguely
represents, to show us that God has not only


LPs. CXIge 303, 2 Gen. i. 6.


66


wished to create the world, but to create it
with the help of a co-operator. Scripture
might continue the history as it 1s begun:
In the beginning God created the heaven and
the earth; afterwards He created light, then
He created the firmament. But, by making
God command and speak, the Scripture
tacitly shows us Him to Whom this order and
these words are addressed.' It is not that it
grudges us the knowledge of the truth, but that
it may kindle our desire by showing us some
trace and indication of the mystery. We seize
with delight, and carefully keep, the fruit of
laborious efforts, whilst a possession easily
attained is despised.” Such is the road and
the course which Scripture follows to lead
us to the idea of the Only begotten. And
certainly, God’s immaterial nature had no
need of the material language of voice,
since His very thoughts could be transmitted
to His feliow-worker. What need then of
speech, for those Who by thought alone could
communicate their counsels to each other?
Voice was made for hearing, and hearing
for voice. Where there is neither air, nor
tongue, nor ear, nor that winding canal
which carries sounds to the seat of sensation
in the head, there is no need for words:
thoughts of the soul are sufficient to transmit
the will. As I said then, this language is only
a wise and ingenious contrivance to set our
minds seeking the Person to whom the
words are addressed.

3. In the second place, does the firma-
ment that is called heaven differ from the
firmament that God made in the beginning?
Are there two heavens? The philosophers,
who discuss heaven, would rather lose their
tongues than grant this. There is only one
heaven,® they pretend; and it is of a nature
neither to admit of a second, nor of a third,
nor of several others. The essence of the
celestial body quite complete constitutes its
vast unity. Because, they say, every body
which has a circular motion is one and
finite. And if this body is used in the con-
struction of the first heaven, there will be


1 Origen, c. Cels. vi. Says Tov μὲν προσεχεῖς δημιουργὸν εἶναι
Tov υἱὸν Tov Θεοῦ λόγον, καὶ ὡσπερεὶ αὐτουργὸν τοῦ κόσμου, TOV
5: πατέρα τοῦ λόγου, τῷ προστεταχέναι τῷ Viw ἑαυτοῦ λόγῳ ποιῆσαι
τὸν κόσμον, εἶναι πρώτως δημιουργόν. cf. Athan., c. gentes

8, sq.
$ 4 Bolen is credited with the saving, δύσκολα Ta καλά. cf. the
German proverb, Gut ding wil wetle haben, and Virgil in
Georg. i. 121:

** Pater tpse colendé
laud facilem esse viam voluit.”

8 Plato said one. πότερον ὀὺν ὀρθως Eva ουρανὸν προειρήκαμεν;
ἢ πολλοὺς ἢ ἀπείρους λέγειν ἣν ὀρθότερον ; εἴπερ κατὰ TO παράδειγμα
δεδημιουργημένος ἔσται, τὸ γὰρ περιέχον πάντα ὁπόσα νοητὰ ζῶα,
μεθ᾽ ἑτέρον δεύτερον οὐκ ἂν ToT’ εἴη - « « εἷς OE μονογενὴς οὐρανὸς
“γεγονὼς ἔστι τε καὶ ἔσται. Plat., 7171. δ 11. On the other hand
was the Epicurean doctrine of the ἀπειρία κόσμων, referred to
in Luc. i. 73:

Ergo vivida vis animti pervictt, et extra
Processit longe flammantia menia mundi,


BASIE:


nothing left for the creation of a second or a
third. Here we see what those imagine who
put under the Creator’s hand uncreated
matter; a lie that follows from the first fable.
But we ask the Greek sages not to mock us
before they are agreed among themselves.
Because there are among them some who
say there are infinite heavens and worlds.’
When grave demonstrations shall have upset
their foolish system, when the laws of geo

metry shall have established that, according
to the nature of heaven, it is impossible that
there should be two, we shall only laugh the
more at this elaborate scientific trifling.
These learned men see not merely one
bubble but several bubbles formed by the
same cause, and they doubt the power of
creative wisdom to bring several heavens
into being! We find, however, if we
raise our eyes towards the omnipotence
of God, that the strength and grandeur
of the heavens differ from the drops of
water bubbling on the surface of a fountain.
How ridiculous, then, is their argument of
impossibility! As for myself, far from not
believing in a second, I seek for the third
whereon the blessed Paul was found worthy
to gaze.” And does not the Psalmist in say-
ing **heaven of heavens”* give us an idea
oftheir plurality? Is the plurality of heaven
stranger than the seven circles through which
nearly all the philosophers agree that the
seven plinets pass, — circles which they re-
present to us as placed in connection with
each other like casks fitting the one into the
other? These circles, they say, carried away
in a direction contrary to that of the world,
and striking the ether, make sweet and har-
monious sounds, unequalled by the sweetest
melody.* And if we ask them for the wit-
(Ding. Laert. ix. 44).

But, as Fialon points out, the Greek philosophers used
κόσμος and οὐρανός as convertible terms: Basil uses οὐρανός of
the firmament or sky.

2 cf. 2.\Cor, XH..2. 3 Ps. cxlvii. 4.

4 You must conceive it ” (the whirl) ‘* to be of such a kind
as this: as if in some great hollow whirl, carved throughout,
there was such another, but lesser, within it, adapted to it, like
casks fitted one within another; and in the same manner a


third, and a fourth, and four others, for that the whirls were
eight in all, as circles one within another .. . and that in each


| of its circles there was seated a siren on the upper side, carrieci


round, and uttering one voice variegated by diverse modula-
tions; but that the whole of them, being eight, composed one
harmony.’”’ (Plat., Rep. x. 14, Davies’ Trans.) Plato describes
the Fates “" singing to the harmony of the Sirens.’”’ Jd. On
the Pythagorean Music of the Spheres, cf. also Cic., De Divin.
i. 3, and Macrobius Jz Somn: Scip.
cf. Shaksp., WW. of Ven.v.1:
** There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st
But in his motion like an angel sings,
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubim.”
And Milton, Arcades :


‘¢ Then listen I
To the celestial Sirens’ harmony,
That sit upon the nine infolded spheres,
And sing to those that hold the vital sheres,
And turn the adamantine spindle round
On which the fate of gods and men is wound.”


THE HEXAEMERON.


67


ness of the senses, what do they say? That
we, accustomed to this noise from our birth,
on account of hearing it always, have lost
the sense of it; like men in smithies with
their ears incessantly dinned. If I refuted
this ingenious frivolity, the untruth of which
is evident from the first word, it would seem
as though I did not know the value of time,
and mistrusted the intelligence of such an
audience.

But let me leave the vanity of outsiders to
those who are without, and return to the
theme proper to the Church. If we believe
some of those who have preceded us, we have
not here the creation of a new heaven, but a
new account of the first. The reason they give
is, that the earlier narrative briefly described
the creation of heaven and earth; while here
scripture relates in greater detail the manner
in which each was created. I, however,
since Scripture gives to this second heaven
another name and its own function, main-
tain that it is different from the heaven
which was made at the beginning; that it is
of a stronger nature and of an especial use to
the universe.

4. ‘** And God said, let there be a firma-
ment tn the midst of the waters, and let itt
divide the waters from the waters. And
God made the firmament, and divided the
waters which were undcr the firmament
Jrom the waters which were above the Jjirma-
ment.” Before laying hold of the meaning
of Scripture let us try to meet objections from
other quarters. We are asked how, if the
firmament is a spherical body, as it appears
to the eye, its convex circumference can
contain the water which flows and circulates
in higher regions? What shall we answer?
One thing only: because the interior of a body
presents a perfect concavity it does not neces-
sarily follow that its exterior surface is spheri-
caland smoothly rounded. Look at the stone
vaults of baths, and the structure of build-
ings of cave form; the dome, which forms
the interior, does not prevent the roof from
having ordinarily a flat surface. Let these
unfortunate men cease, then, from tormenting
us and themselves about the impossibility of
our retaining water inthe higher regions.

Now we must say something about the
nature of the firmament, and why it received
the order to hold the middle place between the
waters. Scripture constantly makes use of
the word firmament to express extraordinary
strensth. ‘¢*The Lord my firmament and
refuge” * 461] have strengthened the pillars
OF ape rs Praise him in the firmament of his


1 Gen. i. 6, 7.
2 Ps. xviii. 2, LAX.


+e; ean Ἂν LXX,


power.” ' The heathen writers thus call a


strong body one which is compact and full,” to
distinguish it from the mathematical Lody.

A mathematical body is a body which exists
only in the three dimensions, breadth, depth,

and height. A firm body, on thd con-
trary, adds resistance to the dimensions. It
is the custom of Scripture to call firmament
all that is strong and unyielding. It even
uses the word to denote the condensation of
the air: He, it says, who strengthens the
thunder.’ Scripture means by the strengthen-
ing of the thunder, the strength and resistance
of the wind, which, enclosed in the hollows of
the clouds, produces the noise of thunder
when it breaks through with violence.* Here
then, according to me, is a firm substance,
capable of retaining the fluid and unstable
element water; and as, according to the com-
mon acceptation, it appears that the firma-
inent owes its origin to water, we must not
believe that it resembles frozen water or any
other matter produced by the filtration of
water ; as, for example, rock crystal, which
is said to owe its metamorphosis to a
sive congelation, ἢ or the transparent stone °

which forms in mines.’ This pellucid stone,
if one finds it in its natural perfection, with-
out cracks inside, or the least spot of corrup-
tion, almost rivals the air in clearness. We
cannot compare the firmament to one of these
substances. To hold such an opinion about
celestial bodies would be childish and fool-
ish; and although everything may be in
everything, fire in earth, air in water, and of
the other elements the one in the other; al-
though none of those which come under our
senses are pure and without mixture, either
with the element which serves as a medium
for it, or with that which is contrary to it;
I, nevertheless, dare not affirm that the firma-
ment was formed of one of these simple sub-
stances, or of a mixture of them, for I am
taught by Scripture not to allow my imagina-
tion to wander too far afield. But do not


3


1Ps. cl. 1, LXX.

2vaotos (fr. vaoow, press or knead) =close, firm. Demo-
critus used it as opposed to κενόν, void. Arist. fr. 202.

38 Amos iv. 13, LXX.

4Pliny (Hist. Nat. ii. 43) writes: St in nube luctetur
flatus aut vapor, tonitrua edt: st erumpat ardens, fulmina ;
st longtore tractu nitatur, fulgetra. His findi nubem, iis
perrumpt. Etesse tonitrua tmpactorum ignium plagas. 9 cf.
Sen., Sued: Nat. ii. 12.

5 Ἐμπεδοκλῆς στερέμνιον εἶναι τὸν οὐρανὸν ἐξ ἀέρος συμπα-
έντος ὑπὸ πυρὸς κρυσταλλοειδῶς, τὸ πυρῶδες καὶ ἀερῶδες ἐν
ἑκατέρῳ τῶν ἡμισφαιρίων περιέχοντα. (Plutarch πεοὶ τὴν ἀοεσ-
κόντῶν τοῖς φιλοσόφοις, Bi ETS) Pliny (Altst. Nat. xxxvii. 9)
says that crystal is made “ gelu (vide Sir T. Browne, Vulgar
Errors, ii. 1) vehementiore concreto... glactem que esso cer-
tum est; unde et nomen gra@ci dedere.” "So Senec: 1, Quest. Nat:
iit; 2 Dicdorus Siculus, however, asserts it ** coalescere noit
a frigore sed divint σίας τοὶ (Br0/. ii. 134.)

6 re. the Lapis = ecularts,” or mica, which was lage: an
glazing windows. . Plin., Zp. ii. 17, and Juv., Saiz. iv.

τ Mica is found i oe large plates i in Siberia, Peru, and Meni
as well as in Sweden and Norway.


68


BASIL.


let us forget to remark that, after these divine
words **let there be a firmament,” it is not
said ** and the firmament was made,’ but,
‘¢and God made the firmament, and divided
the waters.”! Hear, O ye deaf! See, O ye
blind ! — who, then, is deaf? He who does
not hear this startling voice of the Holy
Spirit. Who is blind? He who does not
see such clear proofs of the Only begotten.’
‘¢Tet there be a firmament.” It is the
voice of the primary and principal Cause.
‘¢ And God made the firmament.” Here is
a witness to the active and creative power
of God.

5. But let us continue our explanation:
« Let ct divide the waters from the waters.” ὃ
The mass of waters, which from all direc-
tions flowed over the earth, and was sus-
pended in the air, was infinite, so that there
was no proportion between it and the other
elements. Thus, as it has been already
said, the abyss covered the earth. We will
give the reason for this abundance of water.
None of you assuredly will attack our
opinion; not even those who have the most
cultivated minds, and whose piercing eye
can penetrate this perishable and fleeting
nature; you will not accuse me of advancing
impossible or imaginary theories, nor will you
ask me upon what foundation the fluid
element rests. By the same reason which
makes them attract the earth, heavier than
water, from the extremities of the world to
suspend it in the centre, they will grant us
without doubt that it is due both to its nat-
ural attraction downwards and its general
equilibrium, that this immense quantity of
water rests motionless upon the earth.’
Therefore the prodigious mass of waters was
spread around the earth; not in proportion
with it and infinitely larger, thanks to the fore-
sight of the supreme Artificer, Who, from the
beginning, foresaw what was to come, and at
the first provided all for the future needs of
the world. But what need was there for this
superabundance of water? The essence of
fire is necessary for the world, not only in
the ceconomy of earthly produce, but for the
completion of the universe; for it would be
imperfect ὃ if the most powerful and the most


1 Gen. i. 7. ‘

2 With Christian associations it is startling to read at the
end of the Timzus that the Cosmos is the εἰκὼν τοῦ Θεοῦ, or,
according to another reading, itself Θεός, .. μονογενὴς ὧν.

8 Gen. 1. 6.

4 According to Plutarch (περὶ τῶν ἀρέσκ: etc. iii. 10) Thales
and the Stoics affirmed the earth to be spherical, Thales (/d.
11) placing it ‘in the middle.” Pliny, Ast. Nat. is. 4, says
that the earth ‘‘ zxfversi cardine stare pendentem librantem
per que pendeat; ita solam tmmobilem circa eam volubtli
untversitate, eandem ex omnibus nectt, eidemque omnia in-
mitt.

5 On κολοβός, docked, curtailed, cf, Matt. xxiv. 22.


vital of its elements were lacking.' Now


fire and water are hostile to and destructive
of each other. Fire, if it is the stronger, de-
stroys water, and water, if in greater abun-
dance, destroys fire. As, therefore, it was
necessary to avoid an open struggle between
these elements, so as not to bring about the
dissolution of the universe by the total disap-
pearance of one or the other, the sovereign
Disposer created such a quantity of water
that in spite of constant diminution from the
effects of fire, it could last until the time
fixed for the destruction of the world. He
who planned all with weight and measure,
He who, according to the word of Job,
knows the number of the drops of rain,’
knew how long His work would last, and
for how much consumption of fire He ought
to allow. This isthe reason of the abun-
dance of water at the creation. Further, there
is no one so strange to life as to need to
learn the reason why fire is essential to the
world. Not only all the arts which support
life, the art of weaving, that of shoemaking,
of architecture, of agriculture, have need of
the help of fire, but the vegetation of trees, the
ripening of fruits, the breeding of land and
water animals, and their nourishment, all ex-
isted from heat from the beginning, and have
been since maintained by the action of heat.
The creation of heat was then indispensable
for the formation and the preservation of
beings, and the abundance οἱ waters was no
less so in the presence of the constant and in-
evitable consumption by fire.

6. Survey creation; ,you will see the
power of heat reigning over all that is born
and perishes. On account of it comes all the
water spread over the earth, as well as that
which is beyond our sight and 15 dispersed
in the depths of the earth. On account of it
are abundance of fountains, springs or wells,
courses of rivers, both mountain torrents and
ever flowing streams, for the storing of
moisture in many and various reservoirs.
From the East, from the winter solstice
flows the Indus, the greatest river of the
earth, according to geographers. From the
middle of the East proceed the Bactrus,’
the Choaspes,* and the Araxes,® from which
the Tanais® detaches itself to fall into the
Palus-Mzotis.”. Add to these the Phasis®
which descends from Mount Caucasus, and
countless other rivers, which, from northern
regions, flow into the Euxine Sea. From

1 The supremacy of fire was the idea of Heraclitus. To πῦρ
Θεὸν ὑπειλήφασιν “Immagos.. . καὶ Ἡράελειτος. Clein. Alex.,
Protrep. v.55. Plutarch has an essay on the comparative use.
fulness of fire and water.

2 Job xxxvi. 27, ILXX.


3 Balkh.
4 Kerak.


5 Probably the Volga is meant.
6 Don. 8 Phaz.
7 Sea of Asov.


THE HEXAEMERON.


———


the warm countries of the West, from the
foot of the Pyrenees, arise the Tartessus* and
the Ister,” of which the one discharges itself
into the sea beyond the Pillars and the other,
after flowing through Europe, falls into the
Euxine Sea. Is there any need to enume-
rate those which the Ripzan mountains ®
pour forth in the heart of Scythia, the
Rhone,* and so many other rivers, all navi-
gable, which after having watered the coun-
tries of the western Gauls and of Celts and
of the neighbouring barbarians, flow into the
Western sea? And others from the higher
regions of the South flow through Ethiopia
to discharge themselves some into our sea,
others into inaccessible seas, the /Xgon ἢ
the Nyses, the Chremetes,° and above all the
Nile, which is not of the character of a river
when, like a sea, it inundates Egypt. Thus the
habitable part of our earth is surrounded by
water, linked together by vast seas and irri-
gated by countless perennial rivers, thanks to
the ineflable wisdom of Him Who ordered
all to prevent this rival clement to fire from
being entirely destroyed.

However, a time will come, when all shall
be consumed by fire; as Isaiah says of the
God of the universe in these words, ‘*‘ That
saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up
thy rivers.”’’ Reject then the foolish wis-
dom of this world,® and receive with me the
more simple but infallible doctrine of truth.

7. ‘Therefore we read:: ‘‘Zet there be a
firmament tn the midstof the waters, and let
zt divide the waters from the waters.” I
have said what the word firmament in Script-
ure means. It is not in reality a firm and
solid substance which has weight and resis-
tance; this name would otherwise have better
suited the earth. But, as the substance of
superincumbent bodies is light, without con-
sistency, and cannot be grasped by any one
of our senses, it is 1n comparison with these
pure and imperceptible substances that the
firmament has received its name. Imagine
a place fit to divide the moisture, sending it,
if pure and filtered, into higher regions, and
making it fall, if it is dense and earthy; to


1 Ebro. 2 The Danube.

8 Used vaguely for any mountains in the north of Europe
and Asia. Strabo (vii. pp. 295, 299) considers them fabulous.

4 A varia lectio is Eridanus.

5 Arywov is properly the AZgean Sea.

6 Bisil’s geography is bad. He might have improved it by
consulting Strabo or Ptolemzus, but has been content to go
for his facts t» Aristotle (Wet. i. 13), whose errors he repeats.
Fialon remarks “ nouvelle preuve de lindifference des cités
grecques de δ᾿ Aste pour cet Occtdent lointain dont elles se
séparérent si ‘facilement.” If this refers to the theological
separation it is hardly fair. The East in the 4th c. and sthc.
shewed no indifference to the sympathy of the W., and when
the split came the “ separation ” was not taken “ easily.”

7 Isa. xliv. 27.

8 Schools of ‘the wisdom of the world” did, however,
teach that the world was a world γενόμενον καὶ φθαοτόν. cf.
Lucretius v, 322, ‘‘ totum nalivum mortalt corpore constat.”


69


the end that by the gradual withdrawal of
the moist particles the same temperature may
be preserved from the beginning to the end.
You do not believe in this prodigious quan-
tity of water; but you do not take into
account the prodigious quantity of heat, less
considerable no doubt in bulk, but exceed-
ingly powerful nevertheless, if you consider
it as destructive of moisture. It attracts
surrounding moisture, as the melon shows
us, and consumes it as quickly when at-
tracted, as the flame of the lamp draws to it
the fuel supplied by the wick and burns it
up. Who doubts that the ether is an ardent
fire?’ If an impassable limit had not been
assigned to it by the Creator, what would pre-
vent it from setting on fire and consuming
all that is near it, and absorbing all the moist-
ure from existing things? The aerial waters
which veil the heavens with vapours that are
sent forth by rivers, fountains, marshes,
lakes, and seas, prevent the zther from in-
vading and burning up the universe. Thus
we sce even this sun, in the summer season,
dry up in a moment a damp and marshy
country, and make it perfectly arid. What
has become ofall the water? Let these mas-
ters of omniscience tell us. Is it not plain
to every one that it has risen in vapour, and
has been consumed by the heat of the sun?
They say, none the less, that even the sun is
without heat. What time they lose in
words! And see what proof they lean upon
to resist what is perfectly plain. Its colour
is white, and neither reddish nor yellow, It
is not then fiery by nature, and its heat re-
sults, they say, from the velocity of its rota-
tion.” What do they gain? That the sun
does not seem to absorb moisture? I do not,
however, reject this statement, although it
is false, because it helps my argument. I
said that the consumption of heat required
this prodigious quantity of water. That the
sun owes its heat to its nature, or that heat
results from its action, makes no diflerence,
provided that it produces the same effects
upon the same matter. If you kindle fire by
rubbing two pieces of wood together, or if
you light them by holding them to a flame,
you will have absolutely the same effect.
Besides, we see that the great wisdom of
Him who governs all, makes the sun travel


1So the “ //gurdissimus ether” of the Epicurean Lucretius
(v. 501), “" Suos tgnes fert ;” 1.6. the fiery stars are of the nat-
ure of the element in which they move. cf. the Stoic Man-
ilius i. 149, “ Zonis tn ethereas volucer se sustulit oras sum-
mague complexus stellantis culmina cali, Flammarum vaillo
nature menia fecit.”

So Aristotle, Meteor. i. 3,30. Ὁρῶμεν δὴ τὴν κίνησιν ὅτι
δύναται διακρίνειν τὸν ἀέρα Kal ἐκπυροῦν ὥστε Kal τὰ φερόμενα
τηκόμενα φαίνεσθαι πολλάκις. Τὸ μὲν οὖν γίγνεσθαι THY ἀλέαν καὶ
τὴν θερμότητα ἱκανή ἐστι παρασκευάζειν καὶ ἡ τοῦ ἡλίον φορὰ
MOVOVs


7O


from one region to another, for fear that, if
it remained always in the same place, its
excessive heat would destroy the order of the
universe. Now it passes into southern
regions about the time of the winter solstice,
now it returns to the sign of the equinox ;
from thence it betakes itself to northern
regions during the summer solstice, and
keeps up by this imperceptible passage a


pleasant temperature throughout all the
world.

Let the learned people see if they do not
disagree among themselves. The water


which the sun consumes is, they say, what
prevents the sea from rising and flooding
the rivers; the warmth of the sun leaves
behind the salts and the bitterness of the
waters, and absorbs from them the pure and
drinkable particles,’ thanks to the singular
virtue of this planet in attracting all that is
light and in allowing to fall, like mud and
sediment,all which is thick and earthy. From
thence come the bitterness, the salt taste,
and the power of withering and drying up,
which are characteristic of the sea. While,
as is notorious, they hold these views, they
shift their ground and say that moisture can-
not be lessened by the sun.’

8. ‘** And God called the firmament
heaven.” *® The nature of right belongs to
another, and the firmament only shares it on
account of its resemblance to heaven. We
often find the visible region called heaven,
on account of the density and continuity of
the air within our ken, and deriving its name
‘*heaven” from the word which means to
sees ‘dtasef it that:Scripturesays, ** The
fowl of the air,”*® ** Fowl that may fly...
in the open firmament of heaven;”® and,
elsewhere, ‘* They mount up to heaven.” ’
Moses, blessing the tribe of Joseph, desires
for it the fruits and the dews of heaven, of
the suns of summer and the conjunctions of
the moon, and blessings from the tops of the
mountains and from the everlasting hills,” ὃ


1¢f. Diog. Laert. vii. on Zeno. Τρέπεσθαι δὲ τὰ ἔμπυρα
ταῦτι «αἱ τὶ ἴλλα ἄστρα, τὸν μὴν ἥλιον ἐκ τῆς μεγάλης θαλάττης.
So Zeno, Chrysippus, and Posidonius.

_ 2 Pliny (ii. 103, 104) writes: ‘ /tague solis ardore siccatur
liquor; ... sic mari late patenti saporem incogut salis, aut
quia exhausto inde dulci tenuigue, quod facillime trahat vis
ignea, omne asperits crasstusque linguatur: ideo summa
@quarum aqua dulciorem profundam: hanc esse veriorem
causam aspert saporis, quam quod mare terre sudor sit
@ternus: aut quia plurimum ex arido misceatur {11 vapore,
aut guia terre natura sicut medicatas aquas infictat.’? The
first of these three theories was that of Hippocrates (De Aere,
Locis,et Aguis, iv. 197) and of Anaximander (Plutarch περὶ
τῶν ἀγίσκ, etc. 11. 552). On the second vide Arist., Prob. xxiii.
32. The idea of the sea being the earth’s sweat was that of
Empedocles. cf. Arist., Meteor. ii. 1.

9 Gen. i. 8.

The derivation of οὐρανός from opaw is imaginary. Aris-
totle (De Cel. i. 19, 9) derives it from ὅρος, ἃ boundarv. cf.
‘Ooigwv. The real root is the Skt. vary=cover. M. Miller,
Oxford Essays, 1856.

5 Ps. viii. 8.

6 Gen. i. 20.


1 Ps: evit.j20.
8 cf. Deut. xxxiii. 13-15, LXX.


BASIL.


in one word, from all which fertilises the
earth. In the curses on Israel it is said,
ες And thy heaven that is over thy head shall
be brass.”,* > What: does this! mean’ »..1t
threatens him with a complete drought, with
an absence of the aerial waters which cause
the fruits of the earth to be brought forth
and to grow.

Since, then, Scripture says that the dew
or the rain falls from heaven, we under-
stand that it is from those waters which have
been ordered to occupy the higher regions.
When the exhalations from the earth,
gathered together in the heights of the air,
are condensed under the pressure of the wind,
this aerial moisture diffuses itseif in vaporous
and light clouds; then mingling again, it
forms drops which fall, dragged down by
their own weight; and this is the origin of
rain. When water beaten by the violence
of the wind, changes into foam, and passing
through excessive cold quite freezes, it breaks
the cloud, and falls as snow.” You can thus
account for all the moist substances that the
air suspends over our heads.

And do not let any one compare with the
inquisitive discussions of philosophers upon
the heavens, the simple and inartificial char-
acter of the utterances of the Spirit; as the
beauty of chaste women surpasses that of a
harlot,’ so our arguments are superior to
those of our opponents. They only seek to
persuade by forced reasoning. With us truth
presents itself naked and without artifice.
But why torment ourselves to refute the
errors of philosophers, when it is sufficient to
produce their mutually contradictory books,
and, as quiet spectators, to watch the war? *
For those thinkers are not less numerous, nor
less celebrated, nor more sober in speech in
fighting their adversaries, who say that the
universe is being consumed by fire, and that
from the seeds which remain in the ashes of
the burnt world all is being brought to life
again. Hence in the world there is de-
struction and palingenesis to infinity.° All,
equally far from the truth, find each on their
side by-ways which lead them to error.

9. But as far as concerns the separation
of the waters I am obliged to contest the


1 Deut. xxviii. 23.

2 of. Arist., Meteor. i. 9-12, and Plutarch περὶ τῶν ἀρέσκ. etc.
ili. 4.

3 Fialon quotes Hor., Ep. i. 18: “ Ut matrona meretrict
dispar ertt atgue Discolor.”

4 The well known “" Per campos tustructa, tua sine parte
pericli suave etiam belli certamina magna tuert” (Lucr.ii.*)
may be an echo of some Greek lines in the preacher’s mind,
just as the preceding ‘* stave mart magno”’ is of Menander.

5 ες These Stoical atheists did also agree with the generality
of the other Stoical theists in supposing a successive infinity of
worlds generated and corrupted” (ἀπειρία κόσμων) ‘* by reason
of intervening periodical conflagrations.” Cudworth, I, iii.
23.


THE HEXAEMERON.


opinion of certain writers in the Church '
who, under the shadow of high and sublime
conceptions, have launched out into meta-
phor, and have only seen in the waters a
figure to denote spiritual and incorporeal pow-
ers. In the higher regions, above the firma-
ment, dwell the better; in the lower regions,
earth and matter are the dwelling place of the
malignant. So, say they, God is praised by
the waters that are above the heaven, that is
to say, by the good powers, the purity of
whose soul makes them worthy to sing the
praises of God. And the waters which are
under the heaven represent the wicked spirits,
who from their natural height have fallen
into the abyss of evil. Turbulent, seditious,
agitated by the tumultuous waves of passion,
they have received the name of sea, because
of the instability and the inconstancy of their
movements.” Let us reject these theories as
dreams and old women’s tales. Let us un-
derstand that by water water is meant; for the
dividing of the waters by the firmament let
us accept the reason which has been given
us. Although, however, waters above the
heaven are invited to give glory to the Lord
of the Universe, do not let us think of them
as intelligent beings; the heavens are not
alive because they ‘‘ declare the glory of
God,” nor the firmament a sensible being
because it ‘* sheweth His handiwork.” ? And
if they tell you that the heavens mean con-
templative powers, and the firmament active
powers which produce good, we admire
the theory as ingenious without being able
to acknowledge the truth of it. For thus
dew, the frost, cold and heat, which in
Daniel are ordered to praise the Creator of
all things,* will be intelligent and invisible
natures. But this is onlya figure, accepted as
such by enlightened minds, to complete the
glory of the Creator. Besides, the waters
above the heavens, these waters privileged by
the virtue which they possess in themselves,
are not the only waters to celebrate the
praises of God, ‘Praise the. Lord from
the earth, ye dragons and all deeps.”*® Thus
the singer of the Psalms does not reject the
deeps which our inventors of allegories rank
in the divisions of evil ; he admits them to the
universal choir of creation, and the deeps
sing in their language a harmonious hymn
to the glory of the Creator.

10. ** 4nd God saw that tt was good.”
God does not judge of the beauty of His work
by the charm of the eyes, and He does not

1 7,6. Origen.

2 cf. Jerome to Pammachius against John of Jerusalem, ὃ 7
(in this edition vol. vi. p. 428) and Origen’s Homily on Gene-


Sis, preserved in the Translation of Rufinus. κά
διθες xviii. 1. 4 Bened. 5 Ps. cxlviii. 7.


71


form the same idea of beauty that we do.
What He esteems beautiful is that which
presents in its perfection all the fitness! of
art, and that which tends to the usefulness of
itsend. He, then, who proposed to Himself
a manifest design in His works, approved
each one of them, as fulfilling its end in ac-
cordance with His creative purpose. A hand,
an eye, or any portion of a statue lying
apart from the rest, would look beautiful to
no one. But if each be restored to its own
place, the beauty of proportion, until now
almost unperceived, would strike even the
most uncultivated. But the artist, before
uniting the parts of his work, distinguishes
and recognises the beauty of each of them,
thinking of the object that he has in view. It
is thusthat Scripture depicts to usthe Supreme
Artist, praising each one of His works; soon.
when His work is complete, He will accord
well deserved praise to the whole together.
Let me here end my discourse on the second
day, to allow my industrious hearers to ex-
amine what they have just heard. May their
memory retain it for the profit of their soul;
may they by careful meditation inwardly
digest and benefit by what I say. As for
those who live by their work, let me allow
them to attend all day to their business, so
that they may come, with a soul-free from
anxiety, to the banquet of my discourse in
the evening. May God who, after having
made such great things, put such weak
words in my mouth, grant you the intelli-
gence of His truth, so that you may raise
yourselves from visible things to the invisible
Being, and that the grandeur and beauty of
creatures may give you a just idea of the
Creator. For the visible things of Him from
the creation of the world are clearly seen, and
His power and divinity are eternal.? Thus
earth, air, sky, water, day, night, all visible
things, remind us of who is our Benefactor.
We shall not therefore give occasion to sin,
we shall not give place to the enemy within
us, if by unbroken recollection we keep God
ever dwelling in our hearts, to Whom be all
glory and all adoration, now and for ever,
world without end. Amen.


1 καλον μὲν οὖν ἐστιν ὃ ἂν δ᾽ αὑτὸ αἱρετὸν ὃν ἐπαινετὸν ἢ, ἢ ὃ
ἂν ἀγαθὸν ὃν ἡδὺ γ ὅτι ἀγαθόν. Arist., Rhet.i.o.
cf. E. Burke (Ομ the Sublime and Beautiful, iii. § 6):
“ΤῸ is true that the infinitely wise and good creator has, of his
bounty, frequently joined beauty to those things which he has
made useful to us. But this does not prove that our idea of
use and beauty are the same thing, or that they are in any way
dependent on each other.” Dr, Johnson instances a painting
on a coffee-cup as beautiful, but not useful. ‘ Boswell,” Ann.
aie St. Basil’s idea is in accord with that of Ruskin (Mod.
. Chap. vi.). ‘*In all high ideas of beauty it is more than
probable that much of the pleasure depends on delicate and
untraceable perception of fitness, propriety, and relation,
which are purely intellectual, and through wiich we arrive at
our noblest ideas of what is commonly and rightly called “ in-
tellectual beauty.’ ” 2cf. Rom. i. 20.


72


ΒΘ" ς


FIOMILY) ἄν.


Upon the gathering together cf the waters.


1. THERE are towns where the inhabit-
ants, from dawn to eve, feast their eyes on the
tricks of innumerable conjurors. ‘They are
never tired of hearing dissolute songs which
cause much impurity to spring up in their
souls, and they are often called happy, be-
cause they neglect the cares of business and
trades useful to life, and-pass the time, which
is assigned to them on this earth, in idleness
and pleasure. They do not know that a
theatre full of impure sights is, for those
who sit there, a common school of vice;
that these melodious and meretricious songs
insinuate themselves into men’s souls, and
all who hear them, eager to imitate the
notes’ of harpers and pipers, are filled with
filthiness.2, Some others, who are wild after
horses, think they are backing their horses
in their dreams; they harness their chariots,
change their drivers, and even in sleep are
not free from the folly of the day.* And
shall we, whom the Lord, the great worker
of marvels, calls to the contemplation of His
own works, tire of looking at them, or be
slow to hear the words of the Holy Spirit?
Shall we not rather stand around the vast
and varied workshop of divine creation and,
carried back in mind to the times of old,
shall we not view all the order of creation?
Heaven, poised like a dome, to quote the
words of the prophet; * earth, this immense
mass which rests upon itself; the air around
it, of a soft and fluid nature, a true and con-
tinual nourishment for all who breathe it, of
such tenuity that it yields and opens at the
least movement of the body, opposing no
resistance to our motions, while, in a mo-
ment, it streams back to its place, behind
those who cleave it; water, finally, that sup-
plies drink for man, or may be designed for
our other needs, and the marvellous gather-
ing together of it into definite places which
have been assigned to it: such is the spec-
tacle which the words which I have just read
will show you.

2. ‘**And God said, Let the waters under
the heaven be gathered together unto one


1 koovua, properly * heat,” “stroke,” is used of the blow of
the plectrum on the string, and hence of the note produced.

2 cf. Plato, fep. iii. 18, ad tn7t., and his reference to the
"αλθακὸς αἰχμητής Of Homer, 77. xvii.586. The same subject is
treated of the Laws ii. § 3 and καὶ and vii.

3 cf, Ar., Nub. τό, ὀνειροπολεῖ ἵππους and 27, ὀνειροπολεῖ Kat
καθεύδων ἱππικήν. So Claudian, Devi. Cons. Hon. 1, sq.:


Omnia que sensu volvuntur vota diurno,
Pectore sopito reddit amica quies.
Venator defessa toro cum membra reponit,
Mens tamen ad sylvas et sua lustra redit.
Fudticibus lites, aurige somnita currus,
Vanaque nocturnis meta cavetur equis.
Isa. xi, 22, 1 ΕΝ,


place, and let the dry land appear, and tt
was so.” And the water which was under
the heaven gathered together unto one place;
‘¢ And God called the dry land earth and the
gathering together of the waters called He
seas.” * What trouble you have given me in
my previous discourses by asking me wh

the earth was invisible, why all bodies are
naturally endued with colour, and why all
colour comes under the sense of sight.
And, perhaps, my reason did not appear
sufficient to you, when I said that the earth,
without being naturally invisible, was so to
us, because of the mass of water that en-
tirely covered it. Hear then how Scripture
explains itself. ‘‘ Let the waters be gath-
ered together, and let the dry land appear.”


The veil is lifted and allows the earth,
hitherto invisible, to be seen. Perhaps
you will ask me new questions. And first,


is it not a law of nature that water flows
downwards? Why, then, does Scripture
refer this to the fiat of the Creator? As
long as water is spread over a level surface,
it does not flow ; it is immovable. But when
it finds any slope, immediately the foremost
portion falls, then the one that follows takes
its place, and that one is itself replaced by a
third. Thus incessantly they flow, pressing
the one on the other, and the rapidity of
their course is in proportion to the mass of
water that is being carried, and the declivity
down which it is borne. If such is the
nature of water, it was supererogatory to
command it to gather into one place. It
was bound, on account of its natural in-
stability, to fall into the most hollow part of
the earth and not to stop until the levelling of
its surface. We see how there is nothing so
level as the surface of water. Besides, they
add, how did the waters receive an order to
gather into one place, when we see several
seas, separated from each other by the great-
est distances? Τὸ the first question I reply:
Since God’s command, you know perfectly
well the motion of water; you know that it
is unsteady and unstable and falls naturally
over declivities and into hollow places. But
what was its nature before this command
made it take its course? You do not know
yourself, and you have heard from no eye-
witness. Think, in reality, that a word of
God makes the nature, and that this order is
for the creature a direction for its future
course. There was only one creation of day
and night, and since that moment they have
incessantly succeeded each other and divided
time into equal parts.


3. ‘*Let the waters be gathered to-


1 Gen. i. 9, 10.


THE HEXAEMERON.


73


gether.” It was ordered that it should be
the natural property of water to flow, and
in obedience to this order, the waters are
never weary in their course. In speaking
thus, I have only in view the flowing prop-
erty of waters. Some flow of their own ac-
cord like springs and rivers, others are col-
lected and stationary. But I speak now of
flowing waters. ‘* Let the waters be gath-
ered together unto one place.’’ Have you
never thought, when standing near a spring
which is sending forth water abundantly, Who
makes this water spring from the bowels of
the earth? Who forced it up? Where are
the store-houses which send it forthe To
what place is it hastening? How is it that
it is never exhausted here, and never over-
flows there? All this comes from that first
command; it was for the waters a signal for
their course.

In all the story of the waters remember
this first order, ** let the waters be gathered
together.” To take their assigned places
they were obliged to flow, and, once arrived
there, to remain in their place and not to go
farther. ‘Thus in the language of Ecclesias-
tes, ** All the waters run into the sea; yet
the sea is not full.” Waters flow in virtue of
God’s order, and the sea is enclosed in limits
according to this first law, “" Let the waters
be,gathered together unto one place.” For
fear the water should spread beyond its
bed, and in its successive invasions cover
one by one all countries, and end by flooding
the whole earth, it received the order to gather
unto one place. Thus we often see the furi-
ous sea raising mighty wavesto the heaven,
and, when once it has touched the shore, break
its impetuosity in foam and retire. ‘‘ Fear
ye not ‘me, saith the ordi...) 3. which have
placed the sand for the bound of the sea.” ὅ
A grain of sand, the weakest thing possible,
curbs the violence of the ocean. For what
would prevent the Red Sea from invading the
whole of Egypt, which lies lower, and uniting
itself to the other sea which bathes its shores,
were it not fettered by the fiat of the Creator?
And if I say that Egypt is lower than the
Red Sea, it is because experience has con-
vinced us of it every time that an attempt
has been made to join the sea of Egypt?’ to
the Indian Ocean, of which the Red Sea is a
part. Thus we have renounced this enter-
prise, as also have the Egyptian Sesostris,
who conceived the idea, and Darius the Mede
who afterwards wished to carry it out.°


1 Eccl. i. 6, 7.


2 2 Jer. v. 22. 82,6. the Mediterranean.
4 Geminum mare .


.. guod Rubrum dixere nostri... in
duos dividitur stnus. Is qui ab ortente Persicus est... al-
zero stun Arabico nominato, Plin. vi, 28.

5 This illustration is taken from the work on which Basil


I report this fact to make you understand
the full force of the command, “ Let the
waters be gathered unto one place” ; that is
to say, let there be no other gathering, and,
once gathered, let them not disperse.

4. Tosay that the waters were gathered
in one place indicates that previously they
were scattered in many places. ‘The moun-
tains, intersected by deep ravines, accumu-
lated water in their valleys, when from every
direction the waters betook themselves to
the one gathering place. What vast plains,
in their extent resembling wide seas, what
valleys, what cavities hollowed in many dif-
ferent ways, at that time full of water, must
have been emptied by the command of God!
But we must not therefore say, that if the
water covered the face of the earth, all the
basins which have since received the sea were
originally full. Where can the gathering of
the waters have come from if the basins were
already full? These basins, we reply, were
only prepared at the moment when the
water had. to unite in a single mass. At
that time the sea which is beyond Gadeira ὦ
and the vast ocean, so dreaded by navigators,
which surrounds the isle of Britain and
western Spain, did not exist. But, all of a
sudden, God created this vast space, and the
mass of waters flowed in.

Now if our explanation of the creation of
the world may appear contrary to experience,
(because it is evident that all the waters
did not flow together in one place,) many
answers may be made, all obvious as soon as
they are stated. Perhaps it is even ridicu-
lous to reply to such objections. Ought they
to bring forward in opposition ponds and
accumulations of rain water, and think that
this is enough to upset our reasonings?
Evidently the chief and most complete
affluence of the waters was what received
the name of gathering unto one place.
For wells are also gathering places for water,
made by the hand of man to receive the
moisture diffused in the hollow of the earth.
This name of gathering does not mean any
chance massing of water, but the greatest
and most important one, wherein the ele-
has been so largely dependent, the Meteorology of Aristotle
(i. 14, 548). Pliny (vi. 33) writes: ‘‘ Daneos Fortus, ex quo
navigabilem alveum perducere in Nilum, qua parte ad Delta
dictum decurrit Ixti, mill. D. Pass. tntervallo, quod inter
fiumen et Rubrum mare inter est, primus _omnium Sesostris
igypti rex cogitavit; mox Darius LPersarum; deinde
Ptolemeus sequens” (i.e. Ptolemy II.) ‘* . . . deterruit inun-
dationts metus, excelsiore tribus cubitis Rubro mari comp. rto
quam terra Aigypti.? Herodotus (ii. 158) attributes the canal
to Necho. Strabo (xvii. 804) says Darius, in supposing
Egypt to lie lower than the sea, was ψευδεῖ πεισθείς. ‘The early
canal, choked by sand, was reopened by Trajan, and choked
again. Amron, Omar’s general, again cleared it, but it was
blocked A.D. 767. The present Suez Canal, opened in 1869,
follows a new course.


17,e, Cadiz, a corruption of Gadeira, which, like Geder and
Gadara, is connected with the Pheenician Gadir, an enclosure,


74


BASIL.


ment is shewn collected together. In the
same way that fire, in spite of its being
divided into minute particles which are suf-
ficient for our needs here, is spread in a
mass in the xther; in the same way that
air, in spite of a like minute division, has
occupied the region round the earth; so also
water, in spite of the small amount spread
abroad everywhere, only forms one gather-
ing together, that which separates the whole
element from the rest. Without doubt the
lakes as well those of the northern regions
and those that are to be found in Greece, in
Macedonia, in Bithynia and in Palestine, are
gatherings together of waters; but here
it means the greatest of all, that gathering
the extent of which equals that of the earth.
The first contain a great quantity of water ;
no one will deny this. Nevertheless no one
could reasonably give them the name of seas,
not even if they are like the great sea,
charged with salt and sand. ‘They instance
for example, the Lacus Asphaltitisin Judzxa,
and the Serbonian lake which extends be-
tween Egypt and Palestine in the Arabian
desert. ‘These are lakes, and there is only
one sea, as those affirm who have travelled
round the earth. Although some authorities
think the Hyrcanian and Caspian Seas are
enclosed in their own boundaries, if we are
to believe the geographers, they communi-
cate with each other and together discharge
themselves into the Great Sea.' It is thus
that, according to their account, the Red Sea
and that beyond Gadeira only form one.
Then why did God call the different masses
of water seas? This is the reason; the
waters flowed into one place, and their dif-
ferent accumulations, that is to say, the gulfs
that the earth embraced in her folds, received
from the Lord the name of seas: North Sea,
South Sea, Eastern Sea, and Western Sea.
The seas have even their own names, the Eux-
ine, the Propontis, the Hellespont, the 4-
gean, the Ionian, the Sardinian, the Sicilian,
the Tyrrhene, and many other names of
which an exact enumeration would now be
too long, and quite out of place. See why
God calls the gathering together of waters
seas.
which the course of my argument has di-
verted me.

Ss. 21nd God said':"** (et the waters be
gathered together unto one place and let the
dry land appear.” He did not say let the


earth appear, so as not to show itself again |


without form, mud-like, and in combination


1 Pliny (vi. 15) shared a common error that the Caspian
flowed into a Northern Sea. The eastern part was known as
the Hyrcanian, the western as the Caspian. Strabo xi. 507, δέ


ΘΩ͂.


But let us return to the point from’


with the water, nor yet endued with proper
form and virtue. At the same time, lest we
should attribute the drying of the earth to
the sun, the Creator shows it to us dried
before the creation of the sun. Let us folk
low the thought Scripture gives us. Not
only the water which was covering the earth
flowed off from it, but all that which had
filtered into its depths withdrew in obedience
to the irresistible order of the sovereign
Master. And it was so. This is quite
enough to show that the Creator’s voice had
effect: however, in several editions, there is
added ‘* And the water which was under
the heavens gathered itself unto one place
and the dry land was seen ;” words that other
interpreters have not given, and which do
not appear conformable to Hebrew usage.
In fact, after the assertion, ** and it was so,”
it is superfluous to repeat exactly the same
thing. In accurate copies these words are
marked with an obelus,' which is the sign of
rejection.

ες And God called the dry land earth; and
the gathering together of the waters called
Fle seas.”® Why does Scripture say above
that the waters were gathered together
unto one place, and that the dry earth ap-
peared? Why does it add here the dry land
appeared, and God gave it the name of
earth? It is that dryness is the property
which appears to characterize the nature of
the subject, whilst the word earth is only
its simple name. Just as reason is the dis-
tinctive faculty of man, and the word man
serves to designate the being gifted with this
faculty, so dryness is the special and peculiar
quality of the earth. The element essen-
tially dry receives therefore the name of
earth, as the animal who has a neigh for a
characteristic cry is called a horse. The
other elements, like the earth, have re-
ceived some peculiar property which distin-
guishes them frdm the rest, and makes them
known for what they are. Thus water has
cold for its distinguishing property; air,
moisture; fire, heat. But this theory really
applies only to the primitive elements of
the world. The elements which contribute
to the formation of bodies, and come under
our senses, show us these qualities in com-
bination, and in the whole of nature our
eyes and senses can find nothing which
is completely singular, simple and_ pure.
Earth is at the same time dry and cold;


1The obelus (f) is used by Jerome to mark superfluous
matter in the Ixx. cf. Jer. p. 494, in Canon Fremantle’s
Translation. The addition in question appears neither in the
Vulgate, nor in Aquila, or Symmachus, or Theodotion. Am-
brose, however, in Hexaem. iii. 5 approves of it.

2 Gen. i. 10


THE HEXAEMERON.


75


water, cold and moist; air, moist and warm ;
fire, warm and dry. It is by the combina-
tion of their qualities that the different ele-
ments can mingle. Thanks to a common
quality each of them mixes with a neigh-
bouring element, and this natural alliance
attaches it to the contrary element. For
example, earth, which is at the same time
dry and cold, finds in cold a relationship
which unites it to water, and by the means
of water unites itself to air. Water placed
between the two, appears to give each a
hand, and, on account of its double qu: ality ,
allies itself to earth by cold and to air by
moisture. Air, in its turn, takes the middle
place and plays the part ‘of a mediator be-
tween the inimical natures of water and fire,
united to the first by moisture, and to the
second by heat. Finally. fire, of a nature
at the same time warm and dry, is linked to
air by warmth, and by its dryness reunites
itself to the earth. And from this accord
and from this mutual mixture of elements,
results a circle and an harmonious choir
whence each of the elements deserves its name.
I have said this in order to explain why God
has given to the dry land the name of earth,
without however calling the earth dry. It
is because dryness is not one of those qual-
ities which the earth acquired afterwards,
but one of those which constituted its essence
from the beginning. Now that which causes
a body to exist, is naturally antecedent to its
posterior qualities and has a pre-eminence
over them. It is then with reason that God
chose the most ancient characteristic of the
earth whereby to designate it.

6. ** And God saw that tt was good.” *
Scripture does not merely wish to say that a
pleasing aspect of the sea presented itself to
God. It is not with eyes that the Creator
views the beauty of His works. He contem-
plates them in Hisineffable wisdom. A fair
sight is the sea all bright in a settled calm ; fair
too, when, ruffled by a light breeze of wind,
its surface shows tints of purple and azure, —
when, instead of lashing with violence the


neighbouring shores, it seems to kiss them


with peaceful caresses. However, it is not
in this that Scripture makes God find the
goodness and charm of the sea. Here it is
the purpose of the work which makes the
goodness.

In the first place sea water is the source
of all the moisture of the earth. It filters
through imperceptible conduits, as is proved
by the subterranean openings and caves
whither its waves penetrate; it is received
in oblique and sinuous canals; then, driven


1 Gen. i. 10.


out by the wind, it rises to the surface of
the earth, and breaks it, having become
drinkable and free from its bitterness by
this long percolation. Often, moved by the
58 16 cause, it springs even from mines that it
has crossed, deriving warmth from them,
and rises boiling, and bursts forth of a burn-
ing heat, as may be seen in islands,and on
the sea coast; even inland in certain places,
in the neighbourhood of rivers, to compare
little things with great, almost the same
phenomena occur. To what do _ these
words tend? ΤῸ prove that the earth is all
undermined with invisible conduits, where
the water travels everywhere underground
from the sources of the sea.

7. Ehus; 11 the: eyes: of God, the! gsea\is
good, because it makes the under current of
moisture in the depths of the earth. It


is good again, because from all sides it
receives the rivers without exceeding its
limits. It is good, because it is the origin


and source of the waters in the air. Warmed
by the rays of the sun, it escapes in vapour,
is attracted into the high regions.of the air,
and is there cooled on account of its rising
high above the refraction of the rays from the
ground, and, the shade of the clouds adding to
this sefigeration, it is changed into rain and
fattens the earth. If people are incredulous,
let them look at caldrons on the fire, which,
though full of water, are often left empty
because all the water is boiled and resolved
into vapour. Sailors, too, boil even sea
water, collecting the vapour in sponges, to
quench their thirst in pressing need.

Finally the sea is good in the eyes of God,
because it girdles the isles, of which it forms
at the same time the rampart and the beauty,
because it brings together the most distant
parts of the earth, and facilitates the inter-
communication of mariners. By this means
it gives us the boon of general information,
supplies the merchant with his wealth, and
easily provides for the necessities of life,
allowing the rich to export their superfluities,
and blessing the poor with the supply of
what they lack.

But whence do I perceive the goodness of
the Ocean, as it appeared in the eyes of the
Creator? If the Ocean is good and worthy
of praise before God, how much more beau-
tiful is the assembly of a Church like this,
where the voices of men, of children, and of
women, arise in our prayers to God mingling
and re-sounding like the waves which beat
upon the shore. This Church also enjoys a
profound calm, and malicious spirits cannot
trouble it with the breath of heresy. Deserve,
then, the approbation of the Lord by remain-


76


BASIL.


ing faithful to such good guidance, in our] is the true meaning of the words that I have


Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
power for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY V.


The Germination of the Earth.


1. ‘** And God satd Let the earth bring
forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the
SJruit tree yielding fruit after his kind,
whose secd ts in itself.” It was deep wis-
dom that commanded the earth, when it
rested after discharging the weight of the
waters, first to bring forth grass, then wood,
as we see it doing still at this time. For the
voice that was then heard and this command
were as a natural and permanent law for it;
it gave fertility and the power to produce fruit
for all ages to come; ** Let the earth bring
forth.” The production of vegetables shows
first germination. When the germs begin to
sprout they form grass; this develops and
becomes a plant, which insensibly receives
its different articulations, and reaches its
maturity in the seed. Thus all things which
sprout and are green are developed. ‘+ Let
the earth bring forth green grass.” Let the
earth bring forth by itself without having any
need of help from without. Some consider
the sun as the source of all productiveness
on the earth. It is, they say, the action of
the sun’s heat which attracts the vital force
from the centre of the earth to the surface.
The reason why the adornment of the earth
was before the sun is the following; that
those who worship the sun, as the source of
life, may renounce theirerror. Ifthey be well
persuaded that the earth was adorned before
the genesis of the sun, they will retract their
unbounded admiration for it, because they see
grass and plants vegetate before it rose.” If
then the food for the flocks was prepared,
did our race appear less worthy of a like
solicitude? He, who provided pasture for
horses and cattle, thought before all of your
riches and pleasures. If he fed your cattle,
it was to provide for all the needs of your
life. And what object was there in the
bringing forth of grain, if not for your sub-
sistence? Moreover, many grasses and vege-
tables serve for the food of man.

2. ‘Let the earth bring forth grass yield-
ing seed after his kind.” So that although
some kind of grass is of service to animals,
even their gain is our gain too, and seeds
are especially designed for our use. Such

1 Gen. i. 11.

2 Empedocles, according to Plutarch (περὶ τῶν ἀρέσκ, etc.


V. 342) πρῶτα τῶν ζώων τὰ δένδρα ἐκ γῆς ἀναδῦναί φησι, πρὶν τὸν
ἥλιον περιαπλωθῆναι καὶ πρὶν ἡμέραν καὶ νύκτα διακριθῆναι.


quoted. ‘* Let the earth bring forth grass,
the herb yielding seed after his kind.” In
this manner we can re-establish the order of
the words, of which the construction seems
faulty in the actual version, and the economy
of nature will be rigorously observed. In
fact, first comes germination, then verdure,
then the growth of the plant, which after
having attained its full growth arrives at
perfection in seed.

How then, they say, can Scripture describe
all the plants of the earth as seed-bearing,
when the reed, couch-grass,’ mint, crocus,
garlic, and the flowering rush and countless
other species, produce no seed? Τὸ this we
reply that many vegetables have their seminal
virtue in the lower part and in the roots.
The reed, for: example, afterits jannual
growth sends forth a protuberance from its
roots, which takes the place of seed for
future trees. Numbers of other vegetables
are the same and all over the earth repro-
duce by the roots. Nothing then is truer
than that each plant produces its seed or
contains some seminal virtue; this is what
is meant by ‘after its kind.” So that the
shoot of a reed does not produce an olive
tree, but from areed grows another reed, and
from one sort of seed a plant of the same
sort always germinates. Thus, all which
sprang from the earth, in its first bringing
forth, is kept the same to our time, thanks
to the constant reproduction of kind.’

‘¢ Tet the earth bring forth.” See how,
at this short word, at this brief command,
the cold and sterile earth travailed and
hastened to bring forth its fruit, as it cast
away its sad and dismal covering to clothe
itself in a more brilliant robe, proud of its
proper adornment and displaying the infinite
variety of plants.

I want creation to penetrate you with so
much admiration that everywhere, wherever
you may be, the least plant may bring to you
the clear remembrance of the Creator. If
you see the grass of the fields, think of human
nature, and remember the comparison of the
wise Isaiah. ‘* All flesh is grass, and all the
goodliness thereof is as the flower of the
field.” Truly the rapid flow of life, the
short gratification and pleasure that an in-
stant of happiness gives a man, all wonder-
fully suit the comparison of the prophet.
To-day he is vigorous in body, fattened by
luxury, and in the prime of life, with com-
plexion fair like the flowers, strong and pow-


1 Triticum repens. °
2On the history of this doctrine, of which Linneus was


the latest great exponent, and its contradiction in Darwin, see


Haeckel’s Schépfungsgeschichte, vol. i. ch. 2.


THE HEXAEMERON.


77


erful and of irresistible energy; tomorrow
and he will be an object of pity, withered by
age or exhausted by sickness. Another shines
in all the splendour of a brilliant fortune,
and around him are a multitude of flatterers,
an escort of false friends on the track of his
good graces; a crowd of kinsfolk, but of no
true kin; a swarm of servants who crowd
after him to provide for his food and for all
his needs; and in his comings and goings
this innumerable suite, which he drags after
him, excites the envy of all whom he meets.
To fortune may be added power in the State,
honours bestowed by the imperial throne, the
government of a province, or the command of
armies; a herald who precedes him is crying
in a loud voice; lictors right and left also fill
his subjects with awe, blows, confiscations,
banishments, imprisonments, and all the
means by which he strikes intolerable terror
into all whom he has to rule. And what
then? One night, a fever, a pleurisy, or an
inflammation of the lungs, snatches away
this man from the midst of men, stripped in
a moment of all his stage accessories, and all
this, his glory, is proved a mere dream.
Therefore the Prophet has compared human
glory to the weakest flower.

Up to this point, the order in which
plants shoot bears witness to their first ar-
rangement. Every herb, every plant proceeds
fromagerm. If, like the couch-grass and the
crocus, itthrows out a shoot from its root and
from this lower protuberance, it must always
germinate and start outwards. If it proceeds
from a seed, there is still, by necessity, first a
germ, then the sprout, then green foliage,
and finally the fruit which ripens upon a
stalk hitherto dry and thick. ‘* Let the
earth bring forth grass.” When the seed
falls into the earth, which contains the right
combination of heat and moisture, it swells
and becomes porous, and, grasping the sur-
rounding earth, attracts to itself all that is
suitable for it and that has affinity to it.
These particles of earth, however small they
may be, as they fall and insinuate themselves
into all the pores of the seed, broaden its
bulk and make it send forth roots below, and
shoot upwards, sending forth stalks no less
numerous than the roots. As the germ is
always growing warm, the moisture, pumped
up through the roots, and helped by the at-
traction of heat, draws a proper amount of
nourishment from the soil, and distributes it
to the stem, to the bark, to the husk. to the
seed
is armed. It is owing to these successive
accretions that each plant attains its natural
development, as well corn as vegetables,


@


itself and to the beards with which it


herbs or brushwood. A single plant, a
blade of grass is sufficient to occupy all your
intelligence in the contemplation of the skill
which produced 1{.} Why is the wheat stalk
better with joints?? Are they not like fas-
tenings, which help it to bear easily the
weight of the ear, when it is swollen with
fruit and bends towards the earth? Thus,
whilst oats, which have no weight to bear at
the top, are without these supports, nature
has provided them for wheat. It has hidden
the grain in a case, so that it may not be ex-
posed to birds’ pillage, and has furnished it
with a rampart of barbs, which, like darts,
protect it against the attacks of tiny creatures.

4. What shall I say? What shall I leave
unsaid? In the rich treasures of creation it _
is difficult to select what is most precious; |
the loss of what is omitted is too severe.
‘‘Let the earth bring forth grass; ” and in-
stantly, with useful plants, appear noxious
plants; with corn, hemlock; with the other
nutritious plants, hellebore, monkshood,
mandrake and the juice of the poppy. What
then? Shall we show no gratitude for so
many beneficial gifts, and reproach the
Creator for those which may be harmful to
our life? And shall we not reflect that all
has not been created in view of the wants of
our beliies? The nourishing plants, which
are destined for our use, are close at hand,
and known by all the world. But in crea-
tion nothing exists without a reason. The
blood of the bull is a poison:? ought this
animal then, whose strength is so serviceable
to man, not to have been created, or, if
created, to have been bloodless? But you
have sense enough in yourself to keep you
free from deadly things. What! Sheep and
goats know how to turn away from what
threatens their life, discerning danger by in-
stinct alone: and you, who have reason and
the art of medicine to supply what you reed,
and the experience of your forebears to tell
you to avoid all that is dangerous, you tell me
that you find it dithcult to keep yourself from
poisons! But not a single thing has been
created without reason, not a single thing is
useless. One serves as food to some animal ;
medicine has found in another a relief for
one of our maladies. Thus the starling
eats hemlock, its constitution rendering it
insusceptible to the action of the poison.


1 “To me the meanest flower that blows can give
Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.”
Wordsworth, Ode on Immortality.


2 Literally, knee — Latin geniculum. cf. Xen., Anab. iv. 5,
26, and Theoph. viii. 2, 4. ‘* Knee-jointed” is a recognised
English term for certain grasses.

8... Taurorum (sanguts) pestifer potu maxtmne.” Plin. xi.
90. Taurinus recens inter venena est. 2d. xxviii. 41. cf. Dios-
corid. in Alexiph. 25.


78


BASIL.


Thanks to the tenuity of the pores of its
heart, the malignant juice is no sooner swal-
lowed than it is digested, before its chill can
attack the vital parts.’ The quail, thanks to
its peculiar temperament, whereby it escapes
the dangerous effects, feeds on hellebore.
There are even circumstances where poisons
are useful to men; with mandrake’ doctors
give us sleep; with opium they lull violent
pain. Hemlock has ere now been used to
appease the rage of unruly diseases; * and
many times hellebore has taken away long
standing disease.* These plants, then, in-
stead of making you accuse the Creator, give
you a new subject for gratitude.

5. ‘Let the earth bring forth grass.”
What spontaneous provision is included in
these words, —that which is present in the
root, in the plant itself, and in the fruit, as
well as that which our labour and husbandry
add! God did not command the earth im-
mediately to give forth seed and fruit, but
to produce germs, to grow green, and to
arrive at maturity in the seed; so that this
first command teaches nature what she has
to do in the course of ages. But, they ask,
is it true that the earth produces seed after
his kind, when often, after having sown
wheat, we gather black grain? ‘This is not
a change of kind, but an alteration, a disease
of the grain. It has not ceased to be wheat ;
it is on account of having been burnt that it
is black, as one can learn from its name.°
If a severe frost had burnt it,® it would have
had another colour and a different flavour.
They even pretend that, if it could find suit-
able earth and moderate temperature, it
might return to its. first form. Thus, you
find nothing in nature contrary to the divine
command. As to the darnel and all those
bastard grains which mix themselves with the
harvest, the tares of Scripture, far from being
a variety of corn, have their own origin and
their own kind; image of those who alter the
doctrine of the Lord and, not being rightly
instructed in the word, but, corrupted by the
teaching of the evil one, mix themselves with
the sound body of the Church to spread their
pernicious errors secretly among purer souls.
The Lord thus compares the perfection of
those who believe in Him to the growth of
seed, ‘as if a man should cast seed into the

2 ὃ μανδραγόρας τους ἀνθρώπους κοιμίζει, Ken., Symp. ii. 24.

8 cf. Areteus, De Morb, Aent.ii.11.

4 The Black Hellebore, or Christmas Rose, is a recognised
alterative. Whether this is the plant of Anticyra is doubtful.

5 rupds==wheat. The root, which has nothing to do with
πῦο, 15 found by Curtius in the Slavonic pyro=rye, the Bohe-
mian pyry=quitch grass, the Lettish purjt=wheat, and the
Lithuanian pyragas=wheaten bread. (L.& S. 12 loc.)

6 cf. Virg., Georg. i. 93: ‘Aut Poree penetrabile frigus


adurat.” Ov., AM. xiv. 763, Frigus adurat poma, and in
Greek Arist., Meteor. iv. 5.


eround; and should sleep and rise, night
and day, and the seed should spring and grow
up, he knoweth not how. For the earth
bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade,
then the ear, after that the full corn in the
ear.”1 ‘¢ Let the earth bring forth grass.”
In a moment earth began by germination
to obey the laws of the Creator, completed
every stage of growth, and brought germs
to perfection. ‘The meadows were covered
with deep grass, the fertile plains quivered?
with harvests, and the movement of the
corn was like the waving of the sea. Every
plant, every herb, the smallest shrub, the
least vegetable, arose from the earth in
all its luxuriance. There was no failure in
this first vegetation: no husbandman’s, inex-
perience, no inclemency of the weather,
nothing could injure it; then the sentence of
condemnation was not fettering the earth’s
fertility. All this was before the sin which
condemned us to eat our bread by the sweat
of our brow. ,

6. ‘** 7 εἰ the earth,” the Creator adds,
‘bring forth the frutt tree yielding frutt
after his kind, whose seed ts tn ttsclf.” °

At this command every copse was thickly
planted; all the ‘trees, fir, cedar,’ cypress,
pine, rose to their greatest height, the shrubs
were straightway clothed with thick foliage.*
The plants called crown-plants, roses,
myrtles, laurels, did not exist; in one mo-
ment they came into being, each one with its
distinctive peculiarities. Most marked dif-
ferences separated them from other plants,
and each one was distinguished by a char-
acter of its own. But then the rose was
without thorns; since then the thorn has been
added to its beauty, to make us feel that sor-
row is very near to pleasure, and to remind us
of our sin, which condemned the earth to pro-
duce thorns’ and caltrops. But, they say,
the earth has received the command to pro-
duce trees ‘* yielding fruit whose seed was in
itself,” and we see many trees which have
neither fruit, nor seed. What shall we re-
ply? First, that only the more important
trees are mentioned; and then, that a careful
examination will show us that every tree has
seed, or some property which takes the
place of it. The black poplar, the willow,
the elm, the white poplar, all the trees of
this family, do not produce any apparent
fruit; however, an attentive observer finds


1 Matt. iv. 26-28.

2 cf. Horrescunt segetes.

9. Geni tei

4 ἀμφίκουοι καὶ δασεῖς. cf. Milton, ‘* With frizzled hair im-
plicit.” ΟΣ "ik

5 cf. Milton, P.L., B. iv., ““ Flowers of all hue and without
thorn the rose,”? and August. De Genest contra Manicheos.
is 13s


Virg., Georg. iii. 39.


THE ἬΝ ΤΟΝ. +


79


seed in each of them. This grain which is
at the base of the leaf, and which those who
busy themselves with inventing words call
mischos, has the property of seed. And
there are trees which reproduce by their
branches, throwing out roots from them.
Perhaps we ought even to consider as seeds
the saplings which spring from the roots of a
tree: for cultivators tear them out to multiply
the species. But, we have already said, it is
chiefly a question of the trees which contrib-
ute most to our life; which offer their various
fruits to man and provide him with plen-
tiful nourishment. Such is the vine, which
produces wine to make glad the heart of
man; such is the olive tree, whose fruit
brightens his face with oil. How many
things in nature are combined in the same
plant! In a vine, roots, green and flexible
branches, which spread themselves far over
the earth, buds, tendrils, bunches of sour
grapes and ripe grapes. The sight of avine,
when observed by an intelligent eye, serves
to remind you of your nature. Without
doubt you remember the parable where the
Lord calls Elimself a vine and [lis Father
the husbandiman, and every one of us who
are grafted by faith into the Church the
branches. He invites us to produce fruits in
abundance, for fear lest our sterility should
condemn us to the fire.’ He constantly com-
pares our souls to vines. ‘* My well be-
lowed,” says fic, “hath ‘a: vineyard ima
wery fruitiulhill,?” Ὁ. and elsewhere, Ihave
** planted a vineyard and hedged it round
about.”* Evidently He calls human souls
His vine, those souls whom He has sur-
rounded with the authority of His precepts
and a guard of angels. ‘* The angel of the
Lord encampeth round about them that fear
τ πῆι > And further: Ele has’ planted for
us, so to say, props, in establishing in His


Church apostles, prophets, teachers;? and-
> | ’ ’


raising our thoughts by the example of the
blessed in olden times, He has not allowed
them to drag on the earth and be crushed
under foot. He wishes that the claspings
of love, like the tendrils of the vine, should
attach us to our neighbours and make us
rest on them, so that, in our continual as-
pirations towards heaven, we may imitate
these vines, which raise themselves to the
tops of the tallest trees. He also asks us to
allow ourselves to be dug about; and that
is what the soul does when it disembarrasses
itselr from the cares of the world, which are
a weight on our hearts. He, then, who is


4 Ps, xxxiv. 7.


1 cf. S. John xv. 1-6,
: 5 ef. 1 Cor. xii. 28.


Salles wis kts
8 Matt. xxi. 33.


freed from carnal affections and from the
love of riches, and, far from being dazzled
by them, disdains and despises this miserable
vain glory, is, so to say, dug about and
at length breathes, free from the useless
weight of earthly thoughts. Nor must we,
in the spirit of the parable, put forth too
much wood, that is to say, live with ostenta-
tion, and gain the applause of the world; we
must bring forth fruits, keeping the proof of
our works for the husbandman. Be ‘* like
a green olive tree in the house of Ged,”?
never destitute of hope, but decked through
faith with the bloom of salvation. Thus you
will resemble the eternal verdure of this plant
and will rival it in fruitfulness, if each day sees
you giving abundantly in alms.

7. But let us return to the examination
of the ingenious contrivances of creation.
How many trees then arose, some to give us
their fruits, others to roof our houses, others
to build our ships, others to feed our fires!
What a variety in the disposition of their
several parts! And yet, how difficult is it to
find the distinctive property of each of them,
and to grasp the difference which separates
them from other species. Some strike deep
roots, others do not; some shoot straight
up and have only one stem, others appear to
love the earth and, from their root uy wards,
divide into several shoots. Those whose
long branches stretch up afar into the air,
have also deep roots which spread within
a large circumference, a true foundation
placed by nature to support the weight of
the tree. What variety there is in baik!
Some plants have smooth bark, others rough,
some have only one layer, others several.
What a marvellous thing! You may find in
the youth and age of plants resemblances to
those of man. Young and vigorous, their
bark is distended; when they grow old, it is
rough and wrinkled. Cut one, it sends forth
new buds; the other remains henceforward
sterile and as if struck with a mortal wound.
But further, it has been observed that
pines, cut down, or even submitted to the
action of fire, are changed into a forest of
oaks.” We know besides that the industry
of agriculturists remedies the natural defects


1Ps. lii. 8.

2 The phenomenon has been observed in later days, though
Basil may be at fault in his account of the cause. When pines
have been cleared away in North American forests ycung oak-
lings have sprung up. Theacorn lay Jong hid, unable to con-
tend against the pine, but, when once the ground was clear, it
sprouted. This upgrowth of a new kind of tree has been ac-
counted for partly by the burial of germs by javs, rcoks, and
some quadrupeds; partly by the theory of De Candolle and
Liebig that roots expel certain substances which, though un-
favourable to the vitalitv of the plant excreting them, are Ca-
pable of supporting others. So, on the pine pressure being
removed, the hidden seeds sprout in a kind of vegetable
manure. cf. Sir Charles Lyell’s Travels in the United States
and Rough’s Elements of Forestry, p. 19.


80


BASTL.


of certain trees. Thus the sharp pomegran-
ate and bitter almonds, if the trunk of the
tree is pierced near the root to introduce into
the middle of the pith a fat plug of pine, lose
the acidity of their juice, and become deli-
cious fruits.!. Let not the sinner then despair
of himself, when he thinks, if agriculture can
change the juices of plants, the efforts of
the soul to arrive at virtue, can certainly
triumph over all infirmities.

Now there is such a variety of fruits in
fruit trees that it is beyond all expression ;
a variety not only in the fruits of trees of
different families, but even in those of the
same species, if it be true, as gardeners
say, that the sex of a tree influences the
character of its fruits. They distinguish
male from female in palms; sometimes we
see those which they call female lower their
branches, as though with passionate desire,
and invite the embraces of the male. Then,
those who take care of these plants shake
over these palms the fertilizing dust from
the male palm-tree, the Zsex as they call
it: the tree appears to share the pleasures
of enjoyment; then it raises its branches,
and its foliage resumes its usual form.
The same is said of the fig tree. Some
plant wild fig trees near cultivated fig trees,
and there are others who, to remedy the
weakness of the productive fig tree of our
gardens, attach to the branches unripe figs
and so retain the fruit which had already
begun to drop and to be lost. What lesson
does nature here give us? That we must
often borrow, even from those who are
strangers to the faith, a certain vigour to
show forth good works. If you see outside
the Church, in pagan life, or in the midst of
a pernicious heresy, the example of virtue
and fidelity to moral laws, redouble your
efforts to resemble the productive fig tree,
who by the side of the wild fig tree, gains
strength, prevents the fruit from being shed,
and nourishes it with more care.

8. Plants reproduce themselves in so
many different ways, that we can only touch
upon the chief among them. As to fruits
themselves, who could review their varieties,
their forms, their colours, the peculiar flavour,
and the use of each of them? Why do some
fruits ripen when exposed bare to the rays
of the sun, while others fill out while encased
inshells? Trees of which the fruit is tender
Maye, like the fig tree, a thick shade of
leaves; those, on the contrary, of which the


1 Ambrose, Hevaem. iii, 13, writes: Amygdalis quoque hoc
Zenere medicart feruntur agricole, ut ex amarts dulces fiant
fructus, ut ct terebrent ejus radicem arboris, et in medium tn-
servant surculum ejus arborits quam Gr@ct πεύχην, nos piceam
dicimus ; quo facto succi amaritudo deponitur.


fruits are stouter, like the nut, are only
covered by a light shade. The delicacy of
the first requires more care; if the latter had
a thicker case, the shade of the leaves would
be harmful. Why is the vine leaf serrated,
if not that the bunches of grapes may at the
same time resist the injuries of the air and
receive through the openings all the rays of
the sun? Nothing has been done without
motive, nothing by chance. All shows in-
effable wisdom."

What discourse can touch all? Can the
human mind make an exact review, remark
every distinctive property, exhibit all the
differences, unveil with certainty so many
mysterious causes? The same water, pumped
up through the root, nourishes in a different
way the root itself, the bark of the trunk, the
wood and the pith. It becomes leaf, it dis-
tributes itself among the branches and twigs
and makes the fruits swe!l— it gives to the
plant its gum and its sap. Who will explain
to us the difference between all these? There
is a difference between the gum of the mas-
tich and the juice of the balsam, a difference
between that which distils in Egypt and
Libya from ‘the fennel. Amber is, they
say, the crystallized sap of plants. And
for a proof, see the bits of straws and
little insects which have been caught in the
sap while still liquid and imprisoned there.
In one word, no one without long experience
could find terms to express the virtue of it.
How, again, does this water become wine in
the vine, and oil in the olive tree? Yet
what is marvellous is, not to see it become
sweet in one fruit, fat and unctuous in
another, but to see in sweet fruits an inex-
pressible variety of flavour. . There is one
sweetness of the grape, another of the apple,
another of the fig, another of the date. I
shall willingly give you the gratification of
continuing this research. How is it that
this same water has sometimes a sweet taste,
softened by its remaining in certain plants,
and at other times stings the palate be-
cause it has become acid by passing
through others? How is it, again, that it
attains extreme bitterness, and makes the
mouth rough when it is found in wormwood
and in scammony? That it has in acorns


1On theargument from design, cf. Aristotle, De Part. Anim.
iii. 1,as quoted and translated by Cudworth, III. xxxvii.3: ‘A
carpenter would give a better account than so, for he would
not think it sufficient to say that the fabric came to be of such
a form because the instruments happened to fall so and so,
but he will tell you that it is because himself made such
strokes, and that he directed the instruments and determined
their motion after such a manner, to this end that he might
make the whole a fabric fit and useful for such purposes.” On
the strength and weakness of the argument from design, in
view of modern speculation, suggestive matter is contained in
Dr. Eagar’s Buther’s Analogy and Modern Thought, p. 49
et sq.


THE HEXAEMERON.


and dogwood a sharp and rough davai!
That in the turpentine tree and the walnut
tree it is changed into a soft and oily matter?

g- But what need is there to continue.
when in the same fig tree we have the most
opposite flavours, as bitter in the sap as it is
sweet in the fruit? And in the vine, is it
not as sweet in the grapes as it is astringent
in the branches? And what a variety of
colour! Look how in a meadow this same
water becomes red in one flower, purple in
another, blue in this one, white in that.
And this diversity of colours, is it to be
compared to that of scents? But I perceive
that an insatiable curiosity is drawing out
my discourse beyond its limits. If I do not
stop and recall it to the law of creation, day
will fail me whilst making you see great
wisdom in small things.

εἰ Let the earth bring forth the fruit tree
ytelding fruit.” Immediately the tops of
the mountains were covered with foliage ;
paradises were artfully laid out, and an in-
finitude of plants embellished the banks of
the rivers. ‘Some were for the adornment
of man’s table; some to nourish animals
with their fruits and their leaves; some to
provide medicinal help by giving us their
sap, their juice, their chips, their bark or
fein inuit. In a, word, the experience’. of
ages, profiting from every chance, has not
been able to discover anything useful, which
the penetrating foresight of the Creator did
not first perceive and call into existence.
Therefore, when you see the trees in our
gardens, or those of the forest, those which
love the water or the land, those which bear
flowers, or those which do not flower, I
should like to see you recognising grandeur
even in small objects, adding incessantly to
your admiration of, and redoubling your love
for the Creator. Ask yourself why He has
made some trees evergreen and others decidu-
ous; why, among the first, some lose their
leaves, and others always keep them. Thus
the olive and the pine shed their leaves,
although they renew them insensibly and
never appear to be despoiled of their verd-
ure. The palm tree, on the contrary, from
its birth to its death, is always adorned with
the same foliage. ‘Think again of the double
life of the tamarisk; it is an aquatic plant,
and yet it covers the desert. Thus, Jere-
miah compares it to the worst of characters
— the double character.’

10. ‘* Let the earth bring forth.” This
short command was in a moment a vast
nature, an elaborate system. Swifter than


1 cf, Jer. xvii. 6, LXX.


SI


thought it produced the countless qualities
of plants. It is this command which, still
at this day, is imposed on the earth, and in
the course of each year displays all the
strength of its power to produce herbs,
seeds and trees. Like tops, which after the
first impulse, continue their evolutions, turn-
ing upon themselves when once fixed in
their centre; thus nature, receiving the im-
pulse of this first command, follows without
interruption the course of ages, until the
consummation of all things.! Let us all
hasten to attain to it, full of fruit and of
good works; and thus, planted in the house
of the Lord we shall flourish in the court of
our God,’ in our Lord Jesus Christ, towhom
be glory and power for ever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY VI.


The creation of luminous bodies.


1. AT the shows in the circus the spectator
must join in the efforts of the athletes. This
the laws of the show indicate, for thev pre-
scribe that all should have the head uncov-
ered when present at the stadium. The
object of this, in my opinion, is that each oné
there should not only be a spectator of the
athletes, but be, in a certain measure, a true
athlete himself. Thus, to investigate the
great and prodigious show of creation, to
understand supreme and ineffable wisdom,
you must bring personal light for the contem-
plation of the wonders which I spread before
your eyes, and help me, according to your
power, in this struggle, where you are not
so much judges as fellow combatants,* for fear
lest the truth might escape you, and lest my
error might turn to your common preju-
dice. Why these words? It is because we
propose to study the world as a whole, and
to consider the universe, not by the light of
worldly wisdom, but by that with which


1... Ac mtht quidem videtur, cum due sententie furssent
veterum philosophorum, una eorum gui censerent omnia ita
fato fiert, ut id fatum vim necessitatts afferret, in qua sen-
tentia Democritus, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Aristoteles futt ;
altera eorum,quibus viderentur sine ullo fato esse animorum
motus voluntarti: Chrysippus tanquam arbiter honorarfus,
medium ferire voluisse...quanguam assensio non possit fiert
nist commota visa, tamen cum id visum proximam causan
habeat, non Loe Bere hanc habet rationem, ut Chrysippus
vult, quam dudum-diximus,non, ut tlla quidem fiert possit,
nulla vt extrinsecus excittata, necesse est enim assenstonem
viso commovert, sed revertitur ad cylindrum, et ad turbinem
SuUum, que movert incipere, Last che non possunt: td autem
cum accidit suapte natura, quod superest et cylindrum volvi,
et versart turbinem putat.’’? (Cic., De fato. xviii.)

2 cf, ES; XC. 12»

8 In the Theatrum spectators might be covered. cf. Mart.
xiv. 29:

‘¢ In Pompetano tectus spectabo theatro ;
Nam ventus populo vela negare solet.”

cf. Dion Cassius lix.7. These passages may, however, in-
dicate exceptional cases. '

4 cf. Greg., In Ez.: Propter bonos auditores malis doctorr-
bus sermo datur: et propter malos auditores bonis doctoribus
sermo subtrahitur,


82


BASIL.


God wills to enlighten His servant, when He
speaks to him in person and without enigmas.
It is because it is absolutely necessary that all
lovers of great and grand shows should bring
a mind well prepared to study them. If some-
times, on a bright night,’ whilst gazing with
watchful eyes on the inexpressible beauty of
the stars, you have thought of the Creator of
all things; if you have asked yourself who
it is that has dotted heaven with such flow-
ers, and why visible things are even more
useful than beautiful; if sometimes, in the
day, you have studied the marvels of light,
if you have raised yourself by visible things
to the invisible Being, then you are a well
prepared auditor, and you can take your
place in this august and blessed amphitheatre.
Come in the same way that any one not
knowing a town is taken by the hand and led
through it; thus I am going to lead you, like
strangers, through the mysterious marvels of
this great city of the universe.” Our first
country was in this great city, whence the
murderous demon whose enticements se-
duced man to slavery expelled us. There you
will see man’s first origin and his immediate
seizure by death, brought forth by sin, the
first born of the evil spirit. You will know
that you are formed of earth, but the work of
God’s hands; much weaker than the brute,
but ordained to command beings without
reason and soul; inferior as regards natural
advantages, but, thanks to the privilege of
reason, capable of raising yourself to heaven.
If we are penetrated by these truths, we shall
know ourselves, we shall know God, we
shall adore our Creator, we shall serve our
Master, we shall glorify our Father, we
shall love our Sustainer, we shall bless our
Benefactor, we shall not cease to honour the
Prince * of present and future life, Who, by
the riches that He showers upon us in this
world, makes us believe in His promises and
uses present good things to strengthen our
expectation of the future. ‘Truly, if such are
the good things of time, what will be those
of eternity? If such is the beauty of visible
things, what shall we think of invisible


1**By night an atheist half believes in God.’? Young,
N.T.v.177. ef. also Cic., De nat. Deor. ii. 38: Quis enim
hunc hominem dixerit, gui tam certos celi motus,tam ratos
astrorum ordines, tamgue omnta ister se connexa et apta
viderit, neget in his ullam tnesse rationem, eaque casu fiert
dicat, que quanto consilio gerantur, nullo consilio assequi
possumus

2 cf. Cic., De Nat. Deor.ii. 62. Est enim mundus quast com-
munis deorum aique hominum domus, aut urbs utrorumque.
Soli etiam ratione utentes, jure ac lege vivunt. Bp. Light-
foot quotes in illustration of Phil. iii. 20, Philo, De Conf. i. 416,
M. πατρίδα μὲν τὸν οὐράνιον χῶρον ἐν ᾧ πολιτεύονται ξένον δὲ
τὸν περίγειον ἐν ᾧ παρῴκησαν νομίζουσαι. SoClem. Alex., Strom.
iv. 26, λέγουσι γὰρ οἱ Στωϊκοὶ τὸν μὲν οὐρανὸν κυρίως πόλιν τὰ
δὲ ἐπὶ γῆς ἐνταῦθα οὐκ ἔτι πόλεις, λέγεσθαι γὰρ, οὐκ εἶναι dé, and
Plato, Pep. ix. 592, B. ἐν οὐρανῷ ἴσως παράδειγμα (τῆ5 πόλεως)
ἀνάκειται τῷ βουλομένῳ ὁρᾷν καὶ ὁρῶντι ἑαυτὸν κατοικίζειν.


3 cf, Acts iii. 15.


things? If the grandeur of heaven exceeds
the measure of human intelligence, what mind
shall be able to trace the nature of the ever-
lasting? Ifthe sun, subject to corruption, is
so beautiful, so grand, so rapid in its move-
ment, so invariible in its course; if its gran-
deur is in such perfect harmony with and
due proportion to the universe: if, by the
beauty of its nature, it shines like a brilliant
eye in the middle of creation; if finally, one
cannot tire of contemplating it, what will be
the beauty of the Sun of Righteousness?? If
the blind man suffers from not seeing the
material sun, what a deprivation is it for the
sinner not to enjoy the true light!

2. ** And God satd, Let there be lights
zn the firmament of the heaven to give light
upon the earth, and to divide the day from
the night.’* Heaven and earth were the
first; after them was created light; the day
had been distinguished from the night, then
had appeared the firmament and the dry
element. The water had been gathered into
the reservoir assigned to it, the earth dis-
played its productions, it had caused many
kinds of herbs to germinate and it was
adorned with all kinds of plants. However,
the sun and the moon did not yet exist, in
order that these who live in ignorance of
God may not consider the sun as the origin
and the father of light, or as the maker of all
that grows out of the earth.? That is why
there was a fourth day, and then God said:
*¢ Let there be lights in the firmament of the
heaven.”

When once you have learnt Who spoke,
think immediately of the hearer. God said,
ὁ Let there be-lights.. . 2 and God anade
two great lights.” Who spoke? and Who
made? Do you not see a double person?
Everywhere, in mystic language, history is
sown with the dogmas of theology.

The motive follows which caused the
lights to be created. It was to illuminate
the earth. Already light was created; why
therefore say that the sun was created to give
light? .. And yweiirst, ‘do mot laugh! jap the
strangeness of this expression. We do not
follow your nicety about words, and we
trouble ourselves but little to give them a
harmonious turn. Our writers do not amuse


1cf, Mal. iv. 2. 2 Gen. i. 14, LXX. ᾿

3 Fialon quotes Bossuet (5th elev. 3d week): ‘* “47η81] 11 a
fait la lumtére avant que de fatre les grands luminaires oi il
a voulu la ramasser : et tla fatt la distinction des jours avant
gue d’avotr créé les astres dont il s’est servi pour les régler
parfattement : et le soir et le matin ont été distingués, avant
que leur distinction et la division parfatte du jour et de la
nutt fat bien marquée, et les arbres, et les arbustes, et les herbes
ont germé sur la terre par ordre de Dieu, avant qu'il eit jait
le scletl, quit devatt étre le pére de toutes ces plantes; et tla
détaché exprés les effets d’avec leurs causes naturelles, pour
montrer que naturellement tout ne tient qu’a lui seul, et ne
dépend que de sa seule volonté.”


THE HEXAEMERON.


themselves by polishing their periods, and
everywhere we prefer clearness of words to
sonorous expressions. See thenif, by this ex-
pression “ὁ to light up,” the sacred writer suffi-
ciently made his thought understood. He
has put ““ to give light ”’ instead of ** illumi-
nation.” ”? Now there is nothing here con-
tradictory to what has been said of light.
Then the actual nature of light was produced :
now the sun’s body is constructed to be a
vehicle for that original light. A lamp is
not fire. Fire has the property of illuminat-
ing, and we have invented the lamp to light
us in darkness. In the same way, the lu-
minous bodies have been fashioned as a
vehicle for that pure, clear, and imma-
terial light. The Apostle speaks to us of
certain lights which shine in the world?
without being confounded with the true light
of the world, the possession of which made
‘the saints luminaries of the souls which they
instructed and drew from the darkness of
ignorance. ‘This is why the Creator of all
things, made the sun in addition to that
glorious light, and placed it shining in the
heavens.

3. And let no one suppose it to be a
thing incredible that the brightness of the
light is one thing, and the body which is its
material vehicle is another. First, in all com-
posite things, we distinguish substance sus-
ceptible of quality, and the quality which it
receives. The nature of whiteness is one
thing, another is that of the body which is
whitened; thus the natures differ which we
have just seen reunited by the power of the
Creator. And do not tell me that it is im-
possible to separate them. Even I do not
pretend to be able to separate light from the
body of the sun ; but I maintain that that which
we separate in thought, may be separated in
reality by the Creator of nature. You cannot,
moreover, separate the brightness of fire
from the virtue of burning which it pos-
sesses; but God. who wished to attract His
servant by a wonderful sight, set a fire in the
burning bush, which displayed all the brill-
iancy of flame while its devouring property
was dormant. It is that which the Psalmist
afirms in saying ** The voice of the Lord
divideth the flames of fire.”* Thus, in’ the
requital which awaits us after this life, a
mysterious voice seems to tell us that the
double nature of fire will be divided; the
just will enjoy its light, and the torment of
its heat will be the torture of the wicked.

In the revolutions of the moon we find a


1 φαῦσις, the act of giving light, LXX.
2 φωτισμός. the condituoa produced by φαῦσις.
8 cf, Phil. ii. 15. Ps. Xxix. 7.


83
new proof of what we have advanced.
When it stops and grows less it does not
consume itself in all its body, but in the
measure that it deposits or absorbs the light
which surrounds it, it presents to. us the
image of its decrease or of its increase. If
we wish an evident proof that the moon
does not consume its body when at rest, we
have only to open our eyes. If you look at
it in a cloudless and clear sky, you observe,
when it has taken the complete form of a
crescent, that the part, which is dark and not
lighted up, describes a circle equal to that
which the full moon forms. Thus the eye
can take in the whole circle, if it adds to the
illuminated part this obscure and dark curve.
And do not tell me that the light of the moon
is borrowed, diminishing or increasing iu
proportion as it approaches or recedes from
the sun. That is not now the object of our
research; we only wish to prove that its
body differs from the light which makes it
shine. I wish you to have the same idea of
the sun; except however that the one, after
having once received light and having mixed
it with its substance, does not lay it down
again, whilst the other, turn by turn, putting
off and reclothing itself again with light,
proves by that which takes placein itself
what we have said of the sun.

The sun and moon thus received the com-
mand to divide the day from the night. God
had already separated light from darkness;
then He placed their natures in opposition, so
that they could not mingle, and that there
could never be anything in common between
darkness and light. You see what a shadow
is during the day; that is precisely the nature
of darkness during the night. If, at the ap-
pearance of a light, the shadow always falls
on the opposite side; if in the morning it
extends towards the setting sun; if in the
evening it inclines towards the rising sun,
and at mid-day turns towards the north;
night retires into the regions opposed to the
rays of the sun, since it is by nature only the
shadow of the earth. Because, in the same
way that, during the day, shadow is pro-
duced by a body which intercepts the light,
night comes naturally when the air which
surrounds the earth is in shadow. And this
is precisely what Scripture says, ‘‘ God
divided the light from the darkness.” Thus
darkness fled at the approach of light, the
two being at their first creation divided bv
a natural antipathy. Now God commanded
the sun to measure the day, and the moon,
whenever she rounds her disc, to rule the
night. For then these two luminaries are
almost diametrically opposed; when the sun


84


rises, the full moon disappears from the
horizon, to re-appear in the east at the
moment the sun sets. It matters little to our
subject if in other phases the light of the
moon does not correspond exactly with night.
It is none the less true, that when at its per-
fection it makes the stars to turn pale and
lightens up the earth with the splendour of
its light, it reigns over the night, and in con-
cert with the sun divides the duration of it in
equal parts.

4. ‘And let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days and years.” The signs
which the luminaries give are necessary to
human life. In fact what useful observa-
tions will long experience make us discover,
if we ask without undue curiosity! What
signs of rain, of drought, or of the rising of the
wind, partial or general, violent or moderate !
Our Lord indicates to us one of the signs
given by the sun when He says, ‘‘ It will be
foul weather to-day; for the sky is red and
lowering.” ? In fact, when the sun rises
through a fog, its rays are darkened, but the
disc appears buraing like a coal and of a
bloody red colour. It is the thickness of the
air which causes this appearance; as the rays
of the sun do not disperse such amassed
and condensed air, it cannot certainly be re-
tained by the waves of vapour which exhale
from the earth, and it will cause from supera-
oundance of moisture a storm in the coun-
tries over whichit accumulates. Inthe same
way, when the moon is surrounded with
moisture, or when the sun is encircled with
what is called a halo, it is the sign of heavy
rain or of a violent storm ; again, in the same
way, if mock suns accompany the sun in its
course they foretell certain celestial phenome-
na. Finally, those straight lines, like the
colours of the rainbow, which are seen on
the clouds, announce rain, extraordinary
tempests, or, in one word, a complete change
in the weather.

Those who devote themselves to the ob-
servation of these bodies find signs in the
different phases of the moon, as if the air,
by which the earth is enveloped, were obliged
to vary to correspond with its change of
form. ‘Towards the third day of the new
moon. if it is sharp and clear, it is a sign of
fixed fine weather. If its horns appear thick
and reddish it threatens us either with heavy
rain or with a gale from the South.? Who
does not know how useful * are these signs in


1 Gen. i. 14. 2 St. Matt. xvi. 3.

3 πάντη yap καθαρῇ κε μάλ᾽ εὔδια τεκμήραιο, πάντα. δ᾽ ἐρευθο-
μένῃ δοκέειν ἀνέμοιο κελεύθους, ἄλλοθι δ᾽ ἄλλο μελαινομένῃ δοκέειν
'δετοῖο. Aratus 70. 4cf. Verg., Georg.i. 424:

St vero solem ad rapidum lunasque sequentes
Ordtine respicies. nunquam te crastina fallet
Hora, neque insiditts noctis captere serene.


BASIL.


—


life? Thanks to them, the sailor keeps back
his vessel in the harbour, foreseeing the perils
with which the winds threaten him, and the
traveller beforehand takes shelter from harm,
waiting until the weather has become fairer.
Thanks to them, husbandmen, busy with
sowing seed or cultivating plants, are able to
know which seasons are favourable to their
labours. Further, the Lord has announced
to us that at the dissolution of the universe,
signs will appear in the sun, in the moon and
in the stars. The sun shall be turned into
blood and the moon shall not give her light,'
signs of the consummation of all things.

5. But those who overstep the borders,’
making the words of Scripture their apology
for the art of casting nativities, pretend
that our lives depend upon the motion of
the heavenly bodies, and that thus the Chal-
dzans read in the planets that which will
happen to us.° By these very simple words
‘¢let them be for signs,” they understand
neither the variations of the weather, nor
the change of seasons; they only see in
them, at the will of their imagination, the
distribution of human destinies. What do
they say in reality? When the planets cross
in the signs of the Zodiac, certain figures
formed by their meeting give birth to cer-
tain destinies, and others produce different
destinies.

Perhaps for clearness sake it is not useless
to enter into more detail about this vain
science. I will say nothing of my own to
refute them; I will use their words, bringing
a remedy for the infected, and for others a
preservative from falling. The inventors of
astrology seeing that in the extent of time
many signs escaped them, divided it and en-
closed each part in narrow limits, as if in the
least and shortest interval, in a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye,* to speak with the
Apostle, the greatest difference should be
found between one birth and another. Such
an one is born in this moment; he will bea
prince over cities and will govern the people,


1 Basil seems to be confusing Joel ii. 31 and Matt. xxiv. 29.

2umrio Ta ἐσκαμμένα πηδᾶν iS a proverbial phrase for going
beyond bounds. cf. Lucian., Gad/. vi. and Plat., Crat. 413, a.

3«* On doit a’autant plus louer le grand sens de Saint Basile
qui s’inspire presgu’ enticrement a’ Origéne et de Plotin, sans
tomber dans leur erreur. En riant toute espéce de relation
entre les astres et les actes de V’homme, il conserve intacte
notre liberté.” Fialon, p. 425. ‘* Quale deinde judicium, de
hominum factis Deo relinguitur, quibus celestis necessitas
adhibetur cum Dominus tlle sit et siderum et hominum. Aut
st non dicunt stellas accepta quidam » bind a summo Deo,
arbitrio suo tsta decernere, sed in talibus necessitatibus inger-
endis tllius omnino jussa complere, tta ne de we Deo sentien-
dum est,quod indignissimum visum est de stellarum voluntate
sentire. Quod si dicuntur stelle significare potius ἰδέα quam
facere, ut quast locutio sit quedam illa positio predicens
futura, non agens (non enim mediocriter doctorum hominum
fuit ἰδέα sententia) non quidem ita solent loguit mathematic,
ut verbi gratia dicunt, Mars ita positus homicidam signifi-
cat, sed homicidam non facit.” August., De C. Dei.v. τι.

41 Cor. xv. 52.


THE HEXAEMERON.


in the fulness of riches and power. Another
is born the instant after; he will be poor,
miserable, and will wander daily from door
to door begging his bread. Consequently
they divide the Zodiac into twelve parts, and,
as the sun takes thirty days to traverse each
of the twelve divisions of this unerring circle,
they divide them into thirty more. Each of
them forms sixty new ones, and these last
are again divided into sixty. Let us see then
if, in determining the birth of an infant, it will
be possible to observe this rigorous division
of time. The child is born. The nurse
ascertains the sex ; then she awaits the wail
which is a sign of its life. Until then how
many moments have passed do you think?
The nurse announces the birth of the child
to the Chaldzean: how many minutes would
you count before she opens her mouth, es-
pecially if he who records the hour is outside
the women’s apartments? And we know
that he who consults the dial, ought, whether
by day or by night, to mark the hour with
the most precise exactitude. What aswarm
of seconds passes during this time! For
the planet of nativity ought to be found, not
only in one of the twelve divisions of the
Zodiac, and even in one of its first sub-divi-
sions, but again in one of the sixtieth parts
which divide this last, and even, to arrive at
the exact truth, in one of the sixtieth sub-
divisions that this contains in its turn. And,
to obtain such minute knowledge, so impos-
sible to grasp from this moment, each
planet must be questioned to find its position
as regards the signs of the Zodiac and the
figures that the planets form at the moment
of the child’s birth. Thus, if it is impossi-
ble to find exactly the hour of birth, and if the
least change can upset all, then both those
who give themselves up to this imaginary
science and those who listen to them open-
mouthed, as if they could learn from them
the future, are supremely ridiculous.

6. But what effects are produced? Such
an-one will have curly hair and bright eyes,
because he is born under the Ram; such is
the appearance of a ram. He will have
noble feelings; because the Ram is born
to command. He will be liberal an: fertile
in resources, because this animal gets rid of
its fleece without trouble, and nature imme-
diately hastens to reclothe it. Another is born
under the Bull: he will be enured to hard-
ship and of a slavish character, because the
bull bows under the yoke. Another is born
under the Scorpion; like to this venomous
reptile he will be a striker. He who is born
under the Balance will be just, thanks to the
justness of our balances. Is not this the


85
height offolly ? This Ram, from whence you
draw the nativity of man, is the twelfth part
of the heaven, and in entering into it the sun
reaches the spring. The Balance and the
Bull are likewise twelfth parts of the Zodiac.
How can you see there the principal causes
which influence the life of man? And why
do you take animals to characterize the man-
ners of men who enter this world? He
who is born under the Ram will be liberal,
not because this part of heaven gives this
characteristic, but because such is the nature
of the beast. Why then should we frighten
ourselves by the names of these stars and
undertake to persuade ourselves with these
bleatings? If heaven has different character-
istics derived from these animals, it is then
itself subject to’ external influences since its
causes depend on the brutes who graze in
our fields. A ridiculous assertion; but how
much more ridiculous the pretence of arriv-
ing at the influence on each other of things
which have not the least connexion! This
pretended science is a true spider’s web;
if a gnat or a fly, or some insect equally
feeble falls into it it is held entangled;
if a stronger animal approaches, it passes
through without trouble, carrying the weak
tissue away with it.}

7. They do not, however, stop here;
even our acts, where each one feels his will
ruling, 1 mean, the practice of virtue or of
vice, depend, according to them, on the in-
fluence of celestial bodies. It would be
ridiculous seriously to refute such an error,
but, as it holds a great many in its nets,
perhaps it is better not to pass it over in
silence. I would first ask them if the figures
which the stars describe do not change a
thousand times a day. In the perpetual
motion of planets, some meet in a more
rapid course, others make slower revolutions,
and often in an hour we see them look at
each other and then hide themselves. Now,
at the hour of birth, it is very important
whether one is looked upon by a beneficent
star or by an evil one, to speak their lan-
guage. Often then the astrologers do not
seize the moment when a good star shows
itself, and, on account of having let this
fugitive moment escape, they enrol the new-
born under the influence of a bad genius.
I am compelled to use their own words.
What madness! But, above all, what im-
piety! For the evil stars throw the blame
of their wickedness upon Him Who made
them. If evil is inherent in their nature, the


1’EAeye δὲ. . τοὺς νόμους τοῖς ἀραχνίοις Omoiovs* και yao
? - x,A Ν Ω “- Ν ᾽ Ν , | Ν -
ἐκεῖνα ἐὰν μὲν ἐμπέσῃ TL κοῦφον καὶ ἀσϑενὲς στέγειν, ἐὰν δὲ μεῖζον,
διακόψαν οἴχεσϑαι. Solon, in Diog. Laert. ii. 1.


86


Brome


Creator is the author of evil. If they make
it themselves, they are animals endowed
with the power of choice, whose acts will be
free and voluntary. Is it not the height of
folly to tell these lies about beings without
souls? Again, what a want of sense does it
show to distribute good and evil without re-
gard to personal merit; to say that a star is
beneficent because it occupies a certain place ;
that it becomes evil, because it is viewed by
another star; and that if it moves ever so
little from this figure it loses its malign in-
fluence.

But let us passon. If, at every instant of
duration, the stars vary their figures, then in
these thousand changes, many times a day,
there ought to be reproduced the configuration
of royal births. Why then does not every
day see the birth of a king? Why is there a
succession on the throne from father to son?
Without doubt there has never been a king
who has taken measures to have his son
born under the star of royalty. For what
man possesses such a power? How then
did Uzziah beget Jotham, Jotham Ahaz,
Ahaz Hezekiah? And by what chance
did the birth of none of them happen in
an hour of slavery? If the origin of our
virtues and of our vices is not in ourselves,
but is the fatal consequence of our birth, it
is useless for legislators to prescribe for us
what we ought to do, and what we ought to
avoid; it is useless for judges to honour
virtue and to punish vice. The guilt is not
in the robber, not in the assassin: it was
willed for him; it was impossible for him
to hold back his hand, urged to evil by in-
evitable necessity. Those who laboriously
cultivate the arts are the maddest of men.
The labourer will make an abundant harvest
without sowing seed and without sharpening
his sickle. Whether he wishes it or not,
the merchant will make his fortune, and will
be flooded with riches by fate. As for us
Christians, we shall see our great hopes
vanish, since from the moment that man
does not act with freedom, there is neither
reward for justice, nor punishment for sin.
Under the reign of necessity and of fatality
there is no place for merit, the first condition
of all righteous judgment. But let us stop.
You who are sound in yourselves have no
need to hear more, and time does not allow
us to mike attacks without limit against
these unhappy men.

ὃ. Let us return to the words which fol-
low. ‘** Let them be for signs and for
seasons and for days and years.” ' We have


1 Gen, i. 14.


spoken about signs. By times, we under-
stand the succession of seasons, winter,
spring, summer and autumn, which we see
follow each other in so regular a course,
thanks to the regularity of the movement
of the luminaries. It is winter when
the sun sojourns in the south and pro-
duces in abundance the shades of night
in our region. The air spread over the
earth is chilly, and the damp exhalations,
which gather over our heads, give rise to
rains, to frosts, to innumerable flakes of snow.
When, returning from the southern regions,
the sun is in the middle of the heavens and
divides day and night into equal parts, the
more it sojourns above the earth the more it
brings back a mild temperature tous. Then
comes spring, which makes all the plants
germinate, and gives to the greater part of
the trees their new life, and, by successive
generation, perpetuates all the land and
water animals. From thence the sun, return-
ing to the summer solstice, in the direction
of the North, gives us the longest days. And,
as it travels farther in the air, it burns that
which is over our heads, dries up the earth,
ripens the grains and hastens the matur-
ity of the fruits of the trees. At the epoch
of its greatest heat, the shadows which
the sun makes at mid-day are short, because
it shines from above, from the air over
our heads. Thus the longest days are
those when the shadows are shortest, in the
same way that the shortest days are those
when the shadows are longest. It is this
which happens to all of us “" Hetero-skii” !
(shadowed-on-one-side) who inhabit the
northern regions of the earth. But there
are people who, two days in the year, are
completely without shade at mid-day, be-
cause the sun, being perpendicularly over
their heads, lights them so equally from
all sides, that it could through a narrow
opening shine at the bottom of a well.
Thus there are some who call them ** askii ”
(shadowless). For those who live beyond
the land of spices” see their shadow now
on one side, now on another, the only
inhabitants of this land of which the shade
falls at mid-day; thus they are given the
name of ‘* amphiskii,” > (shadowed-on-both-

17.6. throwing a shadow only one way at noon, — said of
those who live north and south of the tropics, while those
who live in the tropics cast a shadow sometimes north, some-
times south, vide Strabo ii. 5,§ 43. It was “incredible” to
Herodotus that Necho’s Phenician mariners, in their circum-
navigation of Africa, had “the sun on their right hand.”’ Her.


iv. 42.
2. 1.6. Arabia. cf. Lucan., Phars. iii. 247:
Tenotum vobis Arabes venistis tn orbem,
Umbras mirati nemorum non tre sinistras.
3 Simili modo tradunt in Syene oppido, quod est super
Alexandriam quinque millibus stadtorum, solstitit die medio
nullam umbram gact; puteumque 4745 experiments gratia


THE HEXAEMERON.


87


Meee eet. Th haat Seat oT i Ta tio ac McaC tT Meo | PEAT Go ae et “8.


sides). All these phenomena happen whilst
the sun is passing into northern regions:
they give us an idea of the heat thrown on
the air, by the rays of the sun and of the
effects that they produce. Next we pass to
autumn, which breaks up the excessive heat,
lessening the warmth little by little, and by
a moderate temperature brings us back with-
out suffering to winter, to the time when the
sun returns from the northern regions to the
southern. It is thus that seasons, following
the course of the sun, succeed each othe to
rule our life.

‘* Let them be for days”! says Scripture, not
to produce them but to rule them; because
day and night are older than the creation
of the luminaries and it is this that the psalm
declares to us. ‘* The sun to rule by day
- . . the moon and stars to rule by night.” ”
How does the sun rule by day? Because
carrying everywhere light with it, it is no
sooner risen above the horizon than it drives
away darkness and brings us day. Thus
we might, without self deception, define day
as air lighted by the sun, or as the space of
time that the sun passes in our hemisphere.
The functions of the sun and moon serve
further to mark years. The moon,
having twelve times run her course, forms a
year which sometimes needs an intercalary
month to make it exactly agree with the sea-
sons. Such was formerly the year of the


Hebrews and of the early Greeks.* As to the
solar year, it is the time that the sun, having


started from a certain sign, takes to return to
it in its normal progress.

9g. ** And God made two great lights.” *
The word ‘ great,” if, for example we say it
of the heaven of the earth or of the sea, may
have an absolute sense; but ordinarily it has
only a relative meaning, as a great horse, or
a great ox. It is not that these animals are
of an immoderate size, but that in compari-
son with their like they deserve the title of
great. What idea shall we ourselves form
here of greatness? Shall it be the idea that
we have of it in the ant and in all the little
creatures of nature, which we call great in
comparison with those like themselves, and
to show their superiority over them? Or
shall we predicate greatness of the lumina-
ries, as of the natural greatness inherent in
them? As for me, I think so. If the sun
and moon are great, it is not in comparison
factum, totum illuminari.” Pliny ii. 75. cf. Lucan., Phars.
507, ** atque umbras nunguam flectente Syene.”’

PGen. i. 14. 2 Ps. cxxxvi. 8, 9.

3 The Syrians and Macedonians had also an intercalary
thirteenth month to accommodate the lunar to the solar cycle.
Solon is credited with the introduction of the system into
Greece about 594 B.C. But the Julian calendar improved upon


this mode of adjustment.
4 Gen, i. τό.


after


with the smaller stars, but because they have
such a circumference that the splendour
which they diffuse lights up the heavens
and the air, embracing at the same time earth
and sea. In whatever part of heaven thev
may be, whether rising, or setting, or in mid
heaven, they appear always the same in the
eyes of men, a manifest proof of their pro-
digioussize. For the whole extent of heaven
cannot make them appear greater in one
place and smaller in another. Objects
which we see afar off appear dwarfed to our
eyes, and in measure as they approach us
we can form a juster idea of their size. But
there is no one who can be nearer or more
distant from the sun. All the inhabitants of
the earth see it at the same distance. Indians
and Britons see it of the same size. The
people of the East do not see it decrease in
magnitude when it sets; those of the West
do not find it smaller when it rises. If it is
in the middle of the heavens it does not vary
in either aspect. Do not be deceived by
mere appearance, and because it looks a
cubit’s breadth, imagine it to be no bigger.1
At avery great distance objects always lose
size in our eyes; sight, not being able to
clear the intermediary space, is as it were
exhausted in the middle of its course, and
only a small part of it reaches the visible
object.” Our power of sight is small and
makes all we see seem small, affecting what
it sees by its own condition. Thus, then, if
sight is mistaken its testimony is fallible.
Recall your own impressions and you will
find in yourself the proof of my words. If
you have ever from the top of a high moun-
tain looked at a large and level plain, how
big did the yokes of oxen appear to you? How
big were the ploughmen themselves? Did
they not look like ants?* If from the top of
a commanding rock, looking over the wide
sea, you cast your eyes over the vast extent
how big did the greatest islands appear to


\


1 Tertia ex utrogue vastitas solis aperttur, ut non sit
necesse amplitudinem ejus oculorum argumentis, atque con-
Jectura anti scrutart;: tmmensum esse quia arborum in
limitibus porrectarum in quotlibet passuum millia umbras
paribus jactat tntervallis,tanguam toto spatio medius : et guia
per eguinoctium omnibus in meridiana plaga habitantibus,
simul fiat a vertice: tta guia circa solstitialem circulum habi-
tantium meridie ad Septemtrionem umbre cadant, ortu vero
ad occasum, Que fiert nullo modo possent nisi multo quam
terra major esset.” Plin. ii. 8.

2 Πλάτων κατὰ συναύγειαν, τοῦ μὲν ἐκ τῶν ὀφϑαλμῶν φωτὸς ἐπὶ
ποσὸν ἀποῤῥέοντος εἰς τὸν ὁμογενῆ ἀέρα, τοῦ δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ σώματος
φερομένον ἀποῤῥεῖν: τὸν δὲ μεταξὺ ἀέρα εὐδιάχυτον ὄντα καὶ
εὔτρεπτον, συνεκτείνοντος τῷ πυρώδει τῆς ὄψεως, αὕτη, λέγεται
πλατωνικὴ συναύγεια. Plut. περὶ τῶν ἀρεσκ. iv. 13. The Pla-
tonic theory of night is explained in the Zim@us, Chap. xix.

3 Plato (Phed. ὃ 133) makes the same comparison, ‘Ett ᾿
Toivov, ἔφη, πάμμεγά TE εἶναι αὐτό, καὶ ἡμᾶς οἰκειν τοὺς μέχρι
Ἡρακλείων στηλῶν ἀπὸ Φάσιδος ἐν σμικρῷ τινὶ μορίῳ, ὥςπερ
περι τέλμα μύρμηκας ἢ βατράχους περὶ τὴν ϑάλατταν ὀικοῦντας.
Fialon names Seneca (Quest. Nat. i.'pref. 505) and Lucian
(Hermotimus v. and Icaromenippus xix.) as following him.
To these may be added Celsus “ καταγελῶν τὸ “Ιουδαίων καὶ
Χριστιανῶν yevos”’ in Origen, C. Ce/s. iv. 517, B.


83


BASIE.


you? How large did one of those barks of
great tonnage, which unfurl their white sails
to the blue sea, appear to you. Did it not
look smaller than a dove? It is because
sight, as I have just told you, loses itself in
the air, becomes weak and cannot seize with
exactness the object which it sees. And
further : your sight shows you high mountains
intersected by valleys as rounded and smooth,
because it reaches only to the salient parts,
and is not able, on account of its weakness,
to penetrate into the valleys which separate
them. It does not even preserve the form of
objects, and thinks that all square towers are
round. Thus all proves that at a great dis-
tance sight only presents to us obscure and
confused objects. The luminary is_ then
great, according to the witness of Scripture,
and infinitely greater than it appears.

10. See again another evident proof of its
greatness. Although the heaven may be full
of stars without number, the light contributed
by them all could not disperse the gloom
of night. The sun alone, from the time that
it appeared on the horizon, while it was still
expected and had not yet risen completely
above the earth, dispersed the darkness, out-
shone the stars, dissolved and diffused the air,
which was hitherto thick and condensed over
our heads, and produced thus the morning
breeze and the dew which in fine weather
streams over the earth. Could theearth with
such a wide extent be lighted up entirely in
one moment if an immense disc were not
pouring forth its light over it? Recognise
here the wisdom of the Artificer. See how
He made the heat of the sun proportionate to
this distance. Its heat is so regulated that it
neither consumes the earth by excess, nor
lets it grow cold and sterile by defect.

To all this the properties of the moon are
near akin; she, too, has an immense body,
whose splendour only yields to that of the sun.
Our eyes, however, do not always see her in
her full size. Now she presents a perfectly
rounded disc. now when diminished and
lessened she shows a deficiency on one side.
When waxing she is shadowed on one side,
and when she is waning another side is
hidden. Now it is not without a secret reason
of the divine Maker of the universe, that the
moon appears from time to time under such
different forms. It presents a striking ex-
ample of our nature. Nothing is stable in
man; here from nothingness he raises himself
to perfection ; there after having hasted to put
forth his strength to attain his full greatness
he suddenly is subject to gradual deteriora-
tion, and is destroyed by diminution. Thus,
the sight of the moon, making us think of the


rapid vicissitudes of human things, ought to
teach us not to pride ourselves on the good
things of this life, and not to glory in our
power, not to be carried away by uncertain
riches, to despise our flesh which is subject
to change, and to take care of the soul, for its
good is unmoved. If you cannot behold
without sadness the moon losing its splendour
by gradual and imperceptible decrease, how
much more distressed should you be at the
sight of a soul, who, after having possessed
virtue, loses its beauty by neglect, and does
not remain constant to its affections, but is
agitated and constantly changes because its
purposes are unstable. What Scripture says
is very true, ‘* As for a fool he changeth as
the moon.’’?

I believe also that the variations of the
moon do not take place without exerting
great influence upon the organization of ani-
mals and of all living things. This is because
bodies are differently disposed at its waxing
and waning. When she wanes they lose
their density and become void. When she
waxes and is approaching her fulness they
appear to fill themselves at the same time
with her, thanks to an imperceptible moisture
that she emits mixed with heat, which pene-
trates everywhere.” For proof, see how those
who sleep under the moon feel abundant
moisture filling their heads ;° see how fresh
meat is quickly turned under the action of
the moon;* see the brain of animals, the
moistest part of marine animals, the pith of
trees. Evidently the moon must be, as
Scripture says, of enormous size and power
to make all nature thus participate in her
changes.

11. On its variations depends also the con-
dition of the air, as is proved by sudden dis-


1 Ecclus. xxvii. 11.

2cf. Alcman (ap. Plut., Sympos. iii. 10), who calls the dew
Διὸς θυγάτηρ καὶ Σελάνας; and Plutarch himself 72 /oc. Virg.,
Georg. iii. 337, “ Roscitda Luna,” and Statius, Theb. i. 336:


“* Tamque per emeritt! surgens confinta Phabt
Titants, late mundo subvecta stlentt
Rortfera gelidum tenuaverat aera biga.”


3 The baleful influence of “ tracunda Diana’’ (Hor., De
Art. Poet. 454) is an early belief, not yet extinct. cf. the term
σελήνιασμός for epilepsy, and ‘‘dunaticus’’ for the ** moon-
struck”? madman, Vide Cass., Quest. Med. xxv.1. Perowne
on Ps. cxxi. 6 notes, ** De Wette refers to Andersen’s Lastern
Travels in proof that this opinion is commonly entertained.
Delitzsch mentions having heard from Texas that the conse-
quence of sleeping in the open air, when the moon was shin-
ing, was mental aberration, dizziness, and even death.”

“ Dass auch der Mond in heller Nacht dem ohne gehsrigen
Schutz Schlafenden schaden kénne tst allgemeine Mernung des
Orients und der kihlen Néchte wegen leicht moiglich. Vel.
Carne ‘Leben und Sitten im Morgenl.’” Ewald, Dichter des
A.B. ii. 266.

4 A fact, however explained. Plutarch (Sympos. Prob. iii.
10) discusses the question Διὰ τί Ta κρέα σήπεται μᾶλλον Um)
τὴν σελήνην ἢ τὸν ἥλιον, and refers the decomposition to the
moistening influence of the mcon. ‘Air, moisture, and a
certain degree of warmth, are necessary to the decay of ani-
mal bodies .. . where moisture continues present —even though
warmth and air be ina great measure excluded — decay still
slowly takes place.” J. F. W. Johnston, Chemistry of Com-
mon Life, ii. 273.


THE, HEXAAEMERON.


turbances which often come after the new
moon, in the midst of acalm and of a stillness
in the winds, to agitate the clouds and to hurl
them against each other; as the flux and re-
flux in straits, and the ebb and flow of the
ocean prove, so that those who live on its
shores see it regularly following the revolu-
tions of the moon. The waters of straits
approach and retreat from one shore to the
other during the different phases of the
moon; but, when she is new, they have not
an instant of rest, and move in perpetual
swaying to and fro, until the moon, reap-
pearing, regulates their reflux. As to the
Western sea,! we see it in its ebb and flow
now return into its bed, and now overflow,
as the moon draws it back by her respiration
and then, by her expiration, urges it to. its
own boundaries.’

I have entered into these details, to show
you the grandeur of the luminaries, and to
make you see that, in the inspired words,
there is not one idle syllable. And yet my
sermon has scarcely touched on any im-
portant point; there are many other discov-
eries about the size and distance of the sun
and moon to which any one who will make
a serious study of their action and of their
characteristics may arrive by the aid of reason.
Let me then ingenuously make an avowal of
my weakness, for fear that you should meas-
ure the mighty works of the Creator by my
words. The little that I have said ought the
rather to make you conjecture the marvels on
which I have omitted to dwell. We must
not then measure the moon with the eye, but
with the reason. Reason, for the discovery
of truth, is much surer than the eye.

Everywhere ridiculous old women’s tales,
imagined in the delirium of drunkenness,
have been circulated; such as that enchant-
ments can remove the moon from its place
and make it descend to-the earth. How
could a magician’s charm shake that of which


the Most High has laid the foundations?.


And if once torn out what place could hold
ie

Do you wish from slight indications to have
a proof of the moon’s size? All the towns in
the world, however distant from each other,


1 7,2. the Atlantic.
Sretum.””

2 Pytheas, of Marseilles, is first named as attributing the
tides to the moon. Plut. περὶ ἀρεσκ. «.7.A. ili. 17. On the
ancient belief generally v7de Plin. ii. gg.

8. Inventa jam pridem ratio est prenuntians horas, non
modo dies ac noctes, Solis Lunaegue defectuum. Durat
tamen tradita persuasto in magna parte vulgt, venefictis et
herbis td cogt, eamque num feminarum sctentiam prevalere.”
Plin. xxv. v. So it was a custom to avert the spells of sor-
ceresses, which might bring the eclipsed moon to the ground,
by beating brass and shouting. cf. Juv.. Sat, vi. 443,

“ Tam nemo tubas, nemo-era fatigat,
Una laboranti poterit succurrere lune,”
and the “ era auxiliaria lune” of Ov., Met. iv. 333.


cf. Ovid., Met. xi. 258, ‘* Hespertum


89


equally receive the light from the moon in
those streets that are turned towards its rising
If she did not look on all face to face, those
only would be entirely lighted up which
were exactly opposite; as to those beyond
the extremities of her disc, they would only
receive diverted and oblique rays. It is this
effect which the light of lamps produces in
houses; if a lamp is surrounded by several
persons, only the shadow of the person who
is directly opposite to it is cast in a straight
line, the others follow inclined lines on each
side. In the same way, if the body of the
moon were not of an immense and prodig-
ious size she could not extend herself alike to
all. In reality, when the moon rises in the
equinoctial regions, all equally enjoy her
light, both those who inhabit the icy zone,
under the revolutions of the Bear, and those
who dwell in the extreme south in the neigh-
bourhood of the torrid zone. She gives us
an idea of her size by appearing to be face to
face with all people. Who then can deny
the immensity of a body which divides itself
equally over such a wide extent?

But enough on the greatness of the sun
and moon. May He who has given us intel-
ligence to recognise in the smallest objects of
creation the great wisdom of the Contriver
make us find in great bodies a still higher
idea of their Creator. However, compared
with their Author, the sun and moon are
but a fly and an ant. The whole universe
cannot give us aright idea of the greatness
of God; and it is only by signs, weak and
slight in themselves, often by the help of the
smallest insects and of the least plants, that
we raise ourselves to Him. Content with
these words let tis offer our thanks, I to Him
who has given me the ministry of the Word,
you to Him who feeds you with spiritual
food ; Who, even at this moment, makes you
find in my weak voice the strength of barley
bread. May He feed you for ever, and in
proportion to your faith grant you the mani-
festation of the Spirit’ in Jesus Christ our
Lord, to whom be glory and power for ever
and ever. Amen. )


HOMILY: Nil


The creation of moving creatures.*


1. *¢ And God said, Let the waters bring
orth abundantly the moving creature that
hath l¢fe” after their kind, ‘+ and fowl that
may fly above the earth” after their kind.®
After the creation of the luminaries the
waters are now filled with living beings and


1 ef, 2 Cor. ait,7. 3 Gen. i. 20.


2 LXX. creeping things.


90


its own adornment is given to this part of
the world. Earth had received hers from
her own plants, the heavens had received
the flowers of the stars, and, like two eyes,
the great luminaries beautified them in con-
cert. It still remained for the waters to re-
ceive their adornment. The command was
given, and immediately the rivers and lakes
becoming fruitful brought forth their natural
broods; the sea travailed with all kinds of
swimming creatures; not even in mud and
marshes did the water remain idle; it took
its part in creation. Everywhere from its
ebullition frogs, gnats and flies came forth.
For that which we see to-day is the sign
of the past. Thus everywhere the water
hastened to obey the Creator’s command.
Who could count the species which the great
and ineffable power of God caused to be
suddenly seen living and moving, when this
command had empowered the waters to
bring forth life? Let the waters bring forth
moving creatures that have life. Then for
the first time is made a being with life and
feeling. For though plants and trees be said
to live, seeing that they share the power of
being nourished and growing; nevertheless
they are neither living beings, nor have they
life.’ To create these last God said, ‘** Let
the water produce moving creatures.”

Every creature that swims, whether it
skims on the surface of the waters, or cleaves
the depths, is of the nature of a moving
creature,” since it drags itself on the body of
the water. Certain aquatic animals have
feet and walk; especially amphibia, such as
seals, crabs, crocodiles, river horses? and
frogs; but they are above all gifted with the
power of swimming. ‘Thus it is said, Let
the waters produce moving creatures. In
these few words what species is omitted?
Which is not included in the command of
the Creator? Do we not see viviparous ani-
mals, seals, dolphins, rays and all cartilagi-
nous animals? Do we not see oviparous
animals comprising every sort of fish, those
which have a skin and those which have
scales, those which have fins and those which
have not?) This command has only required
one word, even less than a word, a sign, a
motion of the divine will, and it has such a
wide sense that it includes all the varieties
and all the families of fish. To review them
all would be to undertake to count the waves
of the ocean or to measure its waters in the
hollow of the hand. ‘‘ Let the waters pro-


1 Plants are neither ζῶα nor ἔμψυχα.

2 LXX. creeping.

3 Basil uses the classical Greek form οἱ ποτάμιοι ἵπποι, as in
Herod. and Arist. The dog-Greek hippopotamus, properly a
horse-river, is first found in Galen,


BASIE.


duce moving creatures.” That is to say,
those which people the high seas and those
which love the shores; those which inhabit
the depths and those which attach themselves
to rocks; those which are gregarious and
those which live dispersed, the cetaceous,
the huge, and the tiny. It is from the same
power, the same command, that all, small and
great receive their existence. ‘Let the
waters bring forth.” These words show you
the natural affinity of animals which swim
in the water; thus, fish, when drawn out of
the water, quickly die, because they have no
respiration such as could attract our air and
water is their element, as air is that of terres-
trialanimals. The reason for itis clear. With
us the lung, that porous and spongy portion of
the inward parts which receives air by the
dilatation of the chest, disperses and cools
interior warmth; in fish the motion of the
gills, which open and shut by turns to. take in
and to eject the water, takes the place of
respiration.!. Fish have a peculiar lot, a
special nature, a nourishment of their own,
a life apart. Thus they cannot be tamed
and cannot bear the touch of a man’s hand.?

2. ‘* Let the waters bring forth moving
creatures after their kind.” God caused to
be born the firstlings of each species to
serve as seeds for nature. Their multitudi-
nous numbers are kept up in subsequent suc-
cession, when it is necessary for them to
grow and multiply. Of another kind is the
species of testacea, as muscles, scallops, sea
snails, conches, and the infinite variety of
oysters. Another kind is that of the crusta-
cea, as crabs and lobsters; another of fish
without shells, with soft and tender flesh, like
polypi and cuttle fish. And amidst these
last what an innumerable variety! There
are weevers, lampreys and eels, produced in
the mud of rivers and ponds, which more
resemble venomous reptiles than fish in their
nature. Of another kind is the species of
the ovipara; of another, that of the vivipara.
Among the latter are sword-fish, cod, in one
word, all cartilaginous fish, and even the
greater part of the cetacea, as dolphins, seals,
which, it is said, if they see their little ones,
ἔχει πνεύμονα ἀλλ᾽ ἀντὶ τούτου βράγχια καϑάπερ εἴρηται ἐν τοῖς περὶ
ἀναπνοῆς" ὕδατι γᾶρ ποιεῖται τὴν κατάψυξιν, τὰ δ᾽ ἀναπνέοντα
ἔχει πνεύμονα ἀναπνεῖ δὲ τὰ πεζὰ πάντα.

2 Here Basil is curiously in contradiction to ancient as well
as modern experience. Martial’s epigram on Domitian’s tame
fish, ‘“‘guz norunt dominum, manumque lambunt illam qua
nthil est in orbe majus” (iv. 30), is illustrated by the same
author’s ‘*zatat ad magistrum delicata murena” (x. 30), as
well as by AZlian (De animal. viii.4). ‘‘Apud Baulos in parte
Baiana piscinam habuit Hortensius orator, in qua murenam
adeo dilexit ut exanimatam flesse credatur: tn eadem villa
Antonia Drust murene quam: diligebat inaures addidit.”
Plin, ix. 71. So Lucian οὗτοι δε (ίχϑυες) καὶ ὀνόματα ἔχουσι καὶ
ἔρχονται καλούμενοι. (De Syr. Dea. 45.) John Evelyn (Diary


1644) writes of Fontainebleau: ‘‘ The carps come familiarly to
hand.”? There was recently a tame carp at Azay le Rideau.


THE, HEXAEMERON.


still quite young, frightened, take them back
into their belly to protect them.!

Let the waters bring forth after their
kind. ‘The species of the cetacean is one;
another is that of small fish. What infinite
variety in the different kinds! All have
their own names, different food, different
form, shape, and quality of flesh. All pre-
sent infinite variety, and are divided into in-
numerable classes. Is there a tunny fisher
who can enumerate to us the different varie-
ties of that fish? And yet they tell us that
at the sight of great swarms of fish they
can almost tell the number of the individual
ones which compose it. What man is there
of all that have spent their long lives by
coasts and shores, who can inform us with
exactness of the history of all fish?

Some are known to the fishermen of the
Indian ocean, others to the toilers of the
Egyptian gulf, others to the islanders, others
to the men of Mauretania.” Great and small
were all alike created by this first command,
by this ineflable power. What a difference
in their food! What a variety in the man-
ner in which each species reproduces itself!
Most fish do not hatch eggs like birds; they
do not build nests; they do not feed tbeir
young with toil; it is the water which re-
ceives and vivifies the egg dropped into it.
With them the reproduction of each species
is invariable, and natures are not mixed.
There are none of those unions which, on
the earth, produce mules and certain birds
contrary to the nature of their species. With
fish there is no variety which, like the ox
and the sheep, is armed with a half-equip-
ment of teeth, none which ruminates except,
according to certain writers, the scar.* All
have serried and very sharp teeth, for fear
their food should escape them if they masti-
cate it for too long a time. In fact, if it
were not crushed and swallowed as soon as
divided, it would be carried away by the
water.

3. The food of fish differs according to
their species. Some feed on mud; others
eat sea weed; others content themselves
_ with the herbs that grow in water. But the
greater part devour each other, and the
smaller is food for the larger, and if one
which has possessed itself of a fish weaker
than itself becomes a prey to another, the
conqueror and the conquered are both swal-
lowed up in the belly of the last. And we
mortals, do we act otherwise when we op-


1 Narrated by Atlian (Anim. i. 16) of the “ glaucus,” a fish
apparently unknown.

2 Μαυρούσιοι. cf. Strabo, ii. 33. , “

3¢.g. Arist., De Anim. viii. 2 and ‘Elian, il. 54.


ΟΙ
press our inferiors?’ What difference is
there between the last fish and the man
who, impelled by devouring greed, swallows
the weak in the folds of his insatiable ava-
rice? Yon fellow possessed the goods of the
poor; you caught him and made him a part
of your abundance. You have shown your-
self more unjust than the unjust, and more
miserly than the miser. Look to it lest you
end like the fish, by hook, by weel, or by
net. Surely we too, when we have done
the deeds of the wicked, shall not escape pun-
ishment at the last.

Now see what tricks, what cunning, are to
be found in a weak animal, and learn not
to imitate wicked doers. The crab loves
the flesh of the oyster; but, sheltered by its
shell, a solid rampart with which nature has
furnished its soft and delicate flesh, it is a
difficult prey to seize. ‘Thus they call the
oyster “ὁ sherd-hide.”? Thanks to the two
shells with which it is enveloped, and which
adapt themselves perfectly the one to the
other, the claws of the crab are quite pow-
erless. What does he do? When he sees
it, sheltered from the wind, warming itself
with pleasure, and half opening its shells to
the sun,° he secretly throws in a pebble, pre-
vents them from closing, and takes by cun-
ning what force had lost.* Such is the mal-
ice of these animals, deprived as they are of
reason and of speech. But I would that you
should at once rival the crab in cunning and
industry, and abstain from harming your
neighbour; this animal is the image of him
who craftily approaches his brother, takes
advantage of his neighbour’s misfortunes,
and finds his delight in other men’s troubles.
O copy not the damned! Content yourself
with your own lot. Poverty, with what is
necessary, is of more value in the eyes of the
wise than all pleasures.

I will not pass in silence the cunning and
trickery of the squid, which takes the colour
of the rock to which it attaches itself. Most
fish swim idly up to the squid as they might
to a rock, and become themselves the prey
of the crafty creature.” Such are men who

1cf. Pericles ii. i.

3 ish, Master, I marvel how the fishes live in the sea.

1 Fish, Why, as men do a-land; the great ones eat up the
little ones. 2 ὀστρακόδερμος.

8 Fialon quotes La Fontaine Le Rat et l’Huitre:

Parmi tant @huitres toutes closes, ?

Une ς᾽ ἐξ it ouverte, et batllant au soleil,

Par un doux Zéphyr réjoute,

Humatt Pair, respirait, était épanoute,

Blanche, grasse, eb d’un gout, a la voir, sans pareil.

4 Pliny ix. 48, says of the octopus: “ *mposito lapillo extra
corpus ne palpitatu ejiciatur : ita securigrassantur, extrahunt-
gue carnes.”’ :

5 cf. Theog. 215: τ

πούλυπου ὀργὴν ἴσχε πολυπλόκου, ὃς ποτὶ πέτρῃ
τῇ προσομιλήσει τοῖος ἰδεῖν ἐφάνη.


Νῦν μὲν τῇς ἐφέπου, ποτὲ δ᾽ ἀλλοῖος χρόα γίγνου,
κραιπνόν τοι σοφίη γίγνεται εὐτροπίης.- ἢ


62


court ruling powers, bending themselves to
all circumstances and not remaining for a
moment in the same purpose; who praise
self-restraint in the company of the self-re-
strained, and license in that of the licentious,
accommodating their feelings to the pleasure
of each. It is difficult to escape them and
to put ourselves on guard against their mis-
chief; because it is under the mask of
' friendship that they hide their clever wicked-
ness. Men like this are ravening wolves
covered with sheep’s clothing, as the Lord
calls them.’ Flee then fickleness and _ plia-
bility; seek truth, sincerity, simplicity. The

erpent is shifty ; so he has been condemned
to crawl. The just is an honest man, like Job.’
Wherefore God setteth the solitary in fami-
1165. So is this great and wide sea, wherein
are things creeping innumerable, both small
and great beasts.*, Yet a wise and marvellous
order reigns among these animals. Fish do
not always deserve our reproaches ; often they
offer us useful examples. How is it that each
sort of fish, content with the region that has
been assigned to it, never travels over its
own limits to pass into foreign seas? No
surveyor has ever distributed to them their
habitations, nor enclosed them in walls, nor
assigned limits to them; each kind has been
naturally assigned its own home. One gulf
nourishes one kind of fish, another other
sorts; those which swarm here are absent
elsewhere. No mountain raises its sharp
peaks between them; no rivers bar the pas-
sage to them; it is a law of nature, which
according to the needs of each kind, has
allotted to them their dwelling places with
equality and justice.°®

4. It is not thus with us. Why? Be-

5 Greg. Naz., Ov. xxxvi.: πολλὰς μεταλαμβάνων χρόας ὥσπερ τὰ
τῶν πετρῶν ei πολύποδες ais ἃν ὁμιλήσωσι, and Arist., Hist. An.
ix. 37: καὶ ϑηρεύει τοὺς ἰχϑῦς TO χρῶμα μεταβάλλων καὶ ποιῶν
ὅμοιον οἷς dy πλησιάζῃ λίϑοις.

1 cf, Matt. vii. 15.

_2 So the Cod. Colb. and Eustathius, who renders Fustus
nthil habet fictum sicut Fob. The Ben. Ed. suspect that Basil
wrote Jacob and Job. Four MSS. support Jacob alone, who,
whatever may be the meaning of the Hebrew in Gen. xxv. 27, is
certainly ἄπλαστος only in the LXX., and a bad instance of
guilelessness.

3 Ps. Ixviii. 6. APS ον, 25,

5 cf. Cudworth, nt. Syst. iii. 37, 23: *« Besides this plastick
Nature which is in animals, forming their several bodies arti-
ficially, as So any microcosms or little worlds, there must also
be a general plastick Nature in the macrocosm, the whole cor-
poreal universe, that which makes all things thus to conspire
everywhere, and agree together into one harmony. Concern-
ing which plastick nature of the universe, the Author De
Mundo writes after this manner, καὶ τὸν ὅλον κόσμον, διεκόσ-
μησε μία ἡ διὰ πάντων διήκουσα δύναμις, one power, passing
through all things, ordered and formed the whole world.
Again he calls the same πνεῦμα καὶ ἔμψυχον καὶ γόνιμον οὐσίαν,
a spirit, and a living and Generative Nature, and plainly de-
clares it to be a thing distinct from the Deity, but subordinate
to it and dependent on it. But Aristotle himself, in that
genuine work of his before mentioned, speaks clearly and
positively concerning this Plastick Nature of the Universe, as
well as that of animals, in these words: ‘It seemeth that as
there is Art in Artificial things, so in the things of Nature,
there is another such like Principle or Cause, which we our-


selves partake of; in the same manner as we do of Heat and
Cold, trom the Universe. Wherefore it is more probable that


BASIL.


cause we incessantly move the ancient land-
marks which our fathers have set... We
encroach, we add house to house, field to
field, to enrich ourselves at the expense of
our neighbour. The great fish know the
sojourning place that nature has assigned
to them; they occupy the sea far from the
haunts of men, where no islands lie, and
where are no continents rising to confront
them, because it has never been crossed and
neither curiosity nor need has persuaded
sailors to tempt it. The monsters that
dwell in this sea are in size like high moun-
tains, so witnesses who have seen tell us, and
never cross thcir boundaries to ravage islands
and seaboard towns. Thus each kind is as
if it were stationed in towns, in villages, in
an ancient country, and has for its dwelling
place the regions of the sea which have been
assigned to it.

Instances have, however, been known of
migratory fish, who, as if common delibera-
tion transported them into strange regions, all
start on their march at a given sign. When
the time marked for breeding arrives, they, as
if awakened by a common law of nature,
migrate from gulf to gulf, directing their
course toward the North Sea. And at the
epoch of their return you may see all these
fish streaming like a torrent across the Pro-
pontis towards the Euxine Sea. Who puts
them in marching array? Where is the
prince’s order? Has an edict affixed in the
public place indicated to them their day of
departure? Who serves them as a guide?
See how the divine order embraces all and
extends to the smallest object. A fish does
not resist God’s law, and we men cannot
endure His precepts of salvation! Do not
despise fish because they are dumb and quite
unreasoning; rather fear lest, in your resist-
ance to the disposition of the Creator, you
have even less reason than they. Listen to
the fish, who by their actions all but speak
and say: it is for the perpetuation of our
race that we undertake this long vovage.


the whole world wasat first made by such a cause as this (if at
least it were made) and that it is still conserved by the same,
than that mortal animals should be so: for there is much more
of order and determinate Regularity in the Heavenly Bodies
than in ourselves; but more of Fortuitousness and inconstant
Regularity among these mortal things. Notwithstanding
which, some there are, who, though they cannot but acknowl-
edge that the Bodies of Animals were all framed by an Arti-
ficial Nature, yet they will need contend that the System of the
Heavens sprung merely from Fortune and Chance; although
there be not the least appearance of Fortuitousness or Temer-
ity in it.2. And then he sums up all into this conclusion: wore
εἶναι φανερὸν ὅτι ἔστι Te τοιοῦτον ὃ δὴ καὶ καλοῦμεν φύσιν.
‘ Wherefore it is manifest that there is some such thing as
that which we call Nature,’ that is, that there is not only an
‘ Artificial,’ ‘ Methodical,’ and Plastick Nature in Animals,
by which their respective Bodies are Framed and Conserved,
but also that there is such a General Plastick Nature likewise
in the Universe, by which the Heavens and whole World are
thus Artificially Ordered and Disposed.”
1 cf. Prov, xxii. 28.


THE HEXAEMERON.


They have not the gift of reason, but they
have the law of nature firmly seated within
them, to show them what they have to do.
Let us go, they say, to the North Sea. - Its
water is sweeter than that of the rest of the
sea; for the sun does not remain long there,
and its rays do not draw up ail the drinkable
portions... Even sea creatures love fresh
water.” Thus one often sees them enter
into rivers and swim far up them from the
sea. This is the reason which makes them
prefer the Euxine Sea to other gulfs, as the
most fit for breeding and for bringing up
their young. When they have obtained
their object the whole tribe returns home.
Let us hear these dumb creatures tell us the
reason. ‘The Northern sea, they say, is
shallow and its surface is exposed to the
violence of the wind, and it has few shores
and retreats. ‘Thus the winds easily agitate
it to its bottom and mingle the sands of its
bed with its waves. Besides, it is cold in
winter, filled as it is from all directions by
large rivers. ° Wherefore after a moderate
enjoyment of its waters, during the summer,
when the winter comes they hasten to reach
warmer depths and places heated by the sun,
and after fleeing from the stormy tracts of
the North, they seek a haven in less agitated
seas.

. I myself have seen these marvels, and
I have admired the wisdom of God in all
things. If beings deprived of reason are
capable of thinking and of providing for
their own preservation ; if a fish knows what
it ought to seek and what to shun, what
shall we say, who are honoured with reason,
instructed by law, encouraged by the promi-
ses, made wise by the Spirit, and are neverthe-
less less reasonable about our own affairs
than the fish? They know how to provide
for the future, but we renounce our hope of
the future and spend our life in brutal indul-
gence. A fish traverses the extent of the sea
to find what is good for it; what will you say
then— you who live in idleness, the mother of
all vices? * Do not let any one make his igno-
rance an excuse. There has been implanted
in us natural reason which tells us to iden-
tify ourselves with good, and to avoid all that
is harmful. I need not go far from the sea
to find examples, as that is the object of our
researches. I have heard it said by one
living near the sea, that the sea urchin, a
little contemptible creature, often foretells
calm and tempest to sailors. When it fore-
sees a disturbance of the winds, it gets under

2cf. Arist. and Theophrastus.


3 Otiosa mater est nugarum noverca omnium virtutum. St.
Bernard.


oo


a great pebble, and clinging to it as to an an-
chor, it tosses about in safety, retained by the
weight which prevents it from becoming the
plaything of the waves.’ It is a certain sign
for sailors that they are threatened with a
violent agitation of the winds. No astrolo-
ger, no Chaldean, reading in the rising of
the stars the disturbances of the air, has ever
communicated his secret to the urchin: it is
the Lord of the sea and of the winds who
has impressed on this little animal a manifest
proof of His great wisdom. God has fore-
seen all, He has neglected nothing. His eye,
which never sleeps, watches over all.? He is
present everywhere and gives to each being
the means of preservation. If God has not
left the sea urchin outside His providence,
is He without care for you?

‘¢ Hlusbands love your wives.’* Although
formed of two bodies you are united to live in
the communion of wedlock. May this natural
link, may this yoke imposed by the blessing,
reunite those who are divided. The viper, the
cruelest of reptiles, unites itself with the sea
lamprey, and, announcing its presence by a
hiss, it calls it from the depths to conju-
gal union. The lamprey obeys, and is
united to this venomous animal.* What
does this mean? However hard, however
fierce a husband may be, the wife ought to
bear with him, and not wish to find any pre-
text for breakingthe union. He strikes you,
but he is your husband. He is a drunkard,
but he is united to you by nature. He is
brutal and cross, but he is henceforth one of
your members, and the most precious of all.

6. Let husbands listen as well: here is a
lesson for them. The viper, vomits forth its
venom in respect for marriage; and you,
will you not put aside the barbarity and the
inhumanity of your soul, out of respect for
your union? Perhaps the example of the
viper contains another meaning. The union
of the viper and of the lamprey is an adul-
terous violation of nature. You, who are
pletting against other men’s wedlock, learn
what creeping creature you are like. I have
only one object, to make all I say turn to the
edification of the Church. Let then liber-


1% Tyadunt sevitian maris presagire eos, correptisque
opperirt lapitlis, mobilitatem pondere stabilientes: nolunt
volutatione spinas atterere, quod ubt videre nautict, statim
pluribus ancoris navigta tnfrenant.”’ Plin. ix. 5. cf. Plut.,
De Solert, An. 979, Oppian, Halreut, ii. 225, and lian, ///st.
An. Vii. 33.

2 cf. Prov. xv.3: *' The eyes of the Lord are in every place,”
and Ps. cxxi. 3. So Hesiod, πάντα ἰδὼν Διὸς ὀῤφϑαλμὸς καὶ πάντα
νοήσεις. Hes. Works und Days, 265.

3 Eph. v.25.

4 The fable is in lian, H7st. An.ix. 66, and is contradicted
by Athenaus, who says (vii. p. 312): ᾿Ανδρέας δὲ ἐν τῷ περὶ
τῶν ψευδῶς πεπιστευμένων Wevdos φησιν εἶναι τὸ Μύραιναν ἔχιϊ
μίγνυσϑαι προσερχομένην ἐπὶ τὸ τεναγῶδες, οὐδὲ γαρ ἐπὶ τενάγους
ἔχεις νέμεσϑαι, φιληδοῦντας λιμώδεσιν ἐρημίαις. Σώστρατος δὲ
ἐν τοῖς περὶ Lowy συγκατατίϑεται τῇ μίξει.


94


tines put a restraint on their passions, for they
are taught by the examples set by creatures
of earth and sea.

My bodily infirmity and the lateness of
the hour force me to end my discourse.
However, I have still many observations to
make on the products of the sea, for the ad-
miration of my attentive audience. To
speak of the sea itself, how does its water
change into salt? How is it that coral, a
stone so much esteemed, is a plant in the
midst of the sea, and when once exposed to
the air becomes hard as a rock? Why has
nature enclosed in the meanest of animals, in
an oyster, so precious an object as a pearl?
For these pearls, which are coveted by the
caskets of kings, are cast upon the shores,
upon the coasts, upon sharp rocks, and en-
closed in oyster shells. How can the sea pinna
produce her fleece of gold, which no dye has
ever imitated?! How can shells give kings
purple of a brilliancy not surpassed by the
flowers of the field?

‘6 Let the waters bring forth.’ What
necessary object was there that did not im-
mediately appear? What object of luxury
was not given to man? Some to supply
his needs, some to make him convtem-
plate the marvels of creation. Some
are terrible, so as to take our idleness to
school. ‘+ God created great whales.” ἢ
Scripture gives them the name of ‘ great”
not because they are greater than a shrimp
and a sprat, but because the size of their
bodies equals that of great hills. Thus
when they swim on the surface of the
waters one often sees them appear like
islands. But these monstrous creatures do
not frequent our coasts and shores; they in-
habit the Atlantic ocean. Such are these
animals created to strike us with terror and
awe. If now you hear say that the greatest
vessels, sailing with full sails, are easily
stopped by a very small fish, by the rem-
ora, and so forcibly that the ship remains
motionless for a long time, as if it had taken
root in the middle of the sea,’ do you not
see in this little creature a like proof of the
power of the Creator? Sword fish, saw
species are found in the Mediterranean, The beard is called
by modern naturalists byssus. The shell of the giant pinna is
sometimes two feet long.

2 Gen. 1. 21.

3 Tamen omnia hec, pariterque codem tmpellentia unus
ac parvus admodum pisciculus, echenets appellatus, in se
tenet. Ruant venti licet, et seviant procelle,imperat furort,
viresque tantas compescit, et cogit stare navigia: quod non
vincula ulla, non anchore pondere trrevocabilt jacte
Fertur Actiaco marte tenuisse navim Antonii properantis cir-
cumtre et exhortare suos donec transtret inaliam.... Tenutt
et nostra memoria Cait principis ab Astura Antium renavi-
gantes.” Plin, xxxil.1. The popular error was long lived.

‘* Life is a voyage, and, in our life’s ways,


Countries, courts, towns, are rocks or remoras.””
Donne, Zo Sir Ltenry Wotton.


P BAST:


fish, dog fish, whales, and sharks, are not
therefore the only things to be dreaded; we
have to fear no less the spike of the stingray
even after its death, and the sea-hare,’
whose mortal blows are as rapid as they
are inevitable. Thus the Creator wishes
that all may keep you awake, so that full
of hope in Him you may avoid the evils
with which all these creatures threaten you.

But let us come out of the depths of the
sea and take refuge upon the shore. For
the marvels of creation, coming one after
the other in constant succession like the
waves, have submerged my discourse. How-
ever, I should not be surprised if, after find-
ing greater wonders upon the earth, my
spirit seeks " like: Jonah’s.to «flee to the -


sea. But it seems to me, that meeting with
these innumerable marvels has made me


forget all measure, and experience the fate
of those who navigate the high seas with-
out a fixed point to mark their progress,
and are often ignorant of the space which
they have traversed. This is what has
happened to me; whilst my words glanced
at creation, I have not been sensible of the
multitude of beings of which I spoke to you.
But although this honourable assembly is |
pleased by my speech, and the recital of
the marvels of the Master is grateful to
the ears of His servants, let me here bring the
ship of my discourse to anchor, and await
the day to deliver you the rest. Let us,
therefore, all arise, and, giving thanks for
what has been said, let us ask for strength
to hear the rest. Whilst taking your food
may the conversation at your table turn
upon what has occupied us this morning
and this evening. Filled with these thoughts
may you, even in sleep, enjoy the pleasure
of the day, so that you may be permitted
to say, ‘*I sleep but my heart waketh,” °
meditating day and night upon the law
of the Lord, to Whom be glory and power
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY VIIL


The creation of fowl and water animals.*


1. ΑΝ God said ‘‘ Let the earth bring
forth the living creature after his kind,
cattle and creeping things, and beast of the
earth after his kind; and tt was 50." The
command of God advanced step by step
and earth thus received her adornment.


1 Pliny (ix.72) says it is sometimes five inches long. /#lian
(Hist. An. i. 56) calls the wound incurable.

2 Pliny (ix. 72) calls it tactu pestilens, and says (xxxii. 3)
that no other fish eats it, except the mullet.

3 Cant. v. 2.

4 Codex Colb.1 has the title “about creeping things and
beasts.” 5 Gen, i. 24.


THE HEXAEMERON.


95


Yesterday it was said, ‘* Let the waters
produce moving things,” and to-day “ὁ let
the earth bring forth the living creature.”
Is the» earth then, alive? And are the
mad-minded Manicheans right in giving
it a soul? At these words ** Let the earth
bring forth,” it did not produce a germ
contained in it, but He who gave the’ order
at the same time gifted it with the grace and
power to bring forth. When the earth had
heard this command ‘ Let the earth bring
forth grass and the tree yielding fruit,’’ it
was not grass that it had hidden in it that it
caused to spring forth, it did not bring to
the surface a palm tree,an oak, a cypress,
hitherto kept back in its depths. It is the
word of God which forms the nature of things
created. .““ Let the earth bring forth; * that
is to say not that she may bring forth that
which she has but that she may acquire
that which she lacks, when God gives her
the power. Even so now, ‘ Let the earth
bring forth the living creature,” not the
living creature that is contained in herself,
but that which the command of God gives
her. Further, the Manichzans contradict
themselves, because if the earth has brought
forth the life, she has left herself despoiled
of life. . Their execrable doctrine needs no
demonstration.

But why did the waters receive the com-
mand to bring forth the moving creature that
hath life and the earth to bring forth the
living; creature? .We...conclude .. that,, by
their nature, swimming creatures appear
only to have an imperfect life, because they
live in the thick element of water. They are
hard of hearing, and their sight is dull be-
cause they see through the water; they have
no memory, no imagination, no idea of social
intercourse. Thus divine language appears
to indicate that, in aquatic animals, the car-
nal life originates their psychic movements,
whilst in terrestrial’ animals, gifted with a
more perfect life,’ the soul” enjoys supreme
authority. In fact the greater part of quad-
rupeds have more power of penetration in
their senses ; theirapprehension of present ob-
jects is keen, and they keep an exact remem-
brance of the past. It seems therefore, that
God, after the command given to the waters
to bring forth moving creatures that have life,
created simply living bodies for aquatic
animals, whilst for terrestrial animals He
commanded the soul to exist and to direct
the body, showing thus that the inhabitants
of the earth are gifted with greater vital
force. Without doubt terrestrial animals are
devoid of reason. At the same time how


1 ζωή.


5 ψυχή.


many affections of the soul each one of them
expresses by the voice of nature! They ex-
press by cries their joy and sadness, recogni-
tion of what is familiar to them, the need of
food, regret at being separated from their
companions, and numberless emotions.
Aquatic animals, on the contrary, are not
only dumb; it is impossible to tame them,
to teach them, to train them for man’s soci-
ety.’ ** The ox knoweth his owner, and the
ass his master’s crib.”” Butthe fish does
not know who feeds him. The ass knows a
familiar voice, he knows the road which he
has often trodden, and even, if man loses his
way, he sometimes serves him asa guide.
His hearing is more acute than that of any
other terrestrial animal. What animal of the
sea can show so much rancour and resent-
ment as the camel? ‘The camel conceals its
resentment for a long time after it has been
struck, until it finds an opportunity, and then
repays the wrong. Listen, you whose
heart does not pardon, you who practise
vengeance as a virtue ; see what you resem-
ble when you keep your anger for so long
against your neighbour like a spark, hidden in
the ashes, and only waiting for fuel to set
your heart ablaze!

2. ‘* Let the earth bring forth a living
soul.” Why did the earth produce a living
soul? so that you may make a difference be-
tween the soulofcattleand that of man. You
will soon learn how the human soul was
formed; hear now about the soul of creatures
devoid of reason. Since, according to Scrip-
ture, °* the life. of -every creature. is) im thie
blood,” ὅ as the blood when thickened changes
into flesh, and flesh when corrupted decom-
poses into earth, sothe soul of beasts isnatur-
ally an earthy substance. ** Let the earth
bring forth a living soul.” See the affinity of
the soul with blood, of blood with flesh, of flesh
with earth; and remounting in an inverse
sense from the earth to the flesh, from the
flesh to the blood, from the blood to the soul,
you will find that the soul of beasts is earth.
Do not suppose that it is older than the
essence ὁ of their body, nor that it survives
the dissolution of the flesh;° avoid the non-


1 See note on p. go. 3 cf. Lev. xvii. 11.

2JIsa. i. 3. 4 υπόστασις.

5]It may be supposed ‘that the souls of brutes, being but
so many eradiations or effluxes from that source of life above,
are, as soon as ever those organized bodies of theirs, by reason
of their indisposition, become uhcapable of being further acted
upon by them, then to be resumed again and retracted back to
their original head and fountain. Since it cannot be doubted
but what creates anything out of nothing, or sends it forth
from itself, by free and voluntary emanation, may be able
either to retract the same back again to its original source, or
else to annihilate it at pleasure. And I find that there have
not wanted some among the Gentile philosophers themselves
who have entertained this opinion, whereof Porphyry is one,
λύεται ἑκάστη δύναμις ἄλογος εἰς THY ὅλην ζωὴν τοὺ πάντος.᾽


Cudworth, i. 35.


96


BASIL.


sense of those arrogant philosophers who do
not blush to liken their soul to that of a dog ;
who say that they have been formerly them-
selves women, shrubs, fish.’ Have they
ever been fish? I do not know; but I do
not fear to affirm that in their writings they
show less sense than fish. ‘‘ Let the earth
bring forth the living creature.” Perhaps
many of you ask why there is such a long
silence in the middle of the rapid rush of my
discourse. The more studious among my
auditors will not be ignorant of the reason
why words fail me. What! Have I not seen
them look at each other, and make signs to
make me look at them, and to remind me of
what I have passed over? I have forgotten
a part of the creation, and that one of the
most considerable, and my discourse was
almost finished without touching upon it.
ὁ Let the waters bring forth abundantly the
moving creature that hath life and fowl
that may fly above the earth in the open
firmament of heaven.” ? I spoke of fish as
long as eventide allowed: to-day we have
passed to the examination of terrestrial ani-
mals; between the two, birds have escaped
us. We are forgetful like travellers who,
unmindful of some important object, are
obliged, although they be far on their road,
to retrace their steps, punished for their neg-
ligence by the weariness of the journey. So
we have to turn back. That which we have
omitted is not to be despised. It is the third
part of the animal creation, if indeed there
are three kinds of animals, land, winged and
water.

“ς Let the waters” it is said “ὁ bring forth
abundantly moving creature that hath life
and fowl that may fly above the earth in the
open firmament of heaven.” Why do the
waters give birth also to birds? Because
there is, so to say, a family link between the
creatures that fly and those that swim. In
the same way that fish cut the waters, using
their fins to carry them forward and _ their
tails to direct their movements round and
round and _ straightforward, so we_ see
birds float in the air by the help of their
wings. Both endowed with the property of
swimming, their common derivation from
the waters has made them of one family.®


1 Empedocles is named as author of the lines:
ἤδη yap ποτ᾽ ἐγὼ γενόμην κούρητε κόρος Te,
Θάμνος τ᾽ οἰωνός τε καὶ εἰν ἁλὶ ἔλλοπος ἰχϑύς.

cf. Diox. Laert. viii. 78, and Plutarch, D Solert. A. ii. 964.
Whether the “ faba Pythagore cognata” of Hor., Sat. ii. 6,
63, imp:ies the transmigration of the soul into it is doubtful.
cf. Juv., Sat. xv.153. Anaximander thought that human beings
were originaliy generated from fish. Plut., Symp. viii. 8.

2%Gen, 1. 20.

3 Fialon quotes Bossuet, 1st Elev. 5th week : ‘* Dui a donné
aux oiseaux etaux potssons ces rames naturelles, qui leur font
fendre les eaux et les airs? Ce quit peut étre a donné lieu a
leur Créateur de les produire ensemble, comme animaux d’un


At the same time no bird is without feet,
because finding all its food upon the
earth it cannot do without -their service.
Rapacious birds have pointed claws to
enable them to close on their prey; to the
rest has been given the indispensable ministry
of feet to seek their food and to provide for
the other needs of life. There are a few who
walk badly, whose feet are neither suitable
for walking nor for preying. Among this
number are swallows, incapable of walking
and seeking their prey, and the birds called
swifts' who live on little insects carried about
by the air. As to the swallow, its flight, which
grazes the earth, fulfils the function of feet.

. There are also innumerable kinds of
birds. If we review them all, as we have
partly done the fish, we shall find that under
one name, the creatures which fly differ infin-
itely in size, form and colour; that in their life,
their actions and their manners, they present
a variety equally beyond the power of de-
scription. ‘hus some have tried to imagine
names for them of which the singularity and
the strangeness might, like brands, mark
the distinctive character of each kind known.
Some, as eagles, have been called Schizop-
tera, others Dermoptera, as the bats, others
Ptilota, as wasps, others Coleoptera, as
beetles and all those insects which brought
forth in cases and coverings, break their prison
to fly away in liberty.” But we have enough
words of common usage to characterise each
species and to mark the distinction which
Scripture sets up between clean and unclean
birds. Thus the species of carnivora is of
one sort and of one constitution which suits
their manner of living, sharp talons, curved
beak, swift wings, allowing them to swoop
easily upon their prey and to tear it up after
having seized it.* The constitution of those
who pick up seeds is different, and again
that of those who live on all they come across.
What a variety in all these creatures! Some
are gregarious, except the birds of prey
who know no other society than con-
jugal union; but innumerable kinds, doves,
cranes, starlings, jackdaws, like a common
life.* Among them some live without a
chief and in a sort of independence; others,
as cranes, do not refuse to submit themselves
toa leader. And a fresh difference between


dessin ἃ peu prés semblable: le vol des oiseaux semblant, etre
une espéce de faculté denager dans une liqueur plus subtitle,
comme la faculté de nager dans les poissons est une espéece de
vol dans une liqueur plis épatsse.” ;

The theory of evolutionists is, as is well known, that birds
developed out of reptiles and reptiles from fish. Vide E.
Haeckel’s monophyletic pedigree in his H/story of Creation.

1 δοεπανίς, ¢.e. Sickle-bird.

2 These are the terms of Aristotle, Hist. An.i.5.

8 οὐ. Avist., fijst. Am. Ville 3. ;

4 Whence the proverb κολοιὸς ποτὶ κολοιόν. Arist., Zth.


Nic. 1. viii. 6.


THE HEXAEMERON.


97


them is that some are stationary and non-
migratory; others undertake long voyages
and the greater part of them, migrate at the
approach of winter. Nearly all birds can be
tamed and are capable of training, except
the weakest, who through fear and timidity
cannot bear the constant and annoying con-
tact of the hand. Some like the society of
man and inhabit our dwellings; others de-
light in mountains and in desert places.
There is a great difference too in their pecu-
liar notes. Some twitter and chatter, others
are silent, some have a melodious and sono-
rous voice, some are wholly inharmonious
and incapable of song; some imitate the
voice of man, taught their mimicry either by
nature or training ;! others always give forth
the same monotonous cry. The cock is proud ;
the peacock is vain of his beauty ; doves and
fowls are amorous, always seeking each
other’s society. The partridge is deceitful
and jealous, lending perfidious help to the
huntsmen to seize their prey.’

4. What a variety, I have said, in the
actions and lives of flying creatures! Some of
these unreasoning creatures even have a gov-
ernment, if the feature of government is to
make the activity of all the individuals centre
inonecommonend. This may be observed in
bees. They have a common dwelling place ;
they fly in the air together, they work at the
same work together; and what is still more
extraordinary is that they give themselves to
these labours under the guidance of a king
and superintendent, and that they do not
allow themselves to fly to the meadows with-
out seeing if the king is flying at their head.
As to this king, it is not election that gives
him this authority ; ignorance on the part of
the people often puts the worst man in
power; it is not fate; the blind decisions of
fate often give authority to the most un-
worthy. It is not heredity that places him
on the throne; it is only too common to see
the children of kings, corrupted by luxury
and flattery, living in ignorance of all virtue.
It isnature which makes the king of the bees,
for nature gives him superior size, beauty,
and sweetness of character. He has a sting
like the others, but he does not use it to
revenge himself.* It is a principle of natu-
ral and unwritten law, that those who are
raised to high office, ought to be lenient in
punishing. Even bees who do not follow
"1 Super omnia humanas voces reddunt, posittact quidem
sermocinantes.”” Plin. xX. 53.

2 Arist., /7ist. An, ix. 10.

3 Arist., Hist. An. v.21,and Plin. xi. 17. “ Ecce 72 re parva,
villisgue nostra annexa, cujus assidua copia est, non constat
inter auctores, rex nullumne solus habeat aculeum, majestate
tantum armatus ; an dederit eum-quidem natura, sed usum


ejus ill tantum negaverit. Illud constat imperatorem aculeo
non uti,”


the example of their king, repent without
delay of their imprudence, since they lose
their lives with their sting. Listen, Chris-
tians, you to whom it is forbidden to ““ recom-
pense evil for evil” and commanded ‘to
overcome evil with good.”* Take the bee
for your model, which constructs its cells
without injuring any one and without inter-
fering with the goods of others. It gathers
openly wax from the flowers with its mouth,
drawing in the honey scattered over them
like dew, and injects it into the hollow of its
cells. Thus at first honey is liquid; time
thickens it and gives it its sweetness.” The
book of Proverbs has given the bee the most
honourable and the best praise by calling her
wise and industrious.” How much activity
she exerts in gathering this precious nourish-
ment, by which both kings and men of low
degree are brought to health! How great isthe
art and cunning she displays in the construc-
tion of the store houses which are destined to
receive the honey! After having spread the
wax like a thin membrane, she distributes it
in contiguous compartments which, weak
though they are, by their number and by
their mass, sustain the whole edifice. Each
cell in fact holds to the one next to it, and is
separated bya thin partition; we thus see two
or three galleries of cells built one upon the
other. The bee takes care not to make one
vast cavity, for fear it might break under
the weight of the liquid, and allow it to
escape. See how the discoveries of geometry
are mere by-works to the wise bee! *

The rows of honey-comb are all hexagonal
with equal sides. They do not bear on
each other in straight lines, lest the supports
should press on empty spaces between and
give way; but the angles of the lower hexa-
gons serve as foundations and bases to those
which rise above, so as to furnish a sure
support to the lower mass, and so that each
cell may securely keep the liquid honey.’


1 Rom. xii. 17, 21.

2 The ancient belief was that honey fell from heaven, in the
shape of dew, and the bee only gathered it from leaves. So
Verg., Ec. iv. 30, “ roscida mella,” and Georg. iv. 1, * σέ Σὲ
mellis celestia dona.” cf. Arist., H. A. ν. 22, μελὶ δὲ τὸ πίπτον
ἐκ τοῦ ἀέρος, και μάλιστα τῶν ἄστρων ἀνατολαῖς, Kal ὅταν KaTa-
σκήφῃ ἡ ἴρις, and Plin. xi.12. “5706 7176 est celi sudor, sive
quedam stderum saliva, sine purgantis se aerts succus,. . .
magnam tamen celestis nature voluptatem affert.’ So Cole-
ridge (Kubla Khan): :

** For he on honey dew hath fed
And drunk the milk of Paradise.”

3 Prov. vi. 8, xx. The reference to the bee is not in the
Hebrew.

4cf. ΖΕ απ. v. 13. γεωμετρίαν δὲ καὶ κάλλη σχημάτων Kal
ὡραίας πλάσεις αὐτῶν ἄνευ τέχνης τε καὶ κανόνων καὶ τοῦ καλου-
μένου ὑπὸ τῶν σοφῶν διαβήτου, τὸ κάλλιστον σχημάτων ἑξαγωνόν
τε καὶ ἑξάπλευρον καὶ ἰσογώνιον ἀποδείκνυνται αἱ μέλιτται.

5 The mathematical exactness of the bee is described by
Darwin in terms which make it even more marvellous than it
appeared to Basil. ‘* The most wonderful of all known in-
stincts, that of the hive bee, may be explained by natural selec-
tion having taken advantage of numerous slight modifications
of simpler instincts; natural selection having by slow degrees
more and more perfectly led the bees to sweep equal spheres


98


BASIL:


δ. How shall we make an exact review
of all the peculiarities of the life of birds?
During the night cranes keep watch in turn ;
some sleep, others make the rounds and pro-
cure a quiet slumber for their companions.
After having finished his duty, the sentry
utters acry, and goes to sleep, and the one
who awakes, in his turn, repays the security
which he has enjoyed.’ You will see the
same order reign in their flight. One leads
the way, and when it has guided the flight
of the flock for a certain time, it passes to
the rear, leaving to the one who comes after
the care of directing the march.

The conduct of storks comes very near
intelligent reason. In these regions the
same season sees them all migrate. They
all start at one given signal. And it seems
to me that our crows, serving them as escort,
go to bring them back, and to help them
against the attacks of hostile birds. The
proof is that in this season not a single crow
appears, and that they return with wounds,
evident marks of the help and of the assist-
ance that they havelent. Who has explained
to them the laws of hospitality? Who has
threatened them with the penalties of deser-
tion? For not one is missing from the com-
pany. Listen, all inhospitable hearts, ye who
shut your doors, whose house is never open
either inthe winter orin the night to travellers.
The solicitude of storks for their old would
be sufficient, if our children would reflect
upon it, to make them love thcir parents;
because there is no one so failing in good
sense, as not to deem it a shame to be sur-
passed in virtue by birds devoid of reason.
The storks surround their father, when old
age makes his feathers drop off, warm him
with their wings, and provide abundantly for
his support, and even in their flight they help
him as much as they are able, raising him
gently on each side upon their wings, a
conduct so notorious that it has given to
gratitude the name of ‘ antipelargosis.” ἢ
Let no one lament poverty; let not the man
whose house is bare despair of his life, when
he considers the industry of the swallow.
To build her nest, she brings bits of straw


at a given distance from each other in a double layer, and to
build up and excavate the wax along the planes of intersec-
tion.” Origin of Species, ii. 255, ed.1861 According to this
view the beings from whom hive bees, as we know them, are
descended were gifted with certain simple instincts capable
of a kind of hereditary unconscious education, resulting in a
complex instinct which constructs with exact precision the
hexagonal chamber best fitted for the purpose it is designed to
fulfil, and then packs it. And it is interesting to note how the
great apostle of abstract selection personifies it as a ‘taker ”
of ‘‘advantage,”’ and a ““ leader.”’

1 Arist., Hist. An. ix. 10.

2 From πελαργός. On the pious affection of the stork, cf.
Plato, Alc. i. 135 (§ 61), Arist., H.A. ix. 13,20, Allian, 4A. iii.
23, and x. 16, and Plin. x. 22. From πελαογὸς was supposed to
be derived the Pythagorean word πελαργᾶν (Diog. Laert. viii.
20), but this is now regarded as a corruption of πεδαρτᾶν.


in her beak; and, as she cannot raise the
mud in her claws, she moistens the end of her
wings in water and then rolls in very fine
dust and thus procures mud.’ After having
united, little by little, the bits of straw with
this mud, as with glue, she feeds her young;
and if any one of them has its eyes injured, she
has a natural remedy to heal the sight of her
little ones.”

This sight ought to warn you not to take
to evil ways on account of poverty ; and, even
if you are reduced to the last extremity, not
to lose all hope; not to abandon yourself to
inaction and idleness, but to have recourse to
God. If He isso bountiful to the swallow,
what will He not do for those who call upon
Him with all their heart?

The halcyon is a sea bird, which lays its
eggs along the shore, or deposits them in the
sand. And it lays in the middle of winter,
when the violence of the winds dashes the
sea against the land. Yet all winds are
hushed, and the wave of the sea grows calm,


‘during the seven days that the halcyon sits.’


For it only takes seven days to hatch the
young. Then, as they are in need of food
so that they may grow, God, in His munifi-
cence, grants another seven days to this
tiny animal. All sailors know this, and call
these days halcyon days. If divine Provi-
dence has established these marvellous laws
in favour of creatures devoid of reason, it
is to induce you to ask for your salvation from
God. Is there a wonder which He will not
perform for you — you have been made in His
image, when for so little a bird, the great,
the fearful sea is held in check and is com-
manded in the midst of winter to be calm.

6. It is said that the turtle-dove, once
separated from her mate, does not con-
tract a new union, but remains in widow-
hood, in remembrance of her first alliance.’
Listen, O women! What veneration for
widowhood, even in these creatures de-
void of reason, how they prefer it to an
unbecoming multiplicity of marriages. The
eagle shows the greatest injustice in the edu-


1 ἐς Fityundines tuto construunt, stramine roborant: st
guando tnopta est luti,madefacte multa aqua pennis pulverem
spargunt.” Plin.x.49. cf. Arist., Hist. An. ix. 10.

2 Chelidoniam visui saluberrimam hirundines monstra-
vere, vexatis pullorum oculis tlla medentes.” Plin. viii. 41.
cf. ZBlian, .17.44. iii. 25. Chelidonia is swallowwort or celan-

ine.

3 Fetificant bruma, qui dies halcyonides vocantur, placido
mart per eos et navigabilt, Siculo maxime. Plin. x. 47. cf.
Arist., H.A. v.8,9, and lian, H.N. i.36. So Theoc. vii. 57:


X? ἁλκυόνες στορεσεῦντι τὰ κύματα, τάν τε ϑάλασσαν
Τόν τε νότον τόντ᾽ εὗρον ὃς ἔσχατα φυκία κινεῖ.

Sir Thomas Browne ( Vulgar Errors) denies the use of a
kingfisher as a weather-gauge, but says nothing as to the
‘*halcyon days.’? Kingfishers are rarely seen in the open sea,
but haunt estuaries which are calm without any special
miracle, Possibly the halcyon was a tern or sea-swallow,
which resembles a kingfisher, but they brood on land.

4 Arist., //.A. ix.7.


THE HEXAEMERON.


cation which she gives to her young. When
she has katched two little ones, she throws
one on the ground, thrusting it out with
blows from her wings, and only acknowledges
the remaining one. It is the difficulty of
finding food which has made her repulse the
offspring she has brought forth. But the
osprey, it is said, will not allow it to perish,
she carries it away and brings it up with her
young ones.’ Such are parents who, under
the plea of poverty, expose their children;
such are again those who, in the distribution
of their inheritance, make unequal divisions.
Since they have given existence equally to
each of their children, it is just that they
should equally and without preference fur-
nish them with the means of livelihood. Be-
ware of imitating the cruelty of birds with
hooked talons. When they see their young
are from henceforth capable of encountering
the air in their flight, they throw them out
of the nest, striking them and pushing them
with their wings, and do not take the least
care of them. The love of the crow for its
young is laudable! When they begin to fly,
she follows them, gives them food, and for a
very long time provides for their nourish-
ment. Many birds have no need of union
with males to conceive. But their eggs are
unfruitful, except those of vultures, who
more often, it is said, bring forth without
coupling: ? and this although they have a
very long life, which often reaches its hun-
dredth year. Note and retain, I pray you, this
point in the history of birds; and if ever you
see any one laugh at our mystery, as if it
were impossible and contrary to nature that
a virgin should become a mother without
losing the purity of her virginity, bethink
you that He who would save the faithful by
the foolishness of preaching, has given us
beforehand in nature a thousand reasons for
believing in the marvellous.? |

7.‘ Let the waters bring forth themoving


1 Ar, vi. 6 and ix. 34. “ Melanaetos ... solaaguilarum
fetus suos alit; cetere... fugant.” Plin. x.3. ‘* Pariunt
ova terna; excludunt pullos binos: visi sunt et tres aliquan.
do.”® id. 4, following Museus (apud Plutarch, /z Mario,
P. 426). ws τρία μὲν τίκτει, ddr δ᾽ ἔκλεπει, Ev δ᾽ adey Cec. On the
osprey, see Arist., H.A.ix.44 and Pliny doc. ““ Sed egectos ab
his cognatum genus ossifragt exciptunt, et educant cum suis.”

2 Arist., Mist. Az. vi.6 and ix.15. So Plinyx. vii. ‘* Wrdos
nemo attigtt: tdeo etiam fuecre qui pitarent illos ex adverso
orbe advolare, nidificant enim in excelsissimis rupitus.” cf.
also A@lian, ii. 46: γῦπα δὲ ἄρρενα ov φασι γίγνεσϑαί ποτε αλλὰ
ϑηλείις ἁπάσας. NT ] F

8 This analogy is repeated almost in identicaf words in
Rasil’s Hom. xxii. De / rovidentia. cf. also his Com. on
Isaiah. St. Ambrose repeats the illustration (/fex. v. 20).
The analogy, even if the facts were true, would be false and
misleading. But it is curious to note that were ἈΠῈ modern
divine desirous of here following in Basil’s track, he might
find the alleged facts in the latest modern science, — e.g. in
the so-called Parthenogenesis, or virginal reproduction, among
insects, as said to be demonstrated by Siebold. Haeckel (052.
of Creation, Lankester’s ed, ii. p. 198) represents sexual re-
production as quite a recent developinent of non-sexual repro
duction.


¢


99


creatures that have life, and fowl that may
fly above the earth tn the open firmament of
heaven.” They received the command te
fly above the earth because earth provides
them with nourishment. ‘‘ In the firmament
of heaven,” that is to say, as we have said
before, in that part of the air called οὐρανός,
heaven,’ from the word ὁρᾶν, which means to
566 ; called firmament, because the air
which extends over our heads, compared to
the xther, has greater density, and is thick-
ened by the vapours which exhale from
the earth. You have then heaven adorned,
earth beautified, the sea peopled with its
own creatures, the air filled with birds which
scour it in every direction. Studious lis-
tener, think of all these creations which
Ged has drawn out of nothing, think of
all those which my speech has left out, to
avoid tediousness, and not to exceed my
limits ; recognise everywhere the wisdom of
God; never cease to wonder, and, through
every creature, to glorify the Creator.

There are some kinds of birds which live by
night in the midst of darkness ; others which
fly by day in full light. Bats, owls, night-
ravens are birds of night: if by chance you
cannot sleep, reflect on these nocturnal birds
and their peculiarities and glorify their
Maker. How is it that the nightingale is
always awake when sitting on her eggs, pass-
ing the night in acontinual melody?* How
is it that one animal, the bat, is at the
same time quadruped and fowl? That it is
the only one of the birds to have teeth?
That it is viviparous like quadrupeds, and
traverses the air, ‘raising itself not upon
wings, but upon a kind of membrane?‘
What natural love bats have for each other!
How they interlace like a chain and hang the
one upon the other! A very rare spectacle
among men, who for the greater part prefer
individual and private life to the union of
common life. Have not those who give
themselves up to vain science the eyes of
owls? The sight of the owl, piercing during
the night time, is dazzled by the splendour
of the sun; thus the intelligence of these men,
so keen to contemplate vanities, is blind in
presence of the true light.

During the day, also, how easy it is for you
to admire the Creator everywhere! See how


1 cf, note on p. 70.

2The Greck word στερέωμα, from στερεός, strong, is trace-
able to the root sTAR, to spread out, and so indirectly asso-
ciated with the connotation of the Hebrew rasa.

3 Arist., A.A. viii. 75. Pliny x. 43. ““ Luscinits diebus ac
noctibus continuts guindectm garrulus sine tntermissu cantus,
densante se frondium germiie,, yor ty novisstiyum diyna
miratu ave.”’ any ore

4 So also Basil in Hom. on 7ᾷ ἘΤΕΊΔΩΥ x. 81;
‘cut et membranacee pinne uni,’ C10: Ὁ


ὦ iii? gy.
[] .


ee? @


eee.


TOO


BASIT


the domestic cock calls you to work with his
shrill cry, and how, forerunner of the sun,
and early as the traveller, he sends forth
labourers to the harvest! What vigilance
in geese! With what sagacity they divine
secret dangers! Did they not once upon a
time save the imperial city? When enemies
were advancing by subterranean passages to
possess themselves of the capitol of Rome,
did not geese announce the danger?’ [5
there any kind of bird whose nature offers
nothing for our admiration? Who announces
to the vultures that there will be carnage
when men march in battle array against one
another? You may see flocks of vultures
following armies and calculating the result
of warlike preparations; a calculation very
nearly approaching to human _ reasoning.
How can I describe to you the fearful inva-
sions of locusts, which rise everwhere at a
given signal, and pitch their campsall over a
country? They do not attack crops until they
have received the divine command. Or shall
I describe how the remedy for this curse, the
thrush, follows them with its insatiable appe-
tite, and the devouring nature that the loving
God has given it in His kindness for men? ὃ
How does the grasshopper modulate its
song?* Why is it more melodious at mid-
day owing to the air that it breathes in dilat-
ing its chest?

But it appears to me that in wishing to
describe the marvels of winged creatures, I
remain further behind than I should if my
feet had tried to match the rapidity of their
flight. When you see bees, wasps, in short
all those flying creatures called insects, be-
cause they have an incision all around,
reflect that they have neither respiration nor
lungs, and that they are supported by air
through all parts of their bodies.° Thus
they perish, if they are covered with oil, be-
cause it stops up their pores. Wash them
with vinegar, the pores reopen and the ani-
mal returns to life. Our God has created


1¢f. Livy v.47 and Plutarch, Camillus, or Verg. viii. 65g.
The alternative tradition of the mine is preserved by Servius,

2 cf. ABlian, /7.A. ii. 46. Kai μέντοι καὶ ταῖς ἐκδήμοις στρα-
TLALS ETOVTAL γῦπες καὶ μάλα γε μαντικῶς OTL εἰς πόλεμον χωροῦσιν
εἰδότες καὶ ὅτι μάχη πᾶσα ἐργάζεται νεκροὺς καὶ τοῦτο ἐγνωκότες.

cf. Pliny x. 88: “‘ vultures sagacius odorantur.”’

3 cf. Galen. vi. 3.

4 Fialon, quoting the well known ode of Anakreon, “ μακαρί-
ζομέν σε τέττιξ,᾽ and Plato’s theory of the affection of grass-
hoppers and the muses in the Phedrus, contrasts the “" cantu
guerule rumpent arbusta cicade”’ of Veryil (Georg. iii. 328),
and points out that the Romans did not share the Greek ad-
miration for the grasshopper’s song.

5** Insecta multi negarunt spirare,idque ratione persua-
dentes, quoniam in viscera intertora nexus sptrabilis non
tnesset. Itague vivere ut fruges, arboresque: sed plurimum
interesse spiret aliquid an vivat. Eadem de causa nec san-
fZuinem tis esse qui sit nullis carentibus corde atque jecore.
Stic nec sptrare.ea quibus pulmo desit unde numerosa series
questionum exovitus.« Iidém-enim et vocem esse his negant,
in tanto muPmuyre αὐ ότι, citgdarum sono... nec video cur
magts possini now traheri: cnimam talia, et vivere, quam
spirare sine vescertbus.” Plin, xi. 2.

» : : ih οὶ ‘ « « «
ςς e¢ « « ce ce
« Oo © ao δες
« ΟῚ ᾷῷ «4 Γ


nothing unnecessarily and has omitted nothing
that is necessary. If now you cast your eyes
upon aquatic creatures, you will find that
their organization is quite different. Their
feet are not split like those of the crow, nor
hooked like those of the carnivora, but large
and membraneous ; therefore they can easily
swim, pushing the water with the mem-
branes of their feet as with oars. Notice
how the swan plunges his neck into the
depths of the water to draw his food from it,
and you will understand the wisdom of the
Creator in giving this creature a neck longer
than his feet, so that he may throw it like a
line, and take the food hidden at the bottom
of the water.’

8. If we simply read the words of Scrip-
ture we find only a few short syllables. ‘** Let
the waters bring forth fowl that may fly above
the earth in the open firmament of heaven,”
but if we enquire into the meaning of these
words, then the great wonder of the wisdom
of the Creator appears. What a difference
He has foreseen among winged creatures!
How He has divided them by kinds! How
He has characterized each one of them by
distinct qualities! But the day will not suf-
fice me to recount the wonders of the air.
Earth is calling me to describe wild beasts,
reptiles and cattle, ready to show us in her
turn sights rivalling those of plants, fish, and
birds. ‘* Let the earth bring forth the living
5011] ᾿᾿ of domestic animals, of wild beasts,
and of reptiles after their kind. What have
you to say, you who do not believe in the
change that Paul promises you in the resur-
rection, when you see so many metamor-
phoses among creatures of the air? What
are we not told of the horned worm of India!
First it changes into a caterpillar,’ then be-
comes a buzzing insect, and not content with
this form, it clothes itself, instead of wings,
with loose, broad plates. Thus, O women,
when you are seated busy with your weavy-
ing, I mean of the silk which is sent you by
the Chinese to make your delicate dresses,®
remember the metamorphoses of this crea-
ture, conceive a clear idea of the resurrection,
and do not refuse to believe in the change
that Paul announces for all men.

But I am ashamed to see that my discourse
oversteps the accustomed limits; if I con-
sider the abundance of matters on which I
have just discoursed to you, I feel that 1 am
being borne beyond bounds; but when I
reflect upon the inexhaustible wisdom which


1 Arist., De Part. An. iv. 12.

2 This word is curiously rendered by Eustathius veruce,
and by Ambrose caul7s. Garnier (Pref. in Bas. 28) thinks
that the latter perhaps found in some corrupt MS. κράμβην for
κάμπην.


3 Arist., A.A. v. 19.


THE HEXAEMERON.


is displayed in the works of creation, I seem
to be but at the beginning of my story.
Nevertheless, I have not detained you so
long without profit. . For what would you
have done until the evening? You are not
pressed by guests, nor expected at banquets.
Let me then employ this bodily fast to
rejoice your souls. You have often served
the flesh for pleasure, to-day persevere in the
ministry of the soul. ‘+ Delight thyself also
in the Lord and he shall give thee the desire
ΠΡ ΠΕ heart.” ! ° Do you Tove ‘riches?
Here are spiritual riches. ‘* The judgments
of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.
More to be desired are they than gold and
precious stones.””* Do you love enjoyment
and pleasures ? Behold the oracles ofthe Lord,
which, for a healthy soul, are ‘sweeter than
honey and the honey-comb.” * If I let you
go, and if I dismiss this assembly, some will
run to the dice, where they will find bad
language, sad quarrels and the pangs of
avarice. There stands the devil, inflaming
the fury of the players with the dotted bones,*

transporting the same sums of money from
one side of the table to the other, now exalt-
ing one with victory and throwing the other
into despair, now swelling the first with
boasting and covering his rival with confu-
sion.® Of what use is bodily fasting and fill-
ing the soul with innumerable evils? He
who does not play spends his leisure else-
where. What frivolities come from his
mouth! What follies strike his ears!
Leisure without the fear of the Lord is, for
those who do not know the value of time,
a school of vice.° I hope that my words
will be profitable; at least by occupying you
here they have prevented you from sinning.
Thus the longer I keep you, the longer you
are out of the way of evil.

An equitable judge will deem that I have
said enough, not if he considers the riches of
creation, but if he thinks of our weakness and
of the measure one ought to keep in that
which tends to pleasure. Earth has wel-
comed you with its own plants, water with
its fish, air with its birds; the continent in
its turn is ready to offer you as rich treasures.


PPS. KEXVIl. 4.

Csi 21b-<am ΤΌ,

4 The κύβοι were marked on all six sides, the ἀστράγαλοι on
only four, the ends being rounded.

5 With Basil’s description of the gaming tables, presumably
of Czsarea, cf. Ovid’s of those of Rome:


** Ira subit, deforme malum, lucrique cupido ;

Furziaque et rtxe, sollicitusque dolor.

Crimina dicuntur, vesonat clamortbus ether,

Invocat tratos et οὐδὲ quisque deos,

Nulla fides: tabuleque nove per vota petuntur,

Et lacrymts vidi sepe madere gents.

De A.A. iii. 373 SCV]
6“ Cernts ut ignavum corrumpant otia corpus.” Ovid, TI.

Pont.6. ““ Facito aliquid operis ut semper Diabolus inveniat
te occupatum.”’? Jerome, Jn BR. Monach.


2 Ps. xix. g and 10, LXX.


IOI


But let us put an end to this morning ban-
quet, for fear satiety may blunt your taste for
the evening one. May He who has filled all
with the works of His creation and has lett
everywhere visible memorials of His won-
ders, fill your hearts with all spiritual joys in
Jesus Christ, our Lord, to whom belong
glory and power, world without end. Amen.


HOMILY Ix.


The creation of terrestrial animals.


1. How did you like the fare of my morn-
ing’s discourse? It seemed to me that I had
the good intentions of a poor giver of a feast,
who, ambitious of having the credit of keep-
ing a good table saddens his guests by the
poor supply of the more expensive dishes.
In vain he lavishly covers his table with his
mean fare; his ambition only shows his
folly. sit) is foF* you, to, judge iff 1 lave
shared the same fate. Yet, whatever my dis-
course may have been, take care lest you
disregard it. No one refused to sit. at the
table of Elisha; and yet he only gave his
friends wild vegetables.'. I know the laws
of allegory, though less by myself than
from the works of others. There are those
truly, who do not admit the common sense
of the Scriptures, for whom water is not
water, but some other nature, who see in a
plant, ina fish, what their fancy wishes, who
change the nature of reptiles and of wild
beasts to suit their allegories, like the inter-
preters of dreams who explain visions in
sleep to make them serve their own ends.
For me grass is grass; plant, fish, wild
beast, domestic animal, I take all in the
literal sense.?. ‘‘ For I am not ashamed of
the gospel.” ? Those who have written about
the nature of the universe have discussed at
length the shape of the earth. If it be
spherical or cylindrical, if it resemble a disc
and is equally rounded in all parts, or if it
has the form of a winnowing basket and is
hollow in the middle ;* all these conjectures
have been suggested by cosmographers, each
one upsetting that of his predecessor. It
will not lead me to give less importance to
the creation of the universe, that the ser-
vant of God, Moses, is silent as to shapes;

12 Kings iv. 39.

2 Fialon thinks that this plain reference to Origen may have
been evoked by some criticisms on the IIIrd Homily. (cf. p. 71.)
St. Basil’s literalism and bold departure from the ‘allegorizing
of Origen and from the milder mysticism of Eusebius are re-
marked on in the Prolegomena.

3 Rom. i. 16,

4 θαλῆς Kat οἱ Στωϊκοὶ καὶ οἱ ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν σφαιροειδῆ τὴν γῆν.
᾿Αναξίμανδρος λίϑῳ κίονι τὴν γῆν προσφερῆ τῶν επιπέδων. ᾿Αναξι-
μένης, -τραπεζοειδῆ. Λεύκιππος, τυμπανοειδῆ- Δημόκριτος, δισκοειδῆ
μὲν τῷ πλάτει, κοίλην δὲ τὸ μέσον. Plut. περὶ τῶν ἀρεσκ. iii. 10.


Arist. (De .Ce/o ii. 14) follows Thales. So Manilius i. 235:
“* Ex quo colligitur terrarum forma rotunda.”


ΙΟΖ


BASIL.


he has not said that the earth is a hundred
and eighty thousand furlongs in circum-
ference; he has not measured into what
extent of air its shadow projects itself
whilst the sun revolves around it, nor stated
how this shadow, casting itself upon the
moon, produces eclipses. He has passed
over in silence, as useless, all that is unim-
portant for us. Shall I then prefer foolish
wisdom to the oracles.of the Holy Spirit?
Shall I not rather exalt Him who, not wish-
ing to fill our minds with these vanities, has
regulated all the economy of Scripture in
view of the edification and the making’ per-
fect of our souls? It is this which those
seem to me not to have understood, who,
giving themselves up to the distorted mean-
ing of allegory, have undertaken to give a
majesty of their own invention to Scripture.
It is to believe themselves wiser than the
Holy Spirit, and to bring forth their own
ideas under a pretext of exegesis. Let us hear
Scripture as it has been written.

2. ‘* Let the earth bring forth the living
creature.’ Behold the word of God per-
vading creation, beginning even then the effi-
cacy which is seen displayed to-day, and
will be displayed to the end’ of the world!
As a ball, which one pushes, if it meet a
declivity, descends, carried by its form and
the nature of the ground and does not stop
until it has reached a level surface ; so nature,
once put in motion by the Divine command,
traverses creation with an equal step, through
birth and death, and keeps up the succes-
sion of kinds through resemblance, to the
last.” Nature always makes a horse suc-
ceed to a'horse, a lion to a lion, an eagle
to an eagle, and preserving each animal by
these uninterrupted successions she trans-
mits it to the end of all things. Animals do not
sce their peculiarities destroyed or effaced by
any length of time; their nature, as though it
had been just constituted, follows the course
of ages, for ever young.® ‘Let the earth
bring forth the living creature.” This com-
mand has continued and earth does not cease
to obey the Creator. For, if there are crea-
tureswhich are successively produced by their
predecessors, there are others that even to-
day we see born from the earth itself. In
wet weather she brings forth grasshoppers
and an immense number of insects which
fly in the air and have no names _ because
they are so small; she also produces mice
and frogs. In the environs of Thebes in
Egypt, after abundant rain in hot weather,


1 Gen. i. 24. 2 cf. note on Hom. ν. Ὁ. 76.
3“ Sed, st gqueque suo ritu procedit, et omnes
Federe nature certo discrimina servant.”

Luc. v. 921.


the country is covered with field: mice.’ We
see mud alone produce eels; they do not
proceed from an egg, nor in any other man-
ner; itis the earth alone which gives them
birth.” Let the earth produce a living crea-
ture.”

Cattle are terrestrial and bent towards the
earth. Man, a celestial growth, rises superior
to them as much by the mould of his bodily
conformation as by the dignity of his soul.
What is the form of quadrupeds? Their
head is bent towards the earth and looks
towards their belly, and only pursues their
belly’s good. Thy head, O man! is turned
towards heaven; thy eyes look το. When
therefore thou degradest thyself by the pas-
sions of the flesh, slave of thy belly, and thy
lowest parts, thou approachest animals with-
out reason and becomest like one of them.*
Thou art called to more noble cares; ** seek
those things which are above where Christ
sitteth.”° Raise thy soul above the earth;
draw from its natural conformation the rule
of thy conduct; fix thy conversation in
heaven. ‘Thy true country is the heavenly
Jerusalem ;° thy fellow-citizens and thy com-
patriots are ** the first-born which are writ-
ten in heaven.” ?

3. ‘* Let the earth bring forth the living
creature.” ‘Thus when the soul of brutes
appeared it was not concealed in the earth,
but it was born by the command of God.
Brutes have one and the same soul of which
the common characteristic is absence of rea-
son. But each animal is distinguished by
peculiar qualities. The ox is steady, the ass
is lazy, the horse has strong passions, the
wolf cannot be tamed, the fox is deceitful,
the stag timid, the ant industrious, the dog
grateful and faithful in his friendships. As
each animal was created the distinctive char-
acter of his nature appeared in him in due
measure; in the lion spirit, taste for solitary
life, an unsociable character. True tyrant
of animals, he, in his natural arrogance,
admits but few to share his honours. He
disdains his yesterday’s food and never re-

icf, Plin. ix. 84: ““ Verum omnibus his fidem Nili tnunda-
tio affert omnia excedente miraculo: quippe detegente co mus-
culi repertuntur tnchoato opere genitalis aque terreque, jam
parte corporis viventes, novissima efigte ettamnum terrena.”


So Mela De Nilo i. 9, ““ Glebts etiam infundit animas, ex
tpsoque humo vitalia effing tt,’ and Ovid, Met. i. 42:
“ Sic ubi deserutt madidos septemfiuus agros
Nilus, et antiguo sua flumina reddidit alveo,
LEthereoque recens exarsit sidere limus,
Plurima cultores versis animalia glebis
Inventunt.”


2 Arist., H.A.vi.16. Ai ἐγχέλυς γίγνονται εκ τῶν καλουμένων
γῆς ἐντέρων ἃ αὐτόματα συνίσταται εν τῷ πηλῷ καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ ἐνίκμῳ.
Καὶ ἤδη εἰσιν ὠμμέναι αἱ μὲν ἐκδύνουσαι ἐκ τούτων, αἱ δὲ ἐν δια-
κνιζοωένοις καὶ διαιρουμένοις γίγνονται φανεραί. . : :

3 Arist., Part. An. iv. 10, 18. μόνον ὀρϑόν ἐστι τῶν ζῴων ὃ


ἄνϑρωπος. ; ᾿
4 cf. Ps. xlix. 12. ro ae ili, 20.
eb. Xii. 23,


5 Col. iii. 1.


THE HEXAEMERON.


102


SO Ee SEES eee ee Se ene οὐ ξυν μευ δε ον ee οι ee. |


turns to the remains of the prey. Nature
has provided his organs of voice with such
great force that often much swifter animals
are caught by his roaring alone. The pan-
ther, violent and impetuous in his leaps, has
a body fitted for his activity and lightness, in
accord with the movements of his soul. The
bear has a sluggish nature, ways of its own,
a sly character, and is very secret; therefore
it has an analogous body, heavy, thick, with-
out articulations such as are necessary for a
cold dweller in dens.

When we consider the natural and innate
care that these creatures without reason
take of their lives we shall be induced to
watch over ourselves and to think of the sal-
vation of our souls; or rather we shall be the
more condemned when we are found falling
short even of the imitation of brutes. The
bear, which often gets severely wounded,
cares for himself and cleverly fills the wounds
with mullein, a plant whose nature is very
astringent. You will also see the fox heal
his wounds with droppings from the pine
tree; the tortoise, gorged with the flesh of
the viper, finds in the virtue of marjoram a
specific against this venomous animal? and
the serpent heals sore eyes by eating fennel.’

And is not reasoning intelligence eclipsed
by animals in their provision for atmospheric
changes? Do we notsee sheep, when winter
15 approaching, devouring grass with avidity
as if to make provision for future scarcity?
Do we not also see oxen, long confined in
the winter season, recognise the return of
spring by a natural sensation, and look to the
end of their stables towards the doors, all
turning their heads there by common con-
sent? Studious observers have remarked
that the hedgehog makes an opening at the
two extremities of his hole. If the wind
from the north is going to blow he shuts
up the aperture which looks towards the


north; if the south wind succeeds it the
animal passes to the northern door.? What
lesson do these animals teach man? They


not only show us in our Creator a care
which extends to all beings,’ but a certain
presentiment of future even inbrutes. Then
we ought not to attach ourselves to this pres-
ent life and ought to give all heed to that
which isto come. Will you not be indus-
trious for yourself, O man? And will you


1Plut. πότ. τῶν. C. κιτιλ. χελῶναι μὲν ὀρίγανον, γαλαῖ δὲ
πήγανον, ὅταν ὄφεως φάγωσιν, ἐπεσϑίουσαι. ‘ ‘

cf. Pliny xx.68: “ Tragoriganum contra vipere ictum effi-
cacissimum.”?

26 δράκων ὃ τῷ μαράϑρῳ Tov ὀφϑαλμὸν ἀμβλυώπτοντα λεπτύ-
νων καὶ διαγαράττων. Plut. πότερα τῶν ¢. κιτ.λ. 731.

3 Ar., Hist. An.ix.6. περὶ δὲ τῆς τῶν ἐχίνων αἰσϑήσεως συμβέ-
βηκε πολλαχοῦ τεϑεωρῆσϑαι ὅτι μεταβαλλόντων βορέων καὶ νότων
οἱ μὲν ἐν τῇ γῇ τὰς ὁπὰς αὑτῶν μεταμείβουσι οἱ δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς οἰκιαις
τρεφόμενοι μεταβάλλουσι πρὸς τοὺς τοίχους.


not lay up in the present age rest in that
which is to come, after having seen the
example of the ant? The ant during sum-
mer collects treasures for winter. Far from
giving itself up to idleness, before this season
has made it feel its severity, it hastens to
work with an invincible zeal until it has
abundantly filled its storehouses. Here
again, how far it is from being negligent !
With what wise foresight it manages so as
to keep its provisions as long as possible!
With its pincers it cuts the grains in half,
for fear lest they should germinate and not
serve for its food. If they are damp it dries
them; and it does not spread them out in all
weathers, but when it feels that the air will
keep of a mild temperature. Be sure that
you will never see rain fall from the clouds
so long as the ant has left the grain out.!
What language can attain to the marvels
of the Creator? What ear could understand
them? And what time would be sufficient
to relate them? Let us say, then, with the
prophet, **O Lord, how manifold are thy
works! in wisdom hast thou made them
all.”? We shall not be able to say in self-
justification, that we have learnt useful
knowledge in books, since the untaught law
of nature makes us choose that which is ad-
vantageous to us. Do you know what good
you ought to do your neighbour? The good
that you expect from him yourself. Do you
know what is evil?) That which you would
not wish another to do to you. Neither
botanical researches nor the experience of
simples have made animals discover those
which are useful to them; but each knows
naturally what is salutary and marvellously
appropriates what suits its nature.
4. Virtues exist in us also by nature, and the
soul has affinity with them not by education,
but by nature herself. We do not need lessons
to hate illness, but by ourselves we repel what
afflicts us, the soul has no need of a master to
teach us to avoid vice. Now all vice isa sick-
ness of the soul as virtue is its health. Thus
those have defined health well who have
called it a regularity in the discharge of
natural functions ; a definition that can be ap-
plied without fear to the good condition of
the soul. Thus, without having need of
lessons, the soul can attain by herself to what
is fit and conformable to nature.* Hence it


1 ὑετοῦ ποιεῖται σημεῖον 6 Ἄρατος
“ἢ κοίλης μύρμηκες ὀχῆς ἐξ Hea πάντα
θᾶσσον ἀνηνέγκαντο.᾽
καίτινες οὐκ ὠὰ γράφουσιν, ἀλλὰ ἵνα τοὺς ἀποκειμένους καρποὺς
ὅταν εὐρῶτα συνάγοντας αἴσϑωνται καὶ φοβηϑῶσι φϑορὰν καὶ
σῆψιν ἀναφερόντων, ὑπερβάλλει δὲ πᾶσαν ἐπίνοιαν συνέσεως ἡ τοῦ
πυροῦ τῆς βλαστήσεως προκατάληψις. Plut. ποτ. τῶν. ζ. K.T.A. 725.
ΣΙ PS. οἷν; 24.
8 This is the Stoic doctrine. ‘ “Stofcorum quidem facilis
conclusio est; qui cum finem bonorum esse senserint, con-


104


comes that temperance everywhere is praised,
justice is in honour, courage admired, and
prudence the object of all aims; virtues
which concern the soul more than _ health
concerns the body. Children love? your
parents, and you, ‘* parents provoke not your
children to wrath.” ” Does not nature say
the same? Paul teaches us nothing new; he
only tightens the links of nature. If the
lioness loves her cubs, if the she wolf fights
to defend her little ones, what shall man say
who is unfaithful to the precept and violates
nature herself; or the son who insults the
old age of his father; or the father whose
second marriage has made him forget his
first children?

With animals invincible affection unites
parents with children. It is the Creator,
God Himself, who substitutes the strength
of feeling for reason in them. From whence
it comes that a lamb as it bounds from the
fold, in the midst of a thousand sheep recog-
nises the colour and the voice of its mother,
runs to her, and seeks its own sources of
milk. If its mother’s udders are dry, it is
content, and, without stopping, passes by
more abundant ones. And how does the
mother recognise it among the many lambs?
All have the same voice, the same colour,
the same smell, as far at least as regards our
sense of smell. Yet there is in these animals
a more subtle sense than our perception


&ruere nature, cumque ea convententer vivere.” cf. Cic., De
Fin, ii. 7, 25, ant De Nat. D. i. 14, and Hor., Ep., i. x. 12.
“ Vivere nature si cunvenienter oportet.”? So the Stoics’ main
rule of life is ὁμολογουμένως τῇ φύσει ζῆν. But with Basil this
apparent disregard of the doctrine of original sin and the need
of grace for redemption must be understood in the light of the
catholic doctrine that sin is the corruption of human nature
(cf. Art. ix. of Original or Birth Sin), which nature, though
corrupt and prone to evil, retains capacities for good. But
these capacities do need grace and training. cf. Basil’s Homi/y
on Ps. xlv. 166. ‘* What is said about the Saviour hasa double
sense on account of the nature of the Godhead and the Economy
of the incarnation. So, Jooking to the humanity of God, it is
said ‘thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity,’ in-
stead of saying ‘the rest of men by toil and discipline and
careful attention mostly attain a disposition towards good
and an aversion from vice. But thou hast a kind of natural
relationship to good and alienation from iniquity.’ And so to
us, if we will, itis not hard to acquire a love of righteousness
and a hatred of iniquity.” 7.e. Za Christ, redeemed humanity
loves good, and all men “ naturally’ do need toil and disci-
pline. The heredity of sin is recognised by Basil. (e.g. in
Hlom.in Famem.7.) Man fell from grace given, and must
return to it. (Serm. Ascet. in init.) It must always be re.
membered that questions of original sin, the will, and grace
never had the same importance in the Greek as they had in the
Latin church. cf. Dr. Travers Smith on St. Basil (c. ix. p. 108)
and Bohringer (Das Vierte Fahrhundert. Basil, p. 102) who
remarks: Wenn er auch noch von etner ** Wieder herstellung
des freien Willens, den wir zu brauchbaren Gefissen Siir den
Flerrn und zu jedem guten Werke fihig Werden” (De “217.
sanct, 18), spricht, so hat er dies doch nirgends begriindet,
obschon er bei der Besprechung der Folgen des Falls zu-
wetlen sich tussert, es sei der Mensch der von dem Schopfer
erhaltenen Frethett beraubt worden. Im Allgemeinen setzt er
den freten Willen auch nach dem Fall im Menschen so “πὶ
wieder Voraus, wie vor dem Fall, so dass jene Aeusserungen
kaum mehr als den Werth einer Redensart haben. Im Ganzen
erinnert seine Darstellung wieder an diejenige des Athana-
stus, dessen Einfluss Man nicht verkennen kann.
1In Eph. vi. the word is * obey.”?
2 cf. Eph. vi. 4.


BASIL.


which makes them recognise their own.'
The little dog has as yet no teeth, nevertheless
he defends himself with his mouth against any
one who teases him. The calf has as yet no
horns, nevertheless he already knows where
his weapons will grow.” Here we have evident
proof that the instinct of animals is innate,
and that in all beings there is nothing dis-
orderly, nothing unforeseen. All bear the
marks of the wisdom of the Creator, and show
that they have come to life with the means of
assuring their preservation.

The dog is not gifted with a share of reason;
but with him instinct has the power of reason.
The dog has learnt by nature the secret of
elaborate inferences, which sages of the
world, after long years of study, have hardly
been able to disentangle. When the dog is
on the track of game, if he sees it divide in
different directions, he examines these differ-
ent paths, and speech alone fails him to an-
nounce hisreasoning. ‘The creature, he says,
is gone here or there or in another direc-
tion. It is neither here nor there; it is there-
fore in the third direction. And thus,
neglecting the false tracks, he discovers the
true one. What more is done by those who,
gravely occupied in demonstrating theories,
trace lines upon the dust and reject two
propositions to show that the third is the
true one? ® Ἶ

Does not the gratitude of the dog shame
all who are ungrateful to their benefactors?
Many are said to have fallen dead by their
murdered masters in lonely places.* Others,
when a crime has just been committed, have
led those who were searching for the mur-
derers, and have caused the criminals to be
brought to justice. What will those say
who, not content with not loving the Master
who has created them and nourished them,
have for their friends men whose mouth
attacks the Lord, sitting at the same table
with them, and, whilst partaking of their
food, blaspheme Him who has given it to
them?


1 Fialon quotes Luc. ii. 367-370:

“ Preterea teneri tremulis cum voctbus hedt
Cornigeras norunt matres, agnique petulct
Balantum pecudes ; tta, quod natura reposcit,
Ad sua quisque fere decurrunt ubera lactis.”

2 cf. Ovid (Halreut. ad init.) :
“* Accepit mundus legem ; dedit arma per omnes,
Admonuttque sut. Vitulus sic namque minatur,
Qui nondum gerit in tenera jam cornua fronte.”


8 cf. Plutarch (mort. των. ¢. pp. K.T-A. 726). οἱ δὲ διαλεκτικοί
φασι τὸν κύνα τῷ διὰ πλειόνων διεζευγμένῳ χρώμενον ἐν τοῖς
πολυσχιδέσιν ἀτραποῖς συλλογίζεσϑαι πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ἤτοι τήνδε τὸ
ϑηρίον ὥρμηκεν ἢ τήνδε ἢ τήνδε: ἀλλὰ μὴν οὔτε τήνδε οὔτε τήνδε,
τήνδε λοιπὸν ἄρα. But the dog is said to smell the first, the
second, and the third. If he started off on the third without
smelling, he would reason. As it is, there is no “ syllogism.”

# Also taken from Plutarch (πότερα τῶν ¢. 726), who tells
stories of a dog found by King Pyrrhus on a journey, and of
Hesiod’s dog.


THE. HEXAEMERON.


105


5. But let us return to the spectacle of
creation. The easiest animals to catch are
the most productive. It is on account of this
that hares and wild goats produce many little
ones, and that wild sheep have twins, for
fear lest these species should disappear, con-
sumed by carnivorous animals. Beasts of
prey, on the contrary, produce only a few
and a lioness with difficulty gives birth to one
lion;* because, if they say truly, the cub
issues from its mother by tearing her with its
claws; and vipers are only born by gnawing
through the womb, inflicting a proper punish-
ment on their mother.” Thus in nature all
has been foreseen, all is the object of con-
tinual care. If you examine the members
even of animals, you will find that the Crea-
tor has given them nothing superfluous, that
He has omitted nothing that is necessary.
To carnivorous animals He has given pointed
teeth which their nature requires for their
support. Those that are only half furnished
with teeth have received several distinct
receptacles for their food. As it is not
broken up enough in the first, they are gifted
with the power of returning it after it has been
swallowed, and it does not assimilate until
it has been crushed by rumination. ‘The
first, second, third, and fourth stomachs of
ruminating animals do not remain idle; each
one of them fulfils a necessary function.* The
neck of the camel is long so that it may lower
it to its feet and reach the grass on which it
feeds. Bears, lions, tigers, all animals of
this sort, have short necks buried in their
shoulders; it is because they do not live upon
grass and have no need to bend down to
the earth; they are carnivorous and eat
the animals upon whom they prey.

Why has the elephant a trunk? This
enormous creature, the greatest of terrestrial
animals, created for the terror of those who
meet it, is naturally huge and fleshy. If its
neck was large and in proportion to its feet
it would be difficult to direct, and would be
of such an excessive weight that it would
make it lean towards the earth. As it is, its
head is attached to the spine of the back by
short vertebre and it has its trunk to take
the place of a neck, and with it it picks up its
Hs cf. Herod. iii. 108. Aristotle (/Z/st. Anz. vi. 31) refutes
‘ of. Pliny (x. 72): “ Tertia die intra uterum catulos ex-
cludit, deinde singulos singulis diebus parit, viginti fere
numero. Itaque cetere, tarditatis tmpatientes, perrumpunt


latera, occisa parente. cf. Herod. iii. 109.

So Prudentius (Hamartigenia 583}:

‘6 Sic vipera, ut atunt,
Dentibus emorttur fuse per viscera prolis.”
See Sir T. Browne’s Vulgar Errors, iii. 16.
3 Pliny (xi. 78) says ruminantibus geminus, but this 1s sup-
osed to be a misreading for guadrigeminus, or a mistaken

interpretation of Aristotle (/Z/.A. ii. 19), whom Basil is no
doubt following.


food and draws up its drink. Its feet, with-
out joints,’ like united columns, support the
weight of its body. If it were supported on
lax and flexible legs, its joints would con-
stantly give way, equally incapable of sup-
porting its weight, should it wish either
to kneel or rise. But it has under the foot
a little ankle joint which takes the place of
the leg and knee joints whose mobility would
never have resisted this enormous and sway-
ing mass. Thus it had need of this nose
which nearly touches its feet. Have you
seen them in war marching at the head of
the phalanx, like living towers, or breaking
the enemies’ battalions like mountains of
flesh with their irresistible charge? If their
lower parts were not in accordance with
their size they would never have been able_to
hold their own. Now we are told that the
elephant lives three hundred years and more,”*
another reason for him to have solid and un-
jointed feet. But, as we have said, his trunk,
which has the form and the flexibility of a ser-
pent, takes its food from the earth and raises
itup. Thus we are right in saying that it is
impossible to find anything superfluous or
wanting in creation. Well! God has sub-
dued this monstrous animal to us to sucha
point that he understands the lessons and
endures the blows we give him; a manifest
proof that the Creator has submitted all to
our rule, because we have been made in His
image. It is not in great animals only that
we see unapproachable wisdom; no less
wonders are seen in the smallest. The high
tops of the mountains which, near to the
clouds and continually beaten by the winds,
keep up a perpetual winter, do not arouse
more admiration in me than the hollow
valleys, which escape the storms of lofty
peaks and preserve a constant mild tempera-
ture. Inthe same way in the constitution
of animals Iam not more astonished at the
size of the elephant, than at the mouse, who
is feared by the elephant, or at the scor-
pion’s delicate sting, which has_ been
hollowed like a pipe by the supreme arti-
ficer to throw venom into the wounds it
makes. And let nobody accuse the Creator
of having produced venomous animals, de-
stroyers and enemies of our life. Else let
them consider it a crime in the schoolmaster
when he disciplines the restlessness of youth
by the use of the rod and whip to maintain
order.°

6. Beasts bear witness to the
Hast thou confidence in the Lord ?


faith.
‘¢ Thou


1See Sir T. Browne, Vulgar Errors, iii. τ.
2 Arist. H.A. viii. 12 and 1x. 72. Pliny vil. 10.
8 cf. Hom.v. 4.


106


BASIE,


shalt walk upon the asp and the basilisk and
thou shalt trample under feet the lion and the
dragon.” + With faith thou hast the power
to walk upon serpents and scorpions. Do
you not see that the viper which attached it-
self to the hand of Paul, whilst he gathered
sticks, did not injure him, because it found
the saint full of faith? If you have not faith,
do not fear beasts so much as your faithless-
ness, which renders you susceptible of all
corruption. But Isee that fora longtime you
have been asking me for an account of the cre-
ation of man, and I think I can hear you ali
cry in your hearts, We are being taught the
nature of our belongings, but we are igno-
rant of ourselves. Let me then speak of it,
Since it is necessary, and let me put an end
to my hesitation. In truth the most difficult
of sciences is to know one’s 561. Not only
our eye, from which nothing outside us es-
capes, cannot see itself ; but our mind, so
piercing to discover the sins of others, is
slow to recognise its own faults.” Thus my
speech, after eagerly investigating what is
external to myself, is slow and hesitating in
exploring my own nature. Yet the behold-
ing of heaven and earth does not make us
know God better than the attentive study of
our being does; I am, says the Prophet, fear-
fully and wonderfully made ;* that is to say,
in observing myself I have known Thy
infinite wisdom.* And God said ‘+ Let us
make man.” ὃ Does not'the light of theology
shine, in these words, as through windows;
and does not the second Person show Him-
self in a mystical way, without yet manifest-
ing Himself until the great day? Where
is the Jew who resisted the truth and pre-
tended that God was speaking to Himself?
It is He who spoke, it is said, and it is He
who made. ‘+ Let there be light and there
was light.” But then their words contain a
manifest absurdity. Where is the smith, the
carpenter, the shoemaker, who, without
help and alone before the instruments of his
trade, would say to himself; let us make
the sword, let us put together the plough,
let us make the boot? Does he not per-
form the work of his craft in silence?
Strange folly, to say that any one has seated
himself to command himself, to watch over
himself, to constrain himself, to hurry him-


fey. es. ΣΟΙ 53.

Bey, ΡῈ CRXXIX. 14.

4“ αὶ ceelo descendit γνῶθι ceavtov” (Juv. xi. 27). Socrates,
Chilo, Thales, Cleobulus, Bias, Pythagoras, have all been cred-
ited with the saying. ‘‘ On reconnait ici le précepte fécond de
Pécole socratique. L’église chrétienne s’en empara comme de
tout ce quelle trouvatit de grand et de bon dans l’ancienne
Gréce. Fialon.

St. Basil has a Homily on the text πρόσεχε σεαυτῷ (Deut.
xv. 9, lxx.)

5 Gen. i. 26.


2 cf. St. Matt. vii. 3.


| ἀνόμοιοι πάμπαν ἀλλήλων.


self, with the tones οὗ ἃ master! But the un-
happy creatures are not afraid to calumniate
the Lord Himself. What will they not say
with a tongue so well practised in lying?
Here, however, words stop their mouth;
ἐς And God said let us make man.” Tell
me; is there then only one Person? It is
not written ** Let man be made,” but, «* Let
us make man.” The preaching of theology
remains enveloped in shadow before the ap-
pearance of him who was to be instructed,
but, now, the creation of man is expected, that
faith unveils herself and the dogma of truth
appears in all its light. ‘* Let us make
man.” O enemy of Christ, hear God speak-
ing to His Co-operator, to Him by Whom
also He made the worlds, Who upholds all
things by the word of His power.’ But He
does not leave the voice of true religion
without answer. Thus the Jews, race hos-
tile to truth, when they find themselves
pressed, act like beasts enraged against man,
who roar at the bars of their cage and show
the cruelty and the ferocity of their nature,
without being abie to assuage their fury.
God, they say, addresses Himself to several
persons; it is to the angels before Him that
He says, ‘let us amakeymanm.”) . Jewish
fiction! a fable whose frivolity shows whence
it hascome. To reject one person, they admit
many. To reject the Son, they raise ser-
vants to the dignity of counsellors; they
make of our fellow slaves the agents in our
creation. The perfect man attains the dig-
nity of an angel; but what creature can be
like the Creator? Listen to the continuation,
‘‘In our image.” What have you to reply?
Is there one image of God and the angels?
Father and Son have by absolute necessity
the same form, but the form is here under-
stood as becomes the divine, not in bodily
shape, but in the proper qualities of God-
head. Hear also, you who belong to the
new concision,” and who, under the appear-
ance of Christianity, strengthen the error
of the Jews.* To Whom does He say, “" in
our image,” to whom if it is not to Him who
is ** the brightness of His glory and the ex-
press image of His person,”’* ** the image of
the invisible God”?’ It is then to His
living image, to Him Who has said “1 and
my Father are one,” * ‘+ He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father,” ’ that God says
‘¢ Let us make man in our image.” Where
is the unlikeness* in these Beings who have
only one image ἢ ‘*So God created man,” ®


A Heb, 1.3.
5 Colwi. 18.


6 John x. 30.


τ, Heb. 4.258. 7 rater χὰ


2 Phil. iii, 2.

8 The Arians.
87d ἀνόμοιον. Arius had taught that the Persons are
9 Gen. i. 27.


THE HEXAEMERON.


107


it ie mot ** They made.” Here Seripture
avoids the plurality of the Persons. After hav-
ing enlightened the Jew, it dissipates the
error of the Gentiles in putting itself under
the shelter of unity, to make vou understand
that the Son is with the Father, and guard-
ing you from the danger of polytheism. He
created him in the image of God. God
still shows us His co-operator, because He
does not say, in His image, but in the image
of God.

If God permits, we will say later in what
Way man was created in the image of God,
and how he shares this resemblance. To-
day we say but only one word. If there is
one image, from whence .comes the intoler-
able blasphemy of pretending that the Son
is unlike the Father P What ingratitude!
You have yourself received this likeness and
you refuse it to your Benefactor! You pre-
tend to keep personally that which is in


you a gift of grace, and you do not wish that
the Son should keep His natural likeness to
Him who begat Him.

But evening, which long ago sent the sun
to the west, imposes silence upon me.
Here, then, let me be content with what I
have said, and put my discourse to bed. I
have told you enough up to this point to ex-
cite your zeal; with the help of the Holy
Spirit I will make for you a deeper investi-
gation into the truths which follow. Retire,
then, I beg you, with joy, O Christ-loving
congregation, and, instead of sumptuous
dishes of various delicacies, adorn and sanc-
tify your tables with the remembrance of
my words. May the Anomean be con-
founded, the Jew covered with shame, the
faithful exultant in the dogmas of truth, and
the Lord glorified, the Lord to Whom
be glory and power, world without end.
Amen.


rt i ee) Ms νυ; ¢ ΣΥΝ ΕΝ
; Α͂' ἵ ᾿ ᾿. re hai
᾿ ἌΝ at { ie εἰ " . * 7" ᾿ ᾿ He WAG tires
wr 4 ; ΝΥ i > pw "Tr ᾿ «αν ἡ γ᾽ j
{ Spe i > ᾿ yo : { μὲν a
Sn Hy ΓΡῚ ᾿ wa ὁ... τὰ" ;
Wigveivadr ba ' pA
¢ a? 4
- Tee 1 sk bene ston Spe Like ™ i ᾿
¥ + »νὺ At , (i
ι
᾿ “2... ; ᾿ j yk ᾿
gee Δὴ ΠΥ ΜΝ δ, Se aR
F: ὴ cA ἣν ΩΝ»
ee 1a ; EP Yee
2 ὶ ν᾿ gt: rai ΓᾺ Α Ἢ
] wey - eyecare A a
ΩΝ t ; ‘ ἢ
7 ἃ 4 ' ᾿ 7 j Arh ¢
' .
‘ > ‘ ᾿ τ}
a é : ᾿
ΝΜ ἢ ἔ 4
{ - ἢ Mois
* p ; } ᾿
ε ἵ ᾿
᾿ - . ἐὺ»
ων
ed
« : ‘ Y Je
- ὲ ey
( ‘ a Σ ΐ
Ἧ } ΤΙ
i :
i °
P -
᾿ 4 ᾿ ᾿ ᾿ ss}
2 A 4
; is ve)
J f Ι ᾿Ξ Ἀ
4 i
; J ] ,᾿ ‘ +
Rh sient eh gat
3 ὡ } ; ae GES 1 : Ἷ 5 5 ᾿ τὰν lag
bil) ener ἫΝ i ht ΣΤ τ ἢ ἐν, Mg ry Wy . ae Dae, | iver Η͂
᾿ εὐλλω Sadi ye τι t# KN A tok if ζ- wet ele Ry eed, es _ ve A tr ve 3 ᾿ . ᾿ ᾿ Ἂ
ewe, tA A ἂν - i" ᾽ν ᾿ ὃ + he oe ἡ ee ae ' ἢ Ἔ fit
hay ἐν τ δ ΗΕ ee δ", ig teh pee : ξ
i? Ἔν bp


INFRODUCTION::TOr THE“ EEETERS.


Of Saint Basil the extant letters, according to popular ascription, number three hundred
and sixty-six. Of these three hundred and twenty-five, or, according to some, only three
hundred and nineteen are genuine. ‘They are published in three chronological divisions,
the rst, (Letters 1-46) comprising those written by Basil before his elevation to the epis-
copate; the second (47-291) the Letters of the Episcopate; the third (292-366) those
which have no note of time, together with some that are of doubtful genuineness, and a few
certainly spurious.t. They may be classified as (a) historical, (Ὁ) dogmatic, (c) moral
and ascetic, (d) disciplinary, (6) consolatory, (f) commendatory, and (g) familiar. In
the historic we have a vivid picture of his age. The doctrinal are of special value as ex-
pressing and defending the Nicene theology. The moral and ascetic indicate the growing
importance of the monastic institution which Athanasius at about the same time was in-
strumental in recommending to the Latin Church. The disciplinary, (notably 188, 199,
and 217), to Amphilochius, illustrate the earlier phases of ecclesiastical law. The consol-
atory, commendatory, and familiar, have an immediate biographical value as indicating the
character and faith of the writer, and may not be without use alike as models of Christian
feeling and good breeding, and as bringing comfort in trouble to readers remote in time
and place. The text in the following translation is that of Migne’s edition, except where
it is stated to the contrary. Of the inadequacy of the notes to illustrate the letters as they
deserve no one can be more vividly conscious than myself. But the letters tell their own
story.

Hellespont I passed by, more unmoved than


2
LETTER <1, any Ulysses, passing Sirens’ songs.°


To Eustathius the Philosopher.’


Mucu distressed as I was by the flouts of
what is called fortune, who always seems to
be hindering my meeting you, I was won-
derfully cheered and comforted by your letter,
for I had already been turning over in my
mind whether what so many people say is
really true, that there is a certain Necessity
or Fate which rules all the events of our
lives both great and small, and that we
human beings have control over nothing ;
or, that at all events, all human life is driven
by a kind of luck.* You will be very ready
to forgive me for these reflexions, when you
learn by what causes I was led to make
them.

On hearing of your philosophy, I enter-
tained a feeling of contempt for the teachers
of Athens, and left it. The city on the

1 Fessler, (mst. Pat. i. 51S. 2 Placed in 357.

3 Another MS. reading is “Τὸ Eustathius, Presbyter of


Presbyter, but a heathen, as is indicated by Basil’s words,
- would say?’ ”’


Asia® 1 admired; but I hurried on to the
capital of all that is best in it. When I
arrived home, and did not find you, —
the prize which I had sought so eagerly, —
there began many and various unexpected
hindrances. First I must miss you because
I fell ill; then when you were setting out
for the East I could not start with you;
then, after endless trouble, I reached Syria,
but I missed the philosopher, who had set
out for Egypt. Then Τὸ must) set out® for
Egypt, a long and weary way, and even
there I did not gain my end. But so pas-
sionate was my longing that I must either
set out for Persia, and proceed with you to
the farthest lands of barbarism, (you had got
there; what an obstinate devil possessed
me!) or settle here at Alexandria. This
last did. I really think that unless, like some
tame beast, I had followed a bough held out


Antioch.’”? The Benedictine note is ‘Eustathius was not a
‘Are not these things work of fate,— of necessity, as you


4 The word τύχη does not occur in the N.T.


5 ws ovdeis ᾿Οδυσσεύς. The Ben. translation is ‘‘citius guam guisguam Ulysses.’ But the reason of the escape of Ulysses
was not his speed. but his stopping the ears of his crew with wax and tying himself to the mast. cf. Hom. Od. xii. 158.
The ‘“‘ city on the Hellespont,” is, according to the Ben. note, Constantinople; but Constantinople is more than :00 m. from


the Dardanelles, and Basil could hardly write so loosely,


6 Apparently not the Roman Province of Asia, but what we call Asia Minor, a name which came into use in Basil’s century.


The “ metropolis ” is supposed to mean Caesarea.


IIo


BASIL.


to me till I was quite worn out, you would
have been driven on and on beyond Indian
Nyssa,’ or any more remote region, and
wandered about out there. Why say more?

On returning home, I cannot meet you,
hindered by lingering ailments. If these do
not get better I shall not be able to meet you
even in the winter. Is not all this, as you
yourself say, due to Fate? Is not this Neces-
sity? Does not my case nearly outdo poets’
tales of Tantalus? But, as I said, I feel bet-
ter after getting your letter, and am now no
longer of the same mind. When God gives
good things I think we must thank Him,
and not be angry with Him while He is
controlling their distribution. So if He
grant me to join you, I shall think it best
and most delightful; if He put me off, I will
gently endure the loss. For He always
rules our lives better than we could choose
for ourselves. -


LEDER Ori
Basil to Gregory.


1. [Irecognised your letter, as one recog-
nises one’s friends’ children from their ob-
vious likeness to their parents. Your saying
that to describe the kind of place I live in,
before letting you hear anything about how
I live, would not go far towards persuading
you to share my life, was just like you; it
was worthy of a soul like yours, which
makes nothing of all that concerns this life
here, in comparison with the blessedness
which is promised us hereafter. What I do
myself, day and night, in this remote spot, I
am ashamed to write. I have abandoned
my life in town, as one sure to lead to count-
less ills; but I have not yet been able to get
quit of myself. Iam like travellers at sea,
who have never gone a voyage before, and
are distressed and seasick , who quarrel with
the ship because it is so big and makes such
a tossing, and, when they get out of it into
the pinnace or dingey, are everywhere and
always seasick and distressed. Wherever
they go their nausea and misery go with
them. My state is something like this. I
carry my own troubles with me, and so
everywhere I am inthe midst of similar dis-
comforts. So in the end I have not got
much good out of my solitude. What I
ought to have done; what would have en-
abled me to keep close to the footprints of


1 Νύσιος ΞΞ Ἰνδικός. cf. Soph. AZ. 707. Nyssa was in the
Punjab.

2 Placed circa 358, on Basil’s retiring to Pontus. Trans-
lated in part by Newman, Zhe Church of the Fathers, p. 131,
ed. 1840. With the exception of the passages in brackets [ ],
the version in the text is that of Newman,


Him who has led the way to salvation —
for He says, *‘ If any one will come after me,
let him deny himself and take up his cross,
and follow me” ' — is this. |

2. We must strive after a quiet mind.
As well might the eye ascertain an object
put before it while it is wandering restless
up and down and sideways, without fixing
a steady gaze upon it, as a mind, distracted
by a thousand worldly cares, be able clearly
to apprehend the truth. He who is not yet
yoked in the bonds of matrimony is harassed
by frenzied cravings, and rebellious impulses,
and hopeless attachments; he who has found
his mate is encompassed with his own
tumult of cares; if he is childless, there is
desire for children ; has he children? anxiety
about their education, attention to his wife,?
care of his house, oversight of his servants,°
misfortunes in trade, quarrels with his neigh-
bours, lawsuits, the risks of the merchant,
the toil of. the .farmer., Bach day, as it
comes, darkens the soul in its own way ; and
night after night takes up the day’s anxieties,
and cheats the mind with illusions in ac-
cordance. Now one way of escaping all
this is separation from the whole world; that
is, not bodily separation, but the severance
of the soul’s sympathy with the body, and
to live so without city, home, goods, society,
possessions, means of life, business, engage-
ments, human learning, that the heart may
readily receive every impress of divine doc-
trine. Preparation of heart is the unlearning
the prejudices of evil converse. It is the
smoothiag the waxen tablet before attempt-
ing to write on it.*

Now solitude is of the greatest use for this
purpose, inasmuch as it stills our passions,
and gives room for principle to cut them out
of the soul’ [For just as animals are more
easily controlled when they are stroked, lust
and anger, fear and sorrow, the soul’s deadly
foes, are better brought under the control of
reason, after being calmed by inaction, and
where there is no continuous stimulation. |
Let there then be such a place as ours, sep-
arate from intercourse with men, that the
tenour of our exercises be not interrupted from
without. Pious exercises nourish the soul
with divine thoughts. What state can be
more blessed than to imitate on earth the
choruses of angels? to begin the day with


1 Matt. xvi. 24. , ’ 5 Bike

2 γυναικὸς φυλακή, rather “ guardianship of his wife.

8 οἰκετῶν προστασιαι, rather “ protection of his servants.”

4 Rather “for just as it is impossible to write on the wax
without previously erasing the marks on it, so is it impossible
to communicate divine doctrines to the soul without removing
from it its preconceived and habitual notions.” _

5 The following paragraph is altogether omitted by New-
man.


τ ΤΙ 5.


prayer, and honour our Maker with hymns
and songs? As the day brightens, to be-
take ourselves, with prayer attending on it
throughout, to our labours, and to sweeten’
our work with hymns, as if with salt? Sooth-
ing hymns compose the mind to a cheerful
and calm state. Quiet, then, as I have said,
is the first step in our sanctification; the
tongue purified from the gossip of the world;
the eyes unexcited by fair colour or comely
shape; the ear not relaxing the tone of mind
by voluptuous songs, nor by that especial
mischief, the talk of light men and jesters.
Thus the mind, saved from dissipation from
without, and not through the senses thrown
upon the world, falls back upon itself, and
thereby ascends tothe contemplation of God.
[When ’ that beauty shines about it, it even
forgets its very nature; it is dragged down
no more by thought of food nor anxiety con-
cerning dress; it keeps holiday from earthly
cares, and devotes all its energies to the
acquisition of the good things which are
eternal, and asks only how may be made
to flourish in it self-control and manly
courage, righteousness and wisdom, and all
the other virtues, which, distributed under
these heads, properly enable the good man
to discharge all the duties of life. |

3. The study of inspired Scripture is the
chief way of finding our duty, for in it we
find both iastruction about conduct and the
lives of blessed men, delivered in writing,
as some breathing images of godly living,
for the imitation of their good works.
Hence, in whatever respect each one feels
himself deficient, devoting himself to this
imitation, he finds, as from some dispensary,
the due medicine for his ailment. He who
is enamoured of chastity dwells upon the
history of Joseph, and from him learns
chaste actions, finding him not only pos-
sessed of self-command over pleasure, but
virtuously-minded in habit. He is taught
endurance by Job [who,* not only when the
circumstances of life began to turn against
“him, and in one moment he was plunged
from wealth into penury, and from being the
father of fair children into childlessness,
remained the same, keeping the disposition
of his soul all through uncrushed, but was
not even stirred to anger against the friends
who came to comfort him, and trampled on
him, and aggravated his troubles.] Or
should he be enquiring how to be at once
meek and great-hearted, hearty against sin,
meek towards men, he will find David
noble in warlike exploits, meek and unruf-


1 Rather ‘* season.’’


2 Omitted by Newman.
3 Clause oinitted by Newman.


III


fled as regards revenge on enemies. Such,
too,was Moses, rising up with great heart upon
sinners against God, but with meek soul
bearing their evil-speaking against himself.
[Thus,' generally, as painters, when they
are painting from other pictures, constantly
look at the model, and do their best to trans-
fer its lineaments to their own work, so too
must he who is desirous of rendering him-
self perfect in all branches of excellency,
keep his eyes turned to the lives of the saints
as though to living and moving statues, and
make their virtue his own by imitation.

4. Prayers, too, after reading, find the soul
fresher, and more vigorously stirred by love
towards God. And that prayer is good
which imprints a clear idlea of God in the
soul; and the having God established in
self by means of memory is God’s indwell-
ing. Thus we become God’s temple, when
the continuity of our recollection is not sev-
ered by earthly cares; when the mind is
harassed by no sudden sensations; when the
worshipper flees from all things and retreats
to God, drawing away all the feelings that
invite him to self-indulgence, and passes his
time in the pursuits that lead to virtue. |

5. This, too, isa very important point to at-
tend to, — knowledge how to converse ; to in-
terrogate without over-earnestness ; to answer
without desire of display; not to interrupt
a profitable speaker, or to desire ambitiously
to put in a word of one’s own; to be
measured in speaking and hearing; not to
be ashamed of receiving, or to be grudging
in giving information, nor to pass another's
knowledge for one’s own, 85 depraved
women their supposititious children, but to
refer it candidly to the true parent. The
middle tone of voice is best, neither so low
as to be inaudible, nor to be ill-bred from
its high pitch. One should reflect first what
one is going to say, and then give it ut-
terance: be courteous when addressed;
amiable in social intercourse; not aiming to
be pleasant by facetiousness, but cultivating
gentleness in kind admonitions. Harshness
is ever to be put aside, even in censuring.’
[The more you shew modesty and humility
yourself, the more likely are you to be ac-
ceptable to the patient who needs your treat-
ment. There are however many occasions
when we shall do well to employ the kind
of rebuke used by the prophet who did not
in his own person utter the sentence of con-
demnation on David after his sin, but by
suggesting an imaginary character made the


1 Omitted by Newman. ’

2 Here Newman notes that Basil seems sometimes to have
fallen short of his own ideal. His translation ends at this
point.


112


BASIL.


sinner judge of his own sin, so that, after
passing his own sentence, he could not
find fault with the seer who had convicted
him.'

6. From the humble and_ submissive
spirit comes an eye sorrowful and downcast,
appearance neglected, hair rough, dress
dirty; so that the appearance which mourn-
ers take pains to present may appear our
natural condition. The tunic should be
fastened to the body by a girdle, the belt not
going above the flank, like a woman’s, nor
left slack, so that the tunic flows loose, like
an idler’s. The gait ought not to be slug-
gish, which shews a character without
energy, nor on the other hand pushing and
pompous, as though our impulses were rash
and wild. The one end of dress is that it
should be a sufficient covering alike in winter
and summer. As to colour, avoid bright-
ness; in material, the soft and delicate. To
aim at bright colours in dress is like women’s
beautifying when they colour cheeks and
hair with hues other than their own. The
tunic ought to be thick enough not to want
other help to keep the wearer warm.
The shoes should be cheap but serviceable.
In a word, what one has to regard in dress
is the necessary. So too as to food; for a
man in good health bread will suffice, and
water will quench thirst; such dishes of
vegetables may be added as conduce to
strengthening the body for the discharge of
its functions. One ought not to eat with any
exhibition of savage gluttony, but in every-
thing that concerns our pleasures to maintain
moderation, quiet, and self-control; and, all
through, not to let the mind forget to think
of God, but to make even the nature of our
food, and the constitution of the body that
takes it, a ground and means for offering
Him the glory, bethinking us how the vari-
ous kinds of food, suitable to the needs of
our bodies, are due to the provision of the
great Steward: of the Universe. Before
meat let grace be said, in recognition alike
of the gifts which God gives now, and which
He keeps in store for time to come. Say


1 Basil’s admirable little summary of the main principles of
conversation may have been suggested by the recollection of
many well known writers. On sucha Subject no wide reader
could be original. cf. inter alios, the ἄκουε πολλὰ λάλει 0’
ὀλίγα of Bias; the γλῶττα μὴ προτρεχέτω τοῦ νοῦ of Pittacus.
Aulus Gellius (oct, Att. i, 15), referring to the

Τλώσσης τοι θησαυρὸς ἐν ἀνθρώποισιν ἄριστος

Φειδωλῆς πλείστη δὲ χάρις κατὰ μέτρον ἰούσης
of Hesiod, says: *‘ Hestodus poetarum prudentissimus lin-
παῦε non vulgandam sed recondendam esse dicit, perinde ut
thesaurum. kEjusque esse in promendo gratiam plurimam, st
modesta et parca et modulata sit.”

On the desirability of gentleness in blame, cf. Ambrose, Jn
Lucam,: * ἄρον sage amica correctio quam accusatio tur-
bulenta: tlla pudorem incutit, hac indignationem movet.”


2 This was the mark of the old heathen philosophers. cf.
Aristoph., Birds 1282, ἐρρύπων ἐσωκράτων.


grace after meat in gratitude for gifts given
and petition for gifts promised. Let there
be one fixed hour for taking food, always the
same in regular course, that of all the four
and twenty of the day and night barely this
one may be spent upon the body. The
rest the ascetic’ ought to spend in mental
exercise. Let sleep be light and_ easily
interrupted, as naturally happens after a
light diet; it should be purposely broken by
thoughts about great themes. To be over-
come by heavy torpor, with limbs unstrung,
so that a way is readily opened to wild
fancies, is to be plunged in daily death. What
dawn is to some this midnight is to athletes
of piety; then the silence of night gives
leisure to their soul; no noxious sounds or
sights obtrude upon their hearts; the mind
is alone with itself and God, correcting it-
self by the recollection of its sins, giving
itself precepts to help it to shun evil, and
imploring aid from God for the perfecting
of what it longs for. |


LETTER ΠΙΣ


To Candidianus.’


1. WueENI took your letter into my hand,
I underwent an experience worth telling. I
looked at it with the awe due to a document
making some state announcement, and as I
was breaking the wax, I felt a dread greater
than ever guilty Spartan felt at sight of the
Laconian scytale.*

When, however, I had opened the letter,
and read it through, I could not help laugh-
ing, partly for joy at finding nothing alarm-
ing in it; partly because I likened your state
of affairs to that of Demosthenes. Demos-
thenes, you remember, when he was provid-
ing for a certain little company of chorus
dancers and musicians, requested to be styled


no longer Demosthenes, but ‘‘ choragus.” °


You are always the same, whether playing


the ‘*choragus” or not. ‘* Choragus” you


are indeed to soldiers myriads more in
number than the individuals to whom De-


1 ἀσκητὴς, firstly an artisan, came to Ξε ἀθλητὴς, and by
ecclesiastical writers is used for hermit or monk. The ἐρημίτης,
or desert dweller, lives either in retreat as an anchoret, or soli-
tary, μοναχός, whence ** monk;”? or in common with others, in
a κοινόβιον, as a *Sccenobite.” All would be ἀσκηταί.

2 Placed at the beginning of the retreat in Pontus.

3 A governor of Cappadocia, friendly to Basil and to
Gregory of Nazianzus. (cf. Greg., Ep. cxciv.)

4 7,6. the statf or baton used at Sparta for dispatches. The
strip of leather on which the communication was to be made
is said to have been rolled slantwise round it, and the message
was then written lengthwise. The correspondent was said to
have a staff of a size exactiy corresponding, and so by rewind-
ing the strip could read what was written. Vide Aulus Gellius
Xvii. 9.

5 Plutarch πολ. παραγγ. xxii. 7 TO τοῦ Δημοσθένους ὅτι viv
ae ἔστι Δημοσθένης ἀλλὰ Kai θεσμοθέτης ἢ χορηγὸς ἢ στεφανη-

όρος.


LECT TERS.


113


mosthenes supplied necessaries; and yet
you do not when you write to me stand
on your dignity, but keep up the old style.
You do not give up the study of litera-
ture, but, as Plato’ has it, in the midst of
the storm and tempest of affairs, you stand
aloof, as it were, under some strong wall, and
keep your mind clear of all disturbance; nay,
more, as far as in you lies, you do not even
let others be disturbed. Such is your life ;
great and wonderful to all who have eyes to
see; and yet not wonderful to any one who
judges by the whole purpose of your life.

Now let me tell my own story, extraordi-
nary indeed, but only what might have been
expected.

2. One of the hinds who live with us
here at Annesi,’ on the death of my servant,
without alleging any breach of contract with
him, without approaching me, without mak-
ing any complaint, without asking me to
make him any voluntary payment, without
any threat of violence should he fail to get it,
all on a sudden, with certain mad fellows
like himself, attacked my house, brutally-as-
saulted the women who were in charge of it,
broke in the doors, and after appropriating
some of the contents himself, and promising
the rest to any one who liked, carried off
everything. I do not wish to be regarded as
the ze plus ultra of helplessness, and a suit-
able object for the violence of any one who
likes to attack me. Shew me, then, now, I
beg you, that kindly interest which you have
always shewn in my affairs. Only on one
condition can my tranquillity be secured, —
that I be assured of having your energy on
my side. It would be quite punishment
enough, from my point of view, if the man
were apprehended by the district magistrate
and locked up for a short period in the gaol.
It is not only that [am indignant at the treat-
ment I have suffered, but I want security for
the future.

LEC TER Ive


To Olympius.*


Wuat do you mean, my dear Sir, by
evicting from our retreat my dear friend and
nurse of philosophy, Poverty? Were she
but gifted with speech, I take it you would
have to appear as defendant in an action for
unlawful ejectment. She might plead “1
chose to live with this man Basil, an admirer
of Zeno,® who, when he had lost everything

1 Rep. vi. 10. οἷον ἐν χειμῶνι κονιορτοῦ Kat ζάλης ὑπὸ πνεύ-
ματος Φερομένου ὑπὸ τειχίον ἀποστάς.

2 Vide Prolegomena. Ν ΦΉΣ

8 Placed about 358. Olympius sends Basil a present in his
retreat, and he playfully remonstrates.


4 cf. Letters xii., xiii., |xiii., Ixiv., and ccxi,
5 The founder of the Stoic school.


! out sufficient grounds.”


in a shipwreck, cried, with great fortitude,
‘well done, Fortune! you are reducing me
to the old cloak ;’' a great admirer of Clean-
thes, who by drawing water from the well
got enough to live on and pay his tutors’
fees as well; ”? an immense admirer of Dio-
genes, who prided himself on requiring no
more than was absolutely necessary, and
flung away his bowl: after he had learned
from some lad to stoop down and drink from
the hollow of his hand.” In some such
terms as these you might be chidden by my
dear mate Poverty, whom your presents have
driven from house and home. She might
too add a threat; ‘* if I catch you here again,
I shall shew that what went before was
Sicilian or Italian luxury: so I shall exactly
requite you out of my own store.”

But enough of this. Iam very glad that
you have already begun a course of medicine,
and pray that you may be benefited by it.
A condition of body fit for painless activity
would well become so pious a soul.


LETTER: V.


To Nectarius.'


1. I HEARD of your unendurable loss, and
was much distressed. Three or four days
went by, and I was still in some doubt be-
cause my informant was not able to give
me any clear details of the melancholy
event. While I was incredulous about what
was noised abroad, because I prayed that
it might» not be’ true, I received a “letter
from the Bishop fully confirming the un-
happy tidings. 1 need not tell you how I
sighed and wept. Who could be so stony-
hearted, so truly inhuman, as to be in-
sensible to what has occurred, or be
affected by merely moderate grief? He is
gone; heir of a noble house, prop of a
family, a father’s hope, offspring of pious
parents, nursed with innumerable prayers,
in the very bloom of manhood, torn from
his father’s hands. ‘These things are enough
to break a heart of adamant and make it
feel. It is only natural then that I am
deeply touched at this trouble; I who
have been intimately connected with you
from the beginning and have made your
joys and sorrows mine. But yesterday it
seemed that you had only little to trouble

1 The τρίβων, dim. τριβώνιον, or worn cloak, was emblematic
of the philosopher and later of the monk, as now the cowl.
cf. Lucian, Pereg. 15, and Synesius, Fp. 147.

2 Cleanthes, the Lydian Stoic, was hence called φρέαντλος, or
well.drawer. On him vide Val. Max. viii. 7 and Sen., Ep. 44.

3 Placed about 35S.

4cf. Letter 290. The identification of the two Nectarii is
conjectural. ‘* Tillemont is inclined to identify Basil’s cor-


respondent with the future bishop of Constantinople, but with-
D.C.B. see.


114


BASIL.


you, and that your life’s stream was flow-| Judge, they who show like good deeds


ing prosperously on. In a moment, by a
demon’s malice,’ all the happiness of the
house, all the brightness of life, is destroyed,
and our lives are made a doleful story. If
we wish to lament and weep over what has
happened, a life time will not be enough ;
and if all mankind mourns with us they
will be powerless to make their lamenta-
tion match our loss. Yes, if all the streams
run tears? they will not adequately weep
our woe.

2. But we mean,— do we not? — to bring
out the gift which God has stored in our
hearts; I mean that sober reason which in
our happy days’ is wont to draw lines of
limitation round our souls, and when troubles
come about us to recall to our minds that
we are but men, and to suggest to us, what
indeed we have seen and heard, that life
is full of similar misfortunes, and that the
examples of human sufferings are nota
few. Above all, this will tell us that it is
God’s command that we who trust in
Christ should not grieve over them who
are fallen asleep, because we hope in the
resurrection; and that in reward for great
patience great crowns of glory are kept in
store by the Master of life’s course. Only
let us allow our wiser thoughts to speak to
us in this strain of music, and we may
peradventure discover some slight allevi-
ation of our trouble. Play the man, then,
I implore you; the blow is a heavy one,
but stand firm; do not fall under the
weight of your grief; do not lose heart.
Be perfectly assured of this, that though
the reasons for what is ordained by God
are beyond us, yet always what is arranged
for us by Him Who is wise and Who loves
us is to be accepted, be it ever so grievous to
endure. He Himself knows how He is
appointing what is best for each and why
the terms of life that He fixes for us are
unequal. There exists some reason incom-
prehensible to man why some are sooner
carried far away from us, and some are
left a longer while behind to bear the
burdens of this painful life. So we ought
always to adore His loving kindness, and
not to repine, remembering those great and
famous words of the great athlete Job,
when he had seen ten children at one
table, in one short moment, crushed to death,
‘¢ The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken
away.”* As the Lord thought good so it
Let us adopt those marvel-


came to pass.
lous words. At the hands of the righteous


1 cf. Luke xiii. 16 and 2 Cor, xii. 7.
2 cf. Lam. ii. 18. ὃ fob i. 21.


shall receive a like reward. We have not
lost the lad; we have restored him to the
Lender. His life is not destroyed; it is
changed for the better. He whom we love
is not hidden in the ground; he is received
into heaven. Let us wait a little while, and
we shall be once more with him. The time
of our separation is not long, for in this life
we are all like travellers on a journey,
hastening on to the same shelter. While
one has reached his rest another arrives,
another hurries on, but one and the same
end awaits them all. He has outstripped
us on the way. but we shall all travel the
same road, and the same hostelry awaits
us all. God only grant that we through
goodness may be likened to his purity, to
the end that for the sake of our guileless-
ness of life we may attain the rest which
is granted to them that are children in
Christ.


LETTER “Vi
To the wife of Nectarius.


1. [HESITATED to address your excellency,
from the idea that, just as to.the eye when
inflamed even the mildest of remedies
causes pain, so toa soul distressed by heavy
sorrow, words offered in the moment of
agony, even though they do bring much
comfort, seem to be somewhat out of place.
But I bethought me that I should be speak-
ing to a Christian woman, who has long
ago learned godly lessons, and is not inex-
perienced in the vicissitudes of human life,
and I judged it right not to neglect the
duty laid upon me. I know what a
mother’s heart 1597 and when I remember
how good and gentle you are to all, I can
reckon the probable extent of your misery
at this present time. You have lost a son
whom, while he wasalive, all mothers called
happy, with prayers that their own might
be like him, and on his death bewailed, as
though each had hidden her own in the
grave. His death is a blow to two provinces,
both to mine and to Cilicia. With hira has
fallen a great and illustrious race, dashed
to the ground as by the withdrawal of a
prop. Alas for the mighty mischief that
the contact with an evil demon was able
to wreak! Earth, what a calamity thou hast
been compelled to sustain! If the sun had
any feeling one would think he might have


1 To be placed with Letter V.

2z.e.from his knowledge of what Emmelia had been to
him. Yet to the celibate the wife of Nectarius might have an-
ticipated the well known retort of Constance to Pandulph in
King σοί.


LETTERS.


115


shuddered at so sad a sight. Who could
utter all that the spirit in its helplessness
would have said?

2. But our lives are not without a Prov-
idence. So we have learnt in the Gos-
pel, for not a sparrow falls to the ground
without the will of our Father.’ Whatever
has come to pass has come to pass by the
will of our Creator. And who can resist
God’s will? Let us accept what has_be-
fallen us; for if we take it ill we do not
mend the past and we work our own
ruin. Do not let us arraign the righteous
judgment of God. We are all too un-
taught to assail His ineffable sentences. The
Lord is now making trial of your love
for Him. Now there is an opportunity for
you, through your patience, to take the
martyr’s lot. The mother of the Macca-
bees” saw the death of seven sons without
a sigh, without even shedding one unwoysthy
tear. She gave thanks to God for seeing
them freed from the fetters of the flesh by
fire and steel and cruel blows, and she
won praise from God, and fame among
men. The loss is great, as I cansay myself;
but great too are the rewards laid up by
the Lord for the patient. When first you
were made a mother, and saw your boy,
and thanked God, you knew all the while
that, a mortal yourself, you had given birth
to a mortal. What is there astonishing in
the death of a mortal? But we are grieved
at his dying before his time. Are we sure
that this was not his time? We do not
know how to pick and choose what is
good for our souls, or how to fix the limits
of the life of man. Look round at all the
world in which you live; remember that
everything you see is mortal, and all subject
to corruption. Look up to heaven; even it
shall be dissolved; look at the sun, not even
the sun will last for ever. All the stars to-
gether, all living things of land and sea,
all that is fair on earth, aye, earth itself,
all are subject to decay; yet a little while
and all shall be no more. Let these con-
siderations be some comfort to you in
your trouble. Do not measure your loss
by itself; if you do it will seem intolerable ;
but if you take all human affairs into ac-
count you will find that some comfort is to
be derived from them. Above all, one
thing I would strongly urge; spare your
husband. Be a comfort to others. Do not
make his trouble harder to bear by wearing
yourself away with sorrow. Mere words I
know cannot give comfort. Just now what
is wanted is prayer; and I do pray the


22 Mac. vii.


1 Matt. x. 29.


Lord Himself to touch your heart by His
unspeakable power, and through good
thoughts to cause light to shine upon your
soul, that you may havea source of consola-
tion in yourself.


LETTER VII.
To Gregory my friend?


WuHEN I wrote to you, I was perfectly well
aware that no theological term is adequate
to the thought of the speaker, or the want of
the questioner, because language is of natural
necessity too weak to act in the service of
objects of thought. If then our thought is
weak, and our tongue weaker than our
thought, what was to be expected of me
in what I said but that I should be charged
with poverty of expression? Still, it was .
not possible to let your question pass un-
noticed. It looks like a betrayal, if we do
not readily give an answer about God to
them that love the Lord. What has been
said, however, whether it seems satisfactory,
or requires some further and more caretul
addition, needs a fit season for correction.
For the present I implore you, as I have
implored you before, to devote yourself en-
tirely to the advocacy of the truth, and to the
intellectual energies God gives you for the
establishment of what is good. With this
be content, and ask nothing more from me.
Iam really much less capable than is sup-
posed, and am more likely to do harm to the
word by my weakness than to add strength
to the truth by my advocacy.


LETTER VIII.’


To the Cesareans.


A defence of his withdrawal, and concerning
the faith.


1. I HAVE often been astonished at your
feeling towards me as you do, and how it
comes about that an individual so small and
insignificant, and having, may be, very little
that is lovable about him, should have so
won your allegiance. Youremind me of the
claims of friendship and of fatherland,* and


1 Written from the retirement in Pontus.

27.e. Gregory of Nazianzus.

3 This important letter was written A.D. 360, when Basil,
shocked at the discovery that Dianius, the bishop who had
baptized him, had subscribed the Arian creed of Ariminum,
as revised at Nike (Theod., Ast. Ecc. 11. xvi.), left Caesarea,
and withdrew to his friend Gregory at Nazianzus, The Bene. '
dictine note considers the traditional title an error, and con-
cludes the letter to have been really addressed to the monks
of the Caenobium over which Basil had presided But it may
have been written to monks in or near Caesarea, so that title
and sense will agree.

4 πατρίς seems to be used of the city or neighbourhood of
Cesarea, and so far to be in favour of Basil’s birth there.


116


BASIL.


ἜΝ a am aE δι δι ai aS owas id ae Caan Bare aga τι δῖε πὶ τες Gn gh go a ir id


press me urgently in your attempt to make
me come back to you, as though I were a
runaway from a father’s heart and hoine.
That I am a runaway I confess. I should be
sorry to deny it; since you are already re-
gretting me, you shall be told the cause.
| was astounded like a man stunned by some
sudden noise. I did not crush my thoughts,
but dwelt upon them as I fled, and now Ι
have been absent from you a considerable
time. Then I began to yearn for the divine
doctrines, and the philosophy that is con-
cerned with them. How, said I, could I
overcome the mischief dwelling with us?
Who is to be my Laban, setting me free from
Esau, and leading me to the supreme phi-
losophy? By God’s help, I have, so far as
in me lies, attained my object; I have found
a chosen vessel, a deep well; I mean Greg-
ory, Christ’s mouth. Give me, therefore, I
beg you, a little time. I am not embrac-
ing a city life.” I am quite well aware how
the evil one by such means devises deceit
for mankind, but I do hold the society of the
saints most useful. For in the more con-
stant change of ideas about the divine dog-
mas I am acquiring a lasting habit of con-
templation. Such is my present situation.

2. Friends godly and well beloved, do, I
implore you, beware of the shepherds of the
Philistines; let them not choke your wills
unawares; let them not befoul the purity of
your knowledge of the faith. This is ever
their object, not to teach simple souls lessons
drawn from Holy Scripture, but to mar the
harmony of the truth by heathen philosophy.
Is not he an open Philistine who is introduc-
ing the terms “ὁ wzbegotten” and ‘‘ begotten”
into our faith, and asserts that there was
once a time when the Everlasting was not; "
that He who is by nature and eternally a
Father became a Father; that the Holy
Ghost is not eternal? He bewitches our
Patriarch’s sheep that they may not drink
‘Cof the well of water springing up into
everlasting life,” * but may rather bring upon
themselves the words of the prophet, ‘* They
have forsaken me, the fountain of living
waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken
cisterns, that can hold no water;” * when all
the while they ought to confess that the
Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy
Ghost God,° as they have been taught by the
divine words, and by those who have under-
stood them in their highest sense. Against


1 7,6. the life of the city, presumably Nazianzus, from which
he is writing.

2cf.the Arian formula ἣν ποτὲ ὅτε οὐκ ἦν.

3 John iv. 14. 4 Jer. ii. 13.

5 cf. p. 16, note. This is one of the few instances of St.
Basil’s use of the word θεός of the Holy Ghost,


those who cast it in our teeth that we are
Tritheists, let it be answered that we con-
fess one God not in number but in nature.
For everything which is called one in num- .
ber is not one absolutely, nor yet simple
in nature; but God is universally confessed
to be simple and not composite. God there-
fore is not one in number. What I mean is
this. We say that the world is one in number,
but not one by nature nor yet simple; for we
divide it into its constituent elements, fire,
water, air, and earth." Again, man is called
one in number. We frequently speak of
one man, but man who is composed of body
and soul is not simple. Similarly we say
one angel in number, but not one by nature
nor yet simple, for we conceive of the hy-
postasis of the angel as essence with sancti-
fication. If therefore everything which 15
one in number is not one in nature, and that
whieh is one and simple in nature is not one
in number ; and if we call God one in nature
how can number be charged against us,
when we utterly exclude it from that blessed
and spiritual nature? Number relates to
quantity; and quantity is conjoined with
bodily nature, for number is of bodily nature.
We believe our Lord to be Creator of bodies.
Wherefore every number indicates those
things which have received a material and
circumscribed nature. Monad and Unity
on the other hand signify the nature which
is simple and incomprehensible. Whoever
therefore confesses either the Son of God
or the Holy Ghost to be number or crea-
ture introduces unawares a material and cir-
cumscribed nature. And by circumscribed
I mean not only locally limited, but a nature
which is comprehended in foreknowledge
by Him who is about to educe it from the
non-existent into the existent and which can
be comprehended by science. Every holy
thing then of which the nature is circum-
scribed and of which the holiness is acquired
is not insusceptible of evil. But the Son
and the Holy Ghost are the source of sanc-
tification by which every reasonable creature
is hallowed in proportion to its virtue.

We in accordance with the true doctrine
speak of the Son as neither like,’ nor unlike ὃ
the Father. Each of these terms is equally


1 For the four elernents of ancient philosophy modern
chemistry now catalogues at least sixty-seven. Of these, earth
generally contains eight; air is a mixture of two; water is a
compound of two; and fire is the visible evidence of a combi-
nation between elements which produces light and heat. On
the ‘‘elements” of the Greek philosophers vide Arist., Met.
i.3. Thales (tc. §50 B.C.) said water ; Anaximenes (fc. B.C.
480) air ; and Heraclitus (fc. B.C. 500) fire. To these Emped-
ocles (who * ardentem frigidus Etnam insiluit, c. B.C. 440)
added a fourth, earth.

2 Asserted at Seleucia and Ariminum.

8 ε΄. D. Sp. S.§ 4 on Aetius’ responsibility for the Ano-
moean formula.


EETLERS,


117


impossible, for like and unlike are predicated
in relation to quality, and the divine is free
from quality. We, on the contrary, confess
identity of nature and accepting the consub-
stantiality, and rejecting the composition of
the Father, God in substance, Who begat
the Son, God in substance. From this the
consubstantiality’ is proved. For God in
essence or substance is co-essential or con-
substantial with God in essence or substance.
But when even man is called ‘* god” as in
the words, ‘‘ I have said ye are gods,” ? and
‘*demon” as in the words, ‘* The gods of
the nations are demons,” ὅ in the former case
the name is given by favour, in the latter un-
truly. God alone is substantially and essen-
tially God. When I say ““" alone” I set forth
the holy and uncreated essence and substance
of God. For the word ‘ alone” is used in
the case of any individual and generally of
human nature. In the case of an individual,
as for instance of Paul, that he alone was
caught into the third heaven and ** heard un-
speakable words which it is not lawful for a
man to utter,’* and of human nature, as
when David says, ‘¢as for man his days are
as grass,” ® not meaning any particular man,
but human nature generally; for every man
is short-lived and mortal. So we understand
these words to be said of the nature, ‘* who
alone hath immortality ” ° and ** to God only
wise,” 7 and * none is good save one, that 1s
God,” ® for here ‘‘one’”’ means the same as
alone. So also, ‘* which alone spreadest out
the heavens,” ® and again ** Thou shalt wor-
ship the Lord thy God and Him only shalt
thou serve.”'® ¢** There is no God beside
mis.” * Τὴ Scripture** one*’and ** only” are
not predicated of God to mark distinction
from the Son and the Holy Ghost, but to
except the unreal gods falsely so called.
As for instance, ** The Lord alone did lead
them and there was no strange god with
them,” 15. and ὁ then the children of Israel did
put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and did
serve the Lord only.” '® And so St. Paul,
‘¢For as there be gods many and _ lords
many, but to us there is but one god, the
Father, of whom are all things; and one
Lord Jesus Christ by Whom are all things.” ™
Here we enquire why when he had said ‘* one
God” he was not content, for we have said
that “Sone” and ‘only ” when applied to
God, indicate nature. Why did he add the


7 Rom. xvi. 27.
25S; ἸΧΧΧΙΙ. 6. 5Ps. cii. 15. 8 Luke xviii. 19,
Pee. χουν, AX. 6.1 Tim. vi. 16. 9705. ix. 8.

10 Deut. vi. 13, LXX., where the text runs κύριον τὸν θεόν σου
φοβηθήσῃ. St. Basil may quote the version in Matt. iv. 10 and
Luke iv. 8, προσκυνήσεις. The Hebrew = fear.

Deut. xxx. 39, L XX. 13 Sam. vii. 4.

22 Deut. xxxii. 12, LXX. 14 1 Cor. viii. 5, 6.


1-5 ὁμοούσιον. 42 Cor. xii. 4.


time.


word Father and make mention of Christ?
Paul, a chosen vessel, did not, I imagine,
think it sufficient only to preach that the Son
is God and the Holy Ghost God, which he
had expressed by the phrase * one God,”
without, by the further addition of ‘the
Father,” expressing Him of Whom are all
things ; and, by mentioning the Lord, signify-
ing the Word by Whom are all things; and
yet further, by adding the words Jesus Christ,
announcing the incarnation, setting forth the
passion and publishing the resurrection. For
the word Jesus Christ suggests all these ideas
to us. For this reason too before His pas-
sion our Lord deprecates the designation of
‘¢ Jesus Christ,” and charges His disciples
to ‘tell no man that He was Jesus, the
Christ.’"' For His purpose was, after the
completion of the economy,” after His resur-
rection from the dead, and His assumption
into heaven, to commit to them the preaching
of Him as Jesus, the Christ. Such is the
force of the words “" That they may know
Thee the only true God and Jesus Christ
whom thou hast sent,” * and again ** Ye
believe in God, believe also in me.” * Every-
where the Holy Ghost secures our concep-
tion of Him to save us from falling in one
direction while we advance in the other,
heeding the theology but neglecting the
ceconomy,’ and so by omission falling into
impiety.

4. Now lct us examine, and to the best of
our ability explain, the meaning of the words
of Holy Scripture, which our opponents seize
and wrest to their own sense, and urge against
us for the destruction of the glory of the
Only-begotten. First of all take the words
‘¢T live because of the Father,” © for this is
one of the shafts hurled heavenward by those
who impiously use it. These words I do not
understand to refer to the eternal life ; for what-
ever lives because of something else cannot be
self-existent, just as that which is warmed by
another cannot be warmth itself; but He Who
is our Christ and God says, ‘* I am the life.” 7
I understand the life lived because of the
Father to be this life in the flesh, and in this
Of His own will He came to live the


life of men. He did not say ‘‘I have lived


1Matt. xvi. 19.

27,6. οἵ His work on earth as God manifest in the flesh,
Vide note, p. 7.

3 John xvii. 3. 4John xiv. 1. 5 cf. note, p. 7.

6 John vi. 57, R.V. The Greek is ἐγὼ ζώ διὰ τὸν πατέρα, ζ.6.
not through or by the Father, but “ becaase of” or ‘fon ac-
count of” the Father. ‘The preposition (Vulg. propter
Patrem) describes the ground or object, not the instrument or
agent (by, through, διὰ τοῦ 7.). Complete devotion to the
Father is the essence of the life of the Son; and so complete
devotion to the Son is the life of the believer. It seems better
to give this full sense to the word than to take it as equivalent
to ‘ by reason of ;’ that is, ‘I live because the Father lives.’”
Westcott, St. Fohkn ad loc.

7 John xi, 25.


118


BASIL.


because of the Father,” but ‘‘ I live because
of the Father,” clearly indicating the present
time, and the Christ, having the word of God
in Himself, is able to call the life which He
leads, life, and that this is His meaning we
shall learn from what follows. ὁ He that
eateth me,” He says, ‘the also shall live
because of me;”' for we eat His flesh, and
drink His blood, being made through His
incarnation and His visible life partakers of
His Word and of His Wisdom. For all His
mystic sojourn among us He called flesh and
blood, and set forth the teaching consisting
of practical science, of physics, and of theo-
logy, whereby our soul is nourished and is
meanwhile trained for the contemplation of
actual realities. This is perhaps the intended
meaning of what He says.’

. And again, ‘** My Father is greater than
I.”° This passage is also employed by the
ungrateful creatures, the brood of the evil
one. I believe that even from this passage
the consubstantiality of the Son with the
Father is set forth. For I know that compari-
sons may properly be made between things
which are of the same nature. We speak of
angel as greater than angel, of man as juster
than man, of bird as fleeter than bird. If
then comparisons are made between things
of the same species, and the Father by com-
parison is said to be greater than the Son,
then the Son is of the same substance as the
Father. But there is another sense under-
lying the expression. In what is it extraor-
dinary that He who ‘is the Word and
was made flesh” * confesses His Father
to be greater than Himself, when He was
seen in glory inferior to the angels, and
in form to men? For ‘* Thou hast made
him a little lower than the angels,”’® and
again ** Who was made a little lower than
the angels,” ° and “ὁ we saw Him and He
had neither form nor comeliness, his form
was deficient beyond all men.” 7 All this He
endured on account of His abundant loving
kindness towards His work, that He might
save the lost sheep and bring it home when
He had saved it, and bring back safe and
sound to his own land the man who went
down from Jerusalem to Jericho and so fell
among thieves.” Will the heretic cast in His
teeth the manger out of which he in his un-


1 John vi. 57, Ἐν

2 With this striking exposition of Basil’s view of the spirit-
ual meaning of eating the flesh and drinking the blood, cf.
the passage from Athanasius quoted by Bp. Harold Browne
in his Exposition of the XXXIX. Articles, p.693. It is not
easy for Roman commentators to cite passages even apparently
in support of the less spiritual view of the manducation, e.g.
Fessler, /ust. Pat. i. 530, and the quotations under the word
‘“* Eucharistia,” in the Jndex of Basil ed. Migne.
Gregory of Nyssa, in chap. xxxvii. of the Greater Catechism,

3 John xiv. 28. BPs. villsi§. isa, 1111. 2.3 ΤΟΥΣ.

4 Johni. 14. 6 Heb. ii. 9. § cf, Luke x. 30.


Contrast | actions brought, etc. cf. Plat., Legg.o54, D.
| appointed ”’ of the Father in Gal. iv. 2.


reasonableness was fed by the Word of
reason? Will he, because the carpenter’s
son had no bed to lie on, complain of His
being poor? This is why the Son is less than
the Father; for your sakes He was made
dead to free you from death and make you
sharer in heavenly life. It is just as though
any one were to find fault with the physician
for stooping to sickness, and breathing its
foul breath, that he may heal the sick.

6. It is on thy account that He knows
not the hour and the day of judgment. Yet
nothing is beyond the ken of the real Wis-
dom, for.‘ all things were made by Him;”?
and even among men no one is ignorant of
what he has made. But this is His dispen-
sation ἢ because of thine own infirmity, that
sinners be not plunged into despair by the
narrow limits of the appointed period,’ no
opportunity for repentance being left them ;
and that, on the other hand, those who are
waging a long war with the forces of the
enemy may not desert their post on account
of the protracted time. For both of sthese
classes He arranges* by means of His as-
sumed ignorance; for the former cutting the
time short for their glorious strugegle’s sake ;
for the latter providing an opportunity for
repentance because of their sins. In the gos-
pels He numbered Himself among the igno-
rant, on account, as I have said, of the infirm-
ity of the greater part of mankind. In the
Acts of the Apostles, speaking, as it were, to
the perfect apart, He says, ‘It is not for you
to know the times or the seasons which the
Father hath put in His own power.” ὃ Here
He implicitly excepts Himself. So much
for a rough statement by way of preliminary
attack. Now let us enquire into the meaning
of the text from a higher point of view. Let
me knock at the door of knowledge, if haply
I may wake the Master of the house, Who
gives the spiritual bread to them who ask
Him, since they whom we are eager to
entertain are friends and brothers.

4”. Our Saviour’s holy disciples, after
getting beyond the limits of human thought,
and then being purified by the word,° are
enquiring about the end, and longing to
know the ultimate blessedness which our
Lord declared to be unknown to His angels
and to Himself. He calls all the exact com-
prehension of the purposes of God, a day ;
and the contemplation of the One-ness and
Unity, knowledge of which He attributes to


1 John i. 3. 2 τοῦτο οἰκονομεῖ.

8. τῷ στένω τῆς προϑεσμίας. ἡ προϑεσμία SC. ἡμέρα Was in Attic
Law « day fixed beforehand before which money must be paid,
It is the “time


4 οἰκονομεῖ. ® Acts i. 7.
δ cf. ohn xv. 3, * Now ye are clean through the word.”


LETTIERS.


119


the Father alone, an hour. I apprehend,
therefore, that God is said to know of Him-
self what is; and not to know what is not;
God, Who is, of His own nature, very right-
eousness and wisdom, is said to know right-
eousness and wisdom ; but to be ignorant of
unrighteousness and wickedness; for God
who created us is not unrighteousness and
wickedness. If, then, God is said to know
about Himself that which is, and not to know
that which is not; and if our Lord, according
to the purpose of the Incarnation and the
denser doctrine, is not the ultimate object of
desire; then our Saviour does not know the
end and the ultimate blessedness. But He
says the angels do not know;" that is to say,
not even the contemplation which is in them,
nor the methods of their ministries are the
ultimate object of desire. For even their
knowledge, when compared with the know-
ledge which is face to face, is dense.” Only
the Father, He says, knows, since He is
Himself the end and the ultimate blessed-
ness, for when we no longer know God in
mirrors and not immediately,® but approach
Him as one and alone, then we shall know
even the ultimate end. For all material
knowledge is said to be the kingdom of
Christ ; while immaterial knowledge, and so
to say the knowledge of actual Godhead, is
that of God the Father. But our Lord is
also Himself the end and the ultimate blessed-
ness according to the purpose of the Word;
for what does He sayin the Gospel? “1 will
raise him up at the last day.” * He calls the
transition from material knowledge to imma-
terial contemplation a resurrection, speaking
of that knowledge after which there is no
other, as the last day: for our intelligence is
raised up and roused to a height of blessed-
ness at the time when it contemplates the
One-ness and Unity of the Word. But since
our intelligence is made dense and bound to
earth, it is both commingled with clay and
incapable of gazing intently in pure con-
templation, being led through adornments ἢ


1 Mark xiii. 32.

2 The Ben. note is Tota hec explicand? ratio non sua sponte

deducta, sed vi pertracta multis videbitur. Sed illud ad
excusandum difficilius,quod ait Basilius angelorum scientiam
crassam esse, st comparetur cum ea que est facie ad factem.
Videtur subtilis explicatto, quam hic sequitur, necessitatem et
imposutsse tta de angelis sentiendt. Nam cum diem et horam
idem esse statueret, ac extremam beatitudinem,; tllud Scriptura,
sed neque angeli sciunt, cogebat illis visionem illam, que fit
faciead faciem, denegare; quia tdem de illis non poterat dict
ac de Filio, eos de se ipsis scire td quod sunt, nescire quod non
sunt. Quod si hance hausit opinionem ex origenis fontibus,
gui pluribus locis eam insinuat, certe cito deposutt. Art enim
tom 1. p. 320. Angelos indivinum factem continenter intentos
oculos habere. Idem docet in Com, Is. p.515,n. 185, ef De Sp.
S.cap. XVI.

8 διὰ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων. cf. 1 Cor. xiii. 12, where St. Paul’s
word is ἔσοπτρον. St. Basil’s κάτοπτρον may rather be sug-
gested by:2 Cor. iii. 18, where the original is κατοπτριζόμενοι.

4 John vi. 40.

δ κόσμων. The Ben. note quotes Combefis as saying, “* Dura


cognate to its own body. It considers the
operations of the Creator, and judges of them
meanwhile by their effects, to the end
that growing little by little it may one day
wax strong enough to approach even the
actual unveiled Godhead. This is the mean-
ing, I think, of the words “τὴν Father is
greater than 1,᾿ and also of the statement,
‘¢It is not mine to give save to those for
whom it is prepared by my Father.”*? This
too is what is meant by Christ’s ‘ delivering
up the kingdom to God even the Father ;” *
inasmuch as according to the denser doctrine
which, as I said, is regarded relatively to us
and not to the Son Himself, He is not the
end but the first fruits. It is in accordance
with this view that when His disciples asked
Him again in the Acts of the Apostles,
‘¢When wilt thou restore the kingdom of
Israel?” He replied, 9.10 is not for you to
know the times or the seasons which the
Father hath put in His own power.”* That
is to say, the knowledge of such a kingdom is
not for them that are bound in flesh and
blood. This contemplation the Father hath
put away in His own power, meaning by
‘¢ power ” those that are empowered, and by
‘¢ His own” those who are not held down by
the ignorance of things below. Do not, I beg
you, have in mind times and seasons of sense
but certain distinctions of knowledge made by
the sun apprehended by mental perception.
For our Lord’s prayer must be carried out. It
is Jesus Who prayed ‘* Grant that they may
be one in usas I and Thou are one, Father.” ὃ
For when God, Who is one, is in each, He
makes all one; and number is lost in the in-
dwelling of Unity.

This is my second attempt to attack the
text. If any one has a better interpretation
to give, and can consistently with true re-
ligion amend what I say, let him speak and
let him amend, and the Lord will reward
him for me. There is no jealousy in my
heart. I have not approached this investiga-
tion of these passages for strife and vain
glory. 1 have done so to help my brothers,
lest the earthen vessels which hold the treas-
ure of God should seem to be deceived by
stony-hearted and uncircumcised men, whose
weapons are the wisdom of folly.°


mihthic vox: sit pro στοιχείων, per cognata corpori elementa,”
and then goes on, “sed hacin re minus vidit vir eruditus ;
non enim idem sonat tila vox ac mundi, quast plures ejusmodi
mundos admittat Basilius; sed idem ac ornatus, sive ut att
Basilius in Epist. vi. τὰ περὶ γὴν κάλλη, pulchritudines que
sunt circa terram. In Com.in fs.n.58, p.422. Ecclesta dict-
tur πρέπουσιν ἑαυτῆ κοσμίοις κεκοσμημένη, convententibus οὐδὲ
ornamentis instructa eadem voce utitur Gregorius Nazianz.
Ep. cvii.

1 John xiv. 28.

2 Matt. xx. 23. cf.n. Theodoret, p. 28.

δ John xvii. 21 and 22, slightly varied.

6 Basil also refers to this passage in the treatise, C. Euno-


31 Cor. xv. 24.
4 Acts i. 6, 7.


120


ὃ, Αραΐη, ἃ5 is said through Solomon the
Wise in the Proverbs, ** He was created ;”
and He is named * Beginning of ways”! of
good news, which lead us to the kingdom of
heaven. He is not in essence and substance
a creature, but is made a ‘* way” according
to the wconomy. Being made and _ being
created signify the same thing. As He was
made a way, so was He made a door, a shep-
herd, an angel,a sheep, and again a High
Priest and an Apostle,’ the names being used
in other senses. What again would the here-
tics say about God unsubjected, and about
His being made sin forus?* For it 1s written
ες But when all things shall be subdued unto
Him, then shall the Son also Himself be
subject unto Him that put‘all things under
Him.”* Are you not afraid, sir, of God
called unsubjected? For He makes thy sub-
jection His own; and because of thy strug-
gling against goodness He calls Himself
unsubjected. In this sense too He once
spoke of Himself as persecuted — ‘‘ Saul,
Saul,” He says, *‘ why persecutest thou
me?” δ᾽ on theoccasion when Saul was hurry-
ing to Damascus with a desire to imprison
the disciples. Again He calls Himself naked,
when any one of his brethren is naked.


mtum i, 20: ‘* Since the Son’s origin (ἀρχή) is from (ἀπό) the
Father, in this respect the Father is greater, as cause and
Origin (ws αἴτιος Kat ἀρχή). Whence also the Lord said thus
my Father ts greater than TI, clearly inasmuch as He is Father
(cada πατήρ). Yea; what else does the word Father signify
unless the being cause and origin of that which is begotten by
Him?” And in iii. 1: ‘The Son is second in order (τάξει) to
the Father, because He is from Ifim (ἀπό) and in dignity
(ἀξιώματι) because the Father is the origin and cause of His
being.” Quoted by Bp. Westcott in his S¢#. ¥ohkn in the adai-
tional notes on xiv. 16, 28, pp. 211 segg., where also will be
found quotations from other Fathers on this passage.

, i The text of Prov. viii. 22 in the LXX. is κύριος ἔκτισέ με
ἄρχην ὁδῶν αὐτοῦ εἰς ἐγγα αὐτοῦ. The rendering of A.V. is
** possessed me in the bezinning of His way;” of R.V., “ pos-
sessed,” with “ formed ” in the margin.

The Hebrew verb occurs some eighty times in the Old Testa-
ment, and in only four other passages is translated by possess,
viz., Gen. Xiv. 19, 22, Ps. cxxxix. 13, Jer. xxxii. 15, and Zec.
xi. 5. In the two former, though the LXX. renders the word in
the Psalms ἐκτήσω, it would have borne the sense of “" create.”
In the passage under discussion the ‘Syriac agrees with the
LXX., and among critics adopting the same view Bishop
Wordsworth cites Ewald, Hitziz, and Gesenius. The ordi-
nary meaning of the Hebrew is “ get” or “acquire,” and hence
it 1s easy to see how the idea of getting or possessing passed
in relation to the Creator into that of creation. The Greek
translators were not unanimous. and Aquila wrote ἐκτήσατο.
The passage inevitably became the Jezreel or Low Countries
of the Arian war, and many a battle was fought on it. The
depreciators of the Son found in it Scriptural authority for
calling Him akr/sua,eg. Arius in the Thalia, as quoted by
Athanasius in Or.c. Ar. 1. iii. §9, and such writings of his
followers as the Letter of Eusebius of Nicomedia to Pau-
linus of Tvre cited in Theod., Ecc. Hist. I. v.,and Eunomius
as quoted by Greg. Nyss.,c. Eunom. 11. 10; but as Dr. Liddon
observes in his Bampton Lect. p. 60, ed. 1868), * They did not
doubt that this created Wisdom was a real being or person.”’

ἔςτισε was accepted by the Catholic writers, but explained
to refer to the manhond only, cf. Eustathius of Antioch,

uoted in Theod., Dial. I. The view of Athanasius will be
ound in his dissertation on the subject in the Second Dis-
course against the Aritaus, pn. 357-385 of Schafft & Wace’s
edition. cf. Bull, Def. Fid. Nic. If. vi.8.

3 Hfeb. iii. 1. acf.2 Cor. νυ: 21.

*1 Cor. xv. 28. #.e. Because the Son then shall be subjected,
He is previously ἀνυπότακτος, not as bein “ disobedient” (1
τι, τυ), Ὁ Ὁ unruly”? (Tit. 1. 6. 10), but as being made man,
and humanity, though subject unto Him, is not yet seen to be
*‘ put under Him ” (Heb. ii. 8). 5 Acts ix. 4,


BASIL.


—-


“41 was naked,” He says, ‘and ye clothed
me;”' and so when another is in prison
He speaks of Himself as imprisoned, for
He Himself took away our sins and bare
our sicknesses.”, Now one of our infirmi-
ties is not being subject, and He bare
this. So all the things which happen to
us to our hurt He makes His own, taking
upon Him our sufferings in His fellowship
with us.

9. But another passage is also seized by
those who are fighting against God to the
perversion of their hearers: I mean the words
‘¢The Son can do nothing of Himself.” ?
To me this saying too seems distinctly de-.
claratory of the Son’s being of the same
nature as the Father. For if every rational
creature is able todo anything of himself, and
the inclination which each has to the worse
and to the better is in his own power, but
the Son can do nothing of Himself, then the
Son is not a creature. And if He is nota
creature, then He is of one essence and sub-
stance with the Father. Again; no creature
can do what he likes. But the Son does
what He wills in heaven and in earth.
Therefore the Son is not acreature. Again;
all creatures are either constituted of con-
traries or receptive of contraries. But the
Son is very righteousness, and immaterial.
Therefore the Son is not a creature, and if
He is nota creature, He is of one essence
and substance with the Father.

10. This examination of the passages
before us is, so far as my ability goes, suf-
ficient. Now let us turn the discussion on
those who attack the Holy Spirit, and cast
down every high thing of their intellect that
exalts itself against the knowledge of God.‘
You say that the Holy Ghost is a creature.
And every creature is a servant of the
Creator, for ‘all are thy servants.” * If then
He is a servant, His holiness is acquired ;
and everything of which the holiness is ac-
quired is receptive of evil; but the Holy
Ghost being holy in essence is called “ὁ fount
of holiness.” ® Therefore the Holy Ghost is
nota creature. If He isnotacreature. He is
of one essence and substance with the Father.
How, tell me, can you give the name of
servant to Him Who through your baptism
frees you from your servitude? ‘* The law,”
it is said, ** of the Spirit of life hath made me
free from the law of βίη." 7 But you will
never venture to call His nature even vari-
able, so long as you have regard to the
nature of the opposing power. of the enemy,


2 21C Or. X15.
BPS) Xx. Ole
7 Rom. viii. 2.


1Matt xxv. 36.
2 cf. Isa. liii. 4 and Matt. viii. 17.
8 John v. 19. 6 Rom. i. 4.


LETTERS,


121


which, like lightning, is fallen from heaven,
and fell out of the true life because its holi-
ness was acquired, and its evil counsels
were followed by its change. So when it had
fallen away from the Unity and had cast
from it its angelic dignity, it was named after
its character ‘‘ Devil,” ὁ its former and blessed
condition being extinct and this hostile power
being kindled.

Furthermore if he calls the Holy Ghost a
creature he describes: His nature as limited.
How then can the two following passages
stand? ‘¢ The Spirit of the Lord filleth the
world ;” ? and * Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit?” ? But he does not, it would seem,
confess Him to be simple in nature; for he
describes Him as one innumber. And, as
I have already said, everything that is one in
number is not simple. And if the Holy
Spirit is not simple, He consists of essence
and sanctification, and is therefore com-
posite. But who is mad enough to describe
the Holy Spirit as composite, and not simple,
and consubstantial with the Father and the
Son?

11. If we ought to advance our argument
yet further, and turn our inspection to higher
themes, let us contemplate the divine nature
of the Holy Spirit specially from the follow-
ing point: of view. In Scripture we find
mention of three creations. ‘The first is the
evolution from non-being into being.* The
second is change from the worse to the better.
The third is the resurrection of the dead.
In these you will find the Holy Ghost co-
operating with the Father and the Son.
There is a bringing into existence of the
heavens ; and what says David? ‘* By the word
of the Lord were the heavens made and all
the host of them by the breath of His
mouth.” ° Again, man is created through
baptism, for ““ 1 any man be in Christ he is
a new creature.” ® And why does the Sa-
viour say to the disciples, ‘* Go ye therefore
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost”? Here too you see the
Holy Ghost present with the Father and the
Son. And what would you say also as to the


1[In Letter cciv. The name of Διάβολος is more im-
mediately connected with Διαβάλλειν, to calumniate. It is
curious that the occasional spelling (¢.¢.in Burton) Divell,
which is nearer to the original, and keeps up the association
with Diable, Diavolo, etc., should have given place to the less
correct and misleading “ Devil.”

2 Wisdom i. 7. 3 Ps. CXXXixX. 7.

4 παραγωγὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος εἰς TO εἶναι. For παραγωγὴ it is
not easy to vive an equivalent; it is leading or bringing with a
notion of change, sometimes a change into error, as when it
means a quibble. It is not quite the Ben. Latin “ producto.”
It is not used intransitively; if there is a παραγωγὴ, there must
be ὁ παράγων, and similarly if there is evolution or develop-
ment, there must be an evolver or developer.

5 Ps. xxxiii.6. τῷ πνεύματι τοῦ στόματος αὐτοῦ, LXX.

6 2 Cor. v. 17.


resurrection of the dead when we shall have
failed and returned to our dust? Dust we
are and unto dust we shall return.’ And He
will send the Holy Ghost and create us and
renew the face of the earth.? For what the
holy Paul calls resurrection David describes as
renewal. Let us hear, once more, him who
was caught into the third heaven. What
does he say? ‘* You are the temple of the
Holy Ghost which is in you.”* Now every
temple * is a temple of God, and if we are
a temple of the Holy Ghost, then the Holy
Ghost is God. It is also called Solomon’s
temple, but this is in the sense of his being
its builder. And if we are a temple of the
Holy Ghost in this sense, then the Holy
Ghost is God, for ‘**He that built all
things is God.”° If we area temple of one
who is worshipped, and who dwells in us,
let us confess Him to be God, for thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only
shalt thou serve.° Supposing them to ob-
ject to the word “" God,” let them learn what
this word means. God is called Θεὸς either
because He placed (τεθεικέναι) all things or be-
cause He beholds (Θεᾶσθαι) all things. If He
is called Θεὸς because He ‘* placed” or “θὲ:
holds” all things, and the Spirit knoweth all
the things of God, as the Spirit in us knoweth
our things, then the Holy Ghost is God.’
Again, if the sword of the spirit is the word
of God,* then the Holy Ghost is God, inas-
much as the sword belongs to Him of whom
it is also called the word. Is He named
the right hand of the Father? -Por “the
right hand of the Lord bringeth mighty
things to pass;” °
O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.
But the Holy Ghost is the finger of God, as
it is said ** if I by the finger of God cast out
devils,” *? of which the version in another
Gospel is ‘+ if I by the Spirit of God cast out
devils.” So the Holy Ghost is of the same
nature as the Father and the Son.

12. So much must suffice for the present
on the subject of the adorable and _ holy
Trinity. It is not now possible to extend
the enquiry about it further. Do ye take
seeds from a humble person like me, and cul-
tivate the ripe ear for yourselves, for, as you


2210


3 1 Cor. vi. 19.


1 cf. Gen. iii. 19. 2¢f. Ps. cili. 30.
The


4The Greek word ναός (ναίω) = dwelling-place.
Hebrew probably indicates capacity.

Our ‘*‘ temple,” from the Latin Templum (τέμενος --- ν᾿ TAM)
is derivatively a place cut off.

5 Heb. iii. 4. 6 Matt. iv. 10. cf.noteonp. .

71 Cor. ii. 10, 11. On the derivation of Θεός from @éw
(τίθημι) or θεάομαι, cf. Greg. Naz. j

Skeat rejects the theory of connexion with the Latin Deur,
and thinks that the root of τίϑημι may be the origin.

8 Eph. vi. 17.

9 Ps. cxviii. 16. P.B. “ doeth valiantly,” A.V. ἐποίησε δύνα.


μιν, ILXX. ιν
IOP Σ Vie δὴ 12 Matt. xii. 28.


11 Luke xi. 20.


and ‘*thy right hand,.


.᾿


122


BASIL.


know, in such cases we look for interest.
But I trust in God that you, because of
your pure lives, will bring forth fruit thirty,
sixty. and a hundred fold. For, it is said,
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God.' And, my brethren, entertain no
other conception of the kingdom of the
heavens than that it is the very contempla-
tion of realities. This the divine Script-
ures. call blessedness. For “6 the kingdom
of heaven is within you.” ?

The inner man consists of nothing but
contemplation. The kingdom ofthe heavens,
then, must be contemplation. Now we
behold their shadows as in a glass; here-
after, set free from this earthly body, clad
in the incorruptible and the immortal, we
shall behold their archetypes, we shall see
them, that is, if we have steered our own
life’s course aright, and if we have heeded
the right faith, for otherwise none shall see
the Lord. For, it is said, into a malicious
soul Wisdom shall not enter, nor dwell in
the body that is subject unto sin.* And let
no one urge in objection that, while I am
ignoring what is before our eyes, I am philo-
sophizing to them about bodiless and imma-
terial being. It seems to me perfectly absurd,
while the senses are allowed free action in
relation to their proper matter, to exclude
mind alone from its peculiar operation.
Precisely in the same manner in which sense
touches sensible objects, so mind apprehends
the objects of mental perception. This too
must be said that God our Creator has not
included natural facult'es among things
which can be taught. No one teaches sight
to apprehend colour or form, nor hearing to
apprehend sound and speech, nor smell,
pleasant and unpleasant scents, nor taste,
flavours and savours, nor touch; soft and hard,
hot andcold. Nor would any one teach the
mind to reach objects of mental perception ;
and just as the senses in the case of their
being in any way diseased, or injured, re-
quire only proper treatment and then readily
fulfil their own functions; just so the
mind, imprisoned in flesh, and full of the
thoughts that arise thence, requires faith
and right conversation which make ‘* its feet
like hinds’ feet, and set it on its high places.” 4


1 Matt. ν. 8.

2 Luke xvii. 21, ἐντὸς ὑμῶν. Many modern commentators
interpret ‘‘in your midst,” ‘‘among you.’? So Alford, who
quotes Xen., Anab. I. x. 3 for the Greek, Bp. Walsham How,
Bornemann, Meyer. The older view coincided with that of
Basil; so Theophylact, Chrysostom, and with them Olshausen
and Godet.

To the objection that the words were said to the Pharisees,
and that the kingdom was not in their hearts, it may be an-
swered that our Lord might use “you” of humanity, even
when addressing Pharisees. He never, like a merely human
preacher, says “we.”


8 Wisdom i. 4. Ps, xviii, 33.


The same advice is given us by Solomon the
wise, who in one passage offers us the exam-
ple of the diligent worker the ant,’ and
recommends her active life; and in another
the work of the wise bee in forming its
cells,” and thereby suggests a natural con-
templation wherein also the doctrine of the
Holy Trinity is contained, if at least the
Creator is considered in proportion to the
beauty of the things created.

But with thanks to. the Father, the Son
and the Holy Ghost let me make an end to
my letter, for, as the proverb has it, πᾶν μέτρον
ἄριστον͵ 3


LETTER IX.‘


To Maximus the Philosopher.


I. SPEECH is really an image of mind: so I
have learned to know you from your letters,
just as the proverb tells us we may know
‘¢the lion from his claws.” ἢ

I am delighted to find that your strong
inclinations lie in the direction of the first and
greatest of good things— love both to God
and to your neighbour. Of the latter I find
proof in your kindness to myself; of the
former, in your zeal for knowledge. It is
well known to every disciple of Christ that
in these two all is contained.

2. You ask for the writings of Dionysius ;°
they did indeed reach me, and a great many
they were; but I have not the books with
me, and so have not sent them. My opinion
is, however, as follows. I do not admire
everything that is written; indeed of some
things I totally disapprove. For it may be,
that of the impiety of which we are now
hearing so much, I mean the Anomeean, it is
he, as farasI know, who first gave men the
seeds. J donottrace hisso doing to any men-
tal depravity, but only to his earnest desire to
resist Sabellius. I often compare him toa
woodman trying to straighten some ill-grown
sapling, pulling so immoderately in the op-
posite direction as to exceed the mean, and
so dragging the plant awry on the other
side. This is very much what we find to
be the case with Dionysius. While vehe-


1 cf, Prov. vi. 6.

2 Ecclus, xi. 3. The ascription of this book to Solomon is
said by Rufinus to be confined to the Latin church, while the
Greeks know it as the Wisdom of Jesus son of Sirach (vers.
Orig., Hom. in Num. xvii.).

3 Attributed to Cleobulus of Lindos. Thales is credited
with the injunction μέτρῳ χρῶ. cf. my note on Theodoret, £p.
cli. p. 329.

Paes δὲ ascribed to the same period as the preceding.

5 In Lucian (Hermot. 54) the proverb is traced to a story of
Pheidias, who, “ after a look at a claw, could tell how big the
whole lion, formed in proportion, would be.”? A parallel Greek
adage was ἐκτοῦ κρασπέδου τὸ πᾶν ὕφασμα. Vide Leutsch.,
Corp. Paremiog. Grec, 1. 252.

62,6. of Alexandria.


LETTERS.


123


mently opposing the impiety of the Libyan,’
he is carried away unawares by his zeal into
the opposite error. It would have been
quite sufficient for him to have pointed out
that the Father and the Son are not identi-
cal in substance,’ and thus to score against
the blasphemer. But, in order to win an
unmistakable and superabundant victory,
he is not satisfied with laying down a differ-
ence of hypostases, but must needs assert
also difference of substance, diminution of
power, and variableness of glory. So he
exchanges one mischief for another, and
diverges from the right line of doctrine. In
his writings he exhibits a miscellaneous in-
consistency, and is at one time to be found
disloyal to the homoousion, because of his
opponent * who made a bad use of it to the
destruction of the hypostases, and at another
admitting it in his Apology to his namesake.*
Besides this he uttered very unbecoming
words about the Spirit, separating Him from
the Godhead, the object of worship, and
assigning Him an inferior rank with created
and subordinate nature. Such is the man’s
character.

3. If I must give my own view, it is this.
The phrase ‘ like in essence,” ® if it be read
with the addition ‘‘ without any difference,” ®
I accept as conveying the same sense as the
homoousion, in accordance with the sound
meaning of the homoousion. Being of this
mind the Fathers at Nicza spoke of the Only-
begotten as ‘* Light of Light,” ‘* Very God
of very God,” and so on, and then consist-
ently added the homoousion. It is impossible
for any one to entertain the idea of variable-
ness of light in relation to light, of truth in
relation to truth, nor of the essence of the
Only begotten in relation to that of the
Father. If, then, the phrase be accepted in
this sense, I have no objection to it. But
if any one cuts off the qualification ‘* without
any difference” from the word ‘ like,” as
- was done at Constantinople,’ then 1 regard


17.e. Sabellius. Basil is the first writer who asserts his
African birth. In £p. ccvii. he is ‘‘Sabellius the Libyan.”
His active life was Roman; his views popular in the Penta-
polis.

2 ov ταυτὸν τῷ ὑποκειμένῷ. Aristotle, Metaph. vi. 3, 1, Says,
μάλιστα δοκεῖ εἶναι οὐσία τὸ ὑποκείμενον τὸ πρῶτον. On the dis-
tinction between ὁμοούσιος and ταυτὸν τῷ ὑποκειμένῳ, cf. Athan.,
Exp. Fid. ii., where the Sabellians are accused of holding an
vioratwo, and Greg. Nyss. answer to Eunomius, Second Book,
p. 254 in Schaff and Wace’s ed. Vide also Prolegg.to Athan.,
p. xxxi. inthis series. Epiphanius says of Noetus, μονοτύπως
Tov αὐτὸν πατέρα καὶ Yiov Kai ἅγιον πνεῦμα. . . ἡγησάμενος
(Heres. \vii. 2) and of Sabellius, Δογματίζεε οὗτος καὶ οἱ ἀπ᾽
αὐτοῦ Σαβελλιανοὶ τὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι Πατέρα τὸν αὐτὸν Υἱὸν τὸν
αὐτὸν εἶναι ἅγιον πνεῦμα, ὡς εἶναι ἐν μιᾷ ὑποστάσει τρεῖς ὀνομα-
σίας. (Heres. \xii.1.)

3 Sabellius. δ ὅμοιον κατ᾽ οὐσίαν.

4 Dionysius of Rome. 6 ἀπαραλλάκτως.

1z.¢e. at the Acacian council of Constantinople in 360, at
which fifty bishops accepted the creed of Ariminum as revised
at Nike, proscribing οὐσία and ὑπόστασις, and pronounced the
Son to be “like the Father, as say the Holy Scriptures.” cf.
Theod. II. xvi. and Soc. II. xli. In 366 Semiarian deputies


the phrase with suspicion, as derogatory to
the dignity of the Only-begotten. We are fre-
quently accustomed to entertain the idea of
66 likeness” in the case of indistinct resem-
blances, coming anything but close to the
originals. Iam myself for the homoousion,
as being less open to improper interpretation.
But why, my dear sir, should you not pay
mea visit, that we may talk of these high
topics face to face, instead of committing
them to lifeless letters, — especially when [
have determined not to publish my views?
And pray do not adopt, to me, the words of
Diogenes to Alexander, that ‘it is as far
from you to meas from me to you.” I am
almost obliged by ill-health to remain like
the plants, in one place; moreover I hold
*¢ the living unknown’’’-to be one of the chief
goods. You, I am told, are in good health;
you have made yourself a citizen of the world,
and you might consider in coming to see me
that you are coming home. It is quite right
for you, a man of action, to have crowds and
towns in which to show your good deeds.
For me, quiet is the best aid for the contem-
plation and mental exercise whereby I cling
to God. This quiet I cultivate in abundance
in my retreat, with the aid of its giver,
God. Yet if you cannot but court the great,
and despise me who lie low upon the ground,
then write, and in this way make my life a
happier one.


LETTER X.’


To a widow.*


THE art of snaring pigeons is as follows.
When the men who devote themselves to this
craft have caught one, they tame it, and
make itfeed withthem. Then they smear its
wings with sweet oil, and let it go and join
the rest outside. Then the scent of that
sweet oil makes the free flock the possession
of the owner of the tame bird, for all the
rest are attracted by the fragrance, and settle


from the Council of Lampsacus represented to Liberius at
Rome that κατὰ πάντα ὅμοιος and ὁμοούσιος were equivalent.

1 λάϑε βιώσας is quoted by Theodoret in £P. Ixii. as a saying
of “one of the men once called wise.” Itis attributed to Epi-
curus. Horace imitates itin Ep. I, xvii. 10: ** Nec vixtt male
gut natus moriensque fefellit.” So Ovid, Tristia 111. iv. 25:
ἐς crede mihi ; bene qui latuit, bene vixit,” and Eurip., Lph. in
Aul. 17;

Ζηλῶ σὲ, γέρον,
Ζηλῶ δ᾽ ἀνδρῶν ὃς ἀκίνδυνον
Biov ἐξεπέρασ᾽ ἀγνὼς ἀκλεής.
Plutarch has an essay on the question, εἰ καλῶς ἐίρηται τὸ λάϑε
βιώσας.

2 Placed during the retreat.

8 πρὸς ἐλευϑέραν. The Benedictine note, after giving rea-
sons why the name Julitta should not be introduced into the
address, continues: ‘'zegue etiam in hac et pluribus aliis
Basilit epistolis ἐλευϑέρα nomen proprium est, sed viduam
matronam designat. Sic Gregorius Naz. tn Epist. cx\vii.,
ἐλευϑέραν Alypit, td est viduam, apellat Simpliciam quam
ipsius quondam conjugem fuisse dixerat in Epist.cxlvi.” The
usage may be traceable to Rom, vii. 3.


124


BASIL.


in the house. But why doI begin my letter
thus? Because I have taken your son Dio-
nysius, once Diomedes,’ and anointed the
wings of his soul with the sweet oil of God,
and sent him to you that you may take flight
with him, and make for the nest which he
has built under my roof. If I live to see
this, and you, my honoured friend, translated
to our lofty life, I shall require many per-
sons worthy of God to pay Him all the hon-
our that is His due.


LD Bd OS © ρα


Without address. To some friends.®


AFTER by God’s grace I had passed the
sacred day with our sons, and had kept a
really perfect feast to the Lord because of
their exceeding love to God, I sent them in
good health to your excellency, with a prayer
to our loving God to give them an angel of
peace to help and accompany them, and to
grant them to find you in good health and
assured tranquillity, to the end that wherever
your lot may be cast, I tothe end of my
days, whenever I hear news of you, may be
gladdened to think of you as serving and
giving thanks to the Lord. If God should
grant you to be quickly freed from these
cares I beg you to iet nothing stand in the
way of your coming to stay with me. I
think you will find none to love you so well,
or to make more of your friendship. So long,
then, as the Holy One ordains this separation,
be sure that you never lose an opportunity
of comforting me by a letter.


LETTER. ΧΙ
To Olympius.5


BEFORE you did write me a few words:
now not evena few. Your brevity will soon
become silence. Return to your old ways,
and do not let me have to scold you for
your laconic behaviour. But I shall be glad


1A second name was given at baptism, or assumed with
some religious motive. In the first three centuries considera-
tions of prudence would prevent an advertisement of Christian-
ity througha name of peculiar meaning, and even baptismal
names were not biblical or of pious meaning and association.
Later the early indifference of Christians as to the character
of their names ceased, and after the fourth century heathen
names were discouraged. cf. D.C.A. ii. 1368. ‘‘ Dionysius,”
though of pagan origin, is biblical; but “ martyrs often en-
countered death bearing the names of these very divinities to
whom they refuse to offer sacrifice.” So we have Apolli-
narius, Hermias, Demetrius, Origenes (sprung from Horus),
Arius, Athenodorus, Aphrodisius, and many more.

2 Of the same period as X.

3 Possibly to Olympius, the recipient of XII.
ccxi,

4 Of the same date as the preceding.

5 Olympius was an influential friend of Basil’s, and sympa-
thized with him in his later troubles, and under the attacks of
Eustathius. cf. Letters ccxi., Ixiii., lxiv.


cf. Letter


even of a little letter in token of your great
love. Only write to me.


LETTER XIII.’
Lo Olympius.


As all the fruits of the season come to us
in their proper time, flowers in spring, corn
insummer, and apples”? in autumn, so the
fruit for wimter is talk.


LETTER XIV.’
70 Gregory his friend.


My brother Gregory writes me word
that he has long been wishing to be with
me, and adds that you are of the same mind;
however, I could not wait, partly as being
hard of belief, considering I have been so
often disappointed, and partly because I find
myself pulled all ways by business. I must
at once make for Pontus, where, perhaps,
God willing, I may make an end of wander-
ing. After renouncing, with trouble, the
idle hopes which I once had, [about you]*
or rather the dreams, (for it is well said
that hopes are waking dreams), I departed
into Pontus in quest of a place to live in.
There God has opened on me a spot exactly
answering to my taste, so that I actually see
before my eyes what I have often pictured
to my mind in idle fancy. There is a lofty
mountain covered with thick woods, watered
towards the north with cool and transparent
streams. A plain lies beneath, enriched by
the waters which are ever draining off from
it; and skirted by a spontaneous profusion of
trees almost thick enough to bea fence; so
as even to surpass Calypso’s Island, which
Homer seems to have considered the most
beautiful, spot on the earth. Indeed it is
like an island, enclosed as it is on all sides;
for deep hollows cut off two sides of it; the
river, which has lately fallen down a preci-
pice, runs all along the fiont, and is impassa-
ble as a wall; while the mountain extending
itself behind, and meeting the hollows in a
crescent, stops up the path at its roots.
There is but one pass, and I am master of it.
Behind my abode there is another gorge,
rising into a ledge up above, so as to com-
mand the extent of the plains and the stream


1 Placed with the preceding.

2 μῆλον. But, like the Latin malum, this word served for
more than we mean by ‘‘apple.”? So the malum Cydonitum
was quince, the malum Persicum, peach, etc.

3 Placed after Basil’s choice of his Pontic retreat. Trans-
lated by Newman, whose version is here given (Church of the

‘fathers, 126). On the topography, cf. Letters iii., x., CCxxiii.,
and remarks in the Prolegomena.

4 Omitted by Newman.


LETTERS.


125


which bounds it, which is not less beautiful, | have received, in giving me an opportunity


to my taste, than the Strymon as secn from! of writing to your excellency.


Amphipolis." For while the latter flows
leisurely, and swells into a lake almost, and
is too still to bea river, the former is the
most rapid stream I know, and somewhat
turbid, too, from the rocks just above; from
which, shooting down, and eddying in a
deep pool, it forms a most pleasant scene
for myself or any one else; and is an inex-
haustible resource to the country people, in
the countless fish which its depths contain.
What need to tell of the exhalations from the
earth, or the breezes from the river? Another
might admire the multitude of flowers, and
singing birds; but leisure I have none for
such thoughts. However, the chief praise
of the place is, that being happily disposed
for produce of every kind, it nurtures what to
me is the sweetest produce of all, quietness ;
indeed, it is not only rid of the bustle of the
city, but is even unfrequented by travellers,
except a chance hunter. It abounds indeed
in game, as well as other things, but not, Iam
glad to say, in bears or wolves, such as you
have, but in deer, and wild goats, and hares,
and the like. Does it not strike you what a
foolish mistake I was near making when I was
eager to change this spot for your Tiberina,’
the very pit of the whole earth?

Pardon me, then, if 1 am now set upon
it; for not Alcmzon himself, I suppose,
could endure to wander further when he had
found the Echinades.?


LETTER XvV.*
To Arcadius, Imperial Treasurer.°


THE townsmen of our metropolis have
conferred on me a greater favour than they


1 The hill, of which the western half is covered by the ruins
of Amphipolis, is insulated by the Stryinon on the north-west
and south, and a valley on the east. To the north-west the
Strymon widens into a lake, compared by Dr. Arnold to that
formed by the Mincio at Mantua. cf. Thucyd. iv. 108 and v. 7.

2 Tiberina was a district in the neighbourhood of Gregory’s
home at Arianzus. cf. Greg. Naz., Ep. vi. and vii.

3 Alcmzon slew his mother; but the awful Erinnvys, the
avenger of matricide, inflicted on him a long and terrible pun-
ishment, depriving him of his reason. and chasing him about
from place to place without the possibility of repose or peace
of mind. He craved protection and cure from the god at
Delphi, who required him to dedicate at the temple, as an offer-
ing, the precious necklace of Kadmus, that irresistible bribe
which had originally corrupted Eriphyle. He further inti-
mated to the unhappy sufferer that, though the whole earth
was tainted with his crime and had become uninhabitable for
him, yet there was a spot of ground wizich was not under the
eye of the sun at the time when the matricide was committed,
and where, therefore, Alcemzon might yet find a tranquil
shelter. The promise was realised at the mouth of the river
Achelous, whose turbid stream was perpetually depositing
new earth and forming additional islands. Upon one of these
Alcmezon settled permanently and in peace.”? Grote, Hist. Gr.
i. 381. 4 Written from the Pontic retreat.

5 Comes rei private, * who managed the enormous revenues
of the fiscus and kept account of the privileges granted by the
Emperor (liber beveficiorum. Hveinus, De Const. Limit. p. 203,
ed. Lachm., and Du Cange 5.0.).᾽ D.C.B. i. 634.


The kind-
ness, to win which they have received this
letter from me, was assured them even
before I wrote, on account of your wonted
and inborn courtesy to all. But I have con-
sidered ita very great advantage to have the
opportunity of addressing your excellency,
praying to the holy God that I may continue
to rejoice, and share in the pleasure of the
recipients of your bounty, while you please
Him more and more, and while the splendour
of your high place continues to increase.
I pray that in due time I may with joy once
more welcome those who are delivering this
my letter into your hands,’ and send them
forth praising, as do many, your considerate
treatment of them, and I trust that they will
have found my recommendation of them not
without use in approaching your exalted
excellency.


LETIER XVI.


Against Eunomius the heretic.?


Her who maintains that it is possible to
arrive at the discovery of things actually
existing, has no doubt by some orderly
method advanced his intelligence by means
of the knowledge of actually existing
things. It is after first training himself
by the apprehension of small and easily
comprehensible objects, that he brings his
apprehensive faculty to bear on what is
beyond all intelligence. He makes his boast
that he has really arrived at the comprehen-
sion of actual existences; let him then
explain to us the nature of the least of
visible beings; let him tell us all about the
ant. Does its life depend on breath and
breathing? Has ita skeleton? Is its body
connected by sinews and ligaments? Are
its sinews surrounded with muscles and
glands? Does its marrow go with dorsal
vertebree from brow to tail? Does it give
impulse to its moving members by the en-
veloping nervous membrane? Has it a
liver, with a gall bladder near the liver?


1 There is confusion here in the text, and the Benedictines
think it unmanageable as it stands. But the matter is of no
importance.

2 Placed by the Ben. Ed. in the reign of Julian 361-353.

3 Eunomius the Anomean, bp. ae yates; against whose
Liber Apologeticus Basil wrote his counter-work. The first
appearance of the aipetuxds ἄνϑρωπος, the ** chooser” of his
own way rather than the common sense of the Church, is in
Tit. iii. 10. αἱρετίζειν is a common word in the LXX., but does
not occur in Is. xlii. 1, though it is introduced into the quota-
tion in Matt. xii. 18. ἄιρεσις is used six times by St. Luke for
** sect; ’’ twice by St. Paul and once by St. Peter for ‘‘ heresy.”’
Augustine, C. Manich. writes: ‘Qui in ecclesta Christi mor-
bidum aliquid pravumque quid sapiunt, st, correcti ut sanum
rectumque sapiant, reststunt contumactter suaque pestifera et
mortifera dogmata emendare nolunt, sed defensare persistunt
heretici sunt,”


126


BASIL.


arteries, ' veins,


Has it kidneys, heart,
Is it hairy or


membranes, cartilages?
hairless? Has it an uncloven hoof, or
are its feet divided? How long does it
live? What is its mode of reproduction?
Whatis its period of gestation? How is it
that ants neither all walk nor all fly, but
some belong to creeping things, and some
travel through the air? The man who
glories in his knowledge of the reaily-exist-
ing ought to tell us in the meanwhile about
the nature of the ant. Next let him give us
a similar physiological account of the power
that transcends all human intelligence. But
if your knowledge has not yet been able to
apprehend the nature of the insignificant
ant, how can you boast yourself able to form
a conception of the power of the incompre-
hensible God?!


LETTER: XV4L*


To Origenes?


Ir is delightful to listen to you, and de-
lightful to read you; and I think you give
me the greater pleasure by your writings.
All thanks to our good God Who has not
suffered the truth to suffer in consequence of
its betrayal by the chief powers in the State,
but by your means has made the defence of
the doctrine of true religion full and satisfac-
tory. Like hemlock, monkshood, and other
poisonous herbs, after they have bloomed for
a little while, they will quickly wither away.
But the reward which the Lord will give you
in requital of all that you have said in de-
fence of His name blooms afresh for ever.
Wherefore I pray God grant you all happi-
ness in your home, and make His blessing
descend to your sons. I was delighted to
see and embrace those noble boys, express
images of your excellent goodness, and my
prayers for them ask all that their father can
ask.


Lit TER ΧΥΤΙ-:
To Macarius® and John.


THE labours of the field come as no novelty
to tillers of the land; sailors are not aston-


1 As an argument against Eunomius this Letter has no
particular force, inasmuch as a man may be a good divine
though a very poor entomologist, and might tell us all about
the ant without being better able to decide between Basil and
Eunomius. It is interesting, however, as shewing how far
Basil was abreast of the physiology of his time, and how far
that physiology was correct.

2 Placed during the reign of Julian.

3 Nothing is known of this Origen beyond what is sug-
gested in this letter. He is conjectured to have been a layman,
who, alike as a rhetorician and a writer, was popularly known
as a Christian apologist.

4 Placed in the reign of Julian.

5 MS. variations are Macrinus and Machrinus.


ished if they meet a storm at sea; sweats in
the summer heat are the common experience
of the hired hind; and to them that have
chosen to live a holy life the afflictions of
this present world cannot come unforeseen.
Each and all of these have the known and
proper labour of their callings, not chosen
for its own sake, but for the sake of the en-
joyment of the good things to which they
look forward. What in each of these cases
acts as a consolation in trouble is that which
really forms the bond and link of all human
life, — hope. Now of them that labour for
the fruits of the earth, or for earthly things,
some enjoy only in imagination what they
have looked for, and are altogether disap-
pointed; and even in the case of others,
where the issue has answered expectation,
another hope is soon needed, so quickly has
the first fled and faded out of sight. Only of
them that labour for holiness and truth are
the hopes destroyed by no deception; no
issue can destroy their labours, for the king-
dom of the heavens that awaits them is firm
and sure. So long then as the word of truth
is on our side, never be in any wise distressed
at the calumny of a lie; let no imperial
threats scare you; do not be grieved at the
laughter and mockery of your intimates, nor
at the condemnation of those who pretend to
care for you, and who put forward, as their
most attractive bait to deceive, a pretence of
giving good advice. Against them all let
sound reason do battle, invoking the cham-
pionship and succour of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the teacher of true religion, for Whom
to suffer is sweet, and ‘* to die is gain.” *


LETTER... ας
To Gregory my friend.?


I RECEIVED a letter from you the day
before yesterday. It is shewn to be yours
not so much by the handwriting as by the
peculiar style. Much meaning is expressed
in few words. I did not reply on the spot,
because I was away from home. and the let-
ter-carrier, after he had delivered the packet
to one of my friends, went away. Now,
however, I am able to address you through
Peter, and at the same time both to return
your greeting, and give you an opportunity
for another letter. There is certainly no
trouble in writing a laconic dispatch like
those which reach me from you.


1 Phil. i. 21.

2 Placed by the Ben. Ed. shortly after Basil’s ordination as
priest.

3 s,.e. Gregory of Nazianzus, and so Letter xiv.


-


LETTERS.


LETTER ΧΧ.:ἔ
To Leontius the Sophist2


I Too do not write often to you, but not
more seldom than you do to me, though
many have travelled hitherward from your
part of the world. If you had sent a letter
by every one of them, one after the other,
there would have been nothing to prevent
my seeming to be actually in your company,
and enjoying it as though we had been to-
gether, so uninterrupted has been the stream
of arrivals. But why do you not write? It
is no trouble to a Sophist to write. Nay, if
your hand is tired, you need not even write ;
another will do that for you. Only your
tongue is needed. And though it does not
speak to me, it may assuredly speak to one
of your companions. If nobody is with you,
it will talk by itself. Certainly the tongue
of a Sophist and of an Athenian is as little
likely to be quiet as the nightingales when the
spring stirs them to song. In my own case,
the mass of business in which I am now en-
gaged may perhaps afford some excuse for
my lack of letters. And peradventure the
fact of my style having been spoilt by con-
stant familiar.ty with common speech may
make me somewhat hesitate
Sophists like you, who are certain to be an-
noyed and unmerciful, unless you hear some-
thing worthy of your wisdom. You, on the
other hand, ought assuredly to use every
opportunity of making your voice heard
abroad, for you are the best speaker of all
the Hellenes that I know; and I think I know
the most renowned among you; so that there
really is no excuse for your silence. But
enough on this point.

I have sent you my writings against Eu-
nomius. Whether they are to be called
child’s play, or something a little more seri-
ous, I leave you to judge. So far as con-
cerns yourself, I do not think you stand any
longer in need of them ; but I hope they will
be no unworthy weapon against any perverse
men with whom you may fall in. I do not
say this so much because I have confidence
in the force of my treatise, as because I know
well that you are a man likely to make a
little go a long way. If anything strikes you
as weaker than it ought to be, pray have no
hesitation in showing me the error. The
chief difference between a friend and a flat-
terer is this; the flatterer speaks to please,
the friend will not leave out even what is
disagreeable.


1 Placed in 364. 2 cf, Letter xxxv.


to address


127


LETTER XXI:!
To Leontius the Sophist.


ΤῊΝ excellent Julianus? seems to get
some good for his private affairs out of the
general condition of things. Everything
nowadays is full of taxes demanded and
called in, and he too is vehemently dunned
and indicted. Only it is a question not of
arrears of rates and taxes, but of letters. But
how he comes to be a defaulter I do not
know. He has always paid a letter, and re-
ceived a letter—as he has this. But possibly
you have a preference for the famous ‘ four-
times-as-much.” * For even the Pythago-
reans were not so fond of their Tetractys,* as
these modern tax-collectors of their ‘* four-
times-as-much.” Yet perhaps the fairer thing
would have been just the opposite, that a
Sophist like you, so very well furnished with
words, should be bound in pledge to me for
‘* four-times-as-much.” But do not suppose
for a moment that I am writing all this out
of ill-humour. Iam only too pleased to get
even a scolding from you. The good and
beautiful do everything, it is said, with the
addition of goodness and beauty.® Even
grief and anger in them are becoming. At
all events any one would rather see his friend
angry with him than any one else flattering
him. Do not then cease preferring charges
like the last!) The very charge will mean a
letter; and nothing can be more precious or
delightful to me.


LETTER. XxIN


Without address. On the Perfection of the
Life of Solitaries.


1. Many things are set forth by inspired
Scripture as binding upon all who are anx-
ious to please God. But, for the present, I
have only deemed it necessary to speak by


1 Of about the same date as the preceding.

2 cf. Ep.ccxciii.

3The Ben. note quotes Ammianus Marcellinus xxvi. 6,
where it is said of Petronius, father-in-law of Valens: *‘ad
nudandos sine discretione cunctos immaniter flagrans nocen-
tes pariter et insontes post exquistta tormenta quadrupli
nextbus vincrebat, debita jam inde a temporibus principio
Aureliani perscrutans, et impendio me@erens si quemquam
absolvisset indemnem ;” and adds: “ Est ergo quadruplum
hoc loco non quadrimenstrua pensio, non superexactio, sed
debitorum, que soluta non fuerant, crudelis ingquisitio et
guadrupli pana his gut non solverant tmposita.”’

4 τετρακτύς Was the Pythagorean name for the sum of the
first four numbers (1+2+3+4=10), held by them to be the
root of all creation. cf. the Pythagorean oath:

Nai μὰ Tov ἁμετέρᾳ ψύχᾳ παραδόντα τετρακτύν,

Παγὰν ἀενάου φύσεως ῥιζώματ᾽ ἔχουσαν.
ra my note on Theodoret, Ep. cxxx. for the use of τετρακτύς
or the Four Gospels.

5 Τοῖς καλοῖς πάντα μετὰ τῆς τοῦ καλοῦ προσϑήκης yiverdat.
The pregnant sense οὗ καλός makes translation difficult.

6 Placed in 364.


128


BASIL:


way of brief reminder concerning the ques-
tions which have recently been stirred among
you, so far as [have learnt from the study of
inspired Scripture itself. I shall thus leave
behind me detailed evidence, easy of appre-
hension, for the information of industrious
students, who in their turn will be able to
inform others. The Christian ought to be so
minded as becomes his heavenly calling,’ and
his life and conversation ought to be worthy
of the Gospel of Christ.2 The Christian
ought not to be of doubtful mind,* nor by
anything drawn away from the recollection
of God and of His purposes and judgments.
The Christian ought in all things to be-
come superior to the righteousness existing
under the law, and neither swear nor lie.*
He ought not to speak evil;’ to do vio-
lence τ δι το ἤιε: Το. avenge himself; *. ἠδ
return /evil for. evil;* to be angry,’ ' The
Christian ought to be patient,”’ whatever he
have to suffer, and to convict the wrong- doer
in season,’” not with the desire of his own
vindication, but of his brother’s reformation,’
according to the commandment of the Lord.
The Christian ought not to say anything be-
hind his brother’s back with the object of
calumniating him. for this is slander, even if
what is said is true.’* He ought to turn
away from the brother who speaks evil
against him; ἢ he ought not to indulge in
jesting.’® he ought not to laugh nor even to
suffer laugh makers.'’ He must not talk
idly, saying things which are of no service
to the hearers nor to such usage as is neces-
sary and permitted us by God;’*® so that
workers may do their best as far as possible
to work in silence; and that good words be
suggested to them by those who are en-
trusted with the duty of carefully dispensing
the word to the building up of the faith, lest
God’s Holy Spirit be grieved. Anyone who
comes in ought not to be able, of his own
free will, to accost or speak to any of the
brothers, before those to whom the responsi-
bility of general discipline is committed have
approved of it as pleasing to God, with a
view to the common good.'® The Christian


1 cf. Heh. iii.
δ Ghar ail. 1. 2:
3 of. Luke xii. 29.


® Tit. Mi,2.
δ. Tim,ii. 13.
72 Tim. ii. 24. 11 James v. ὃ.

4 cf. Matt. v. 20. 8 Rom. xii. 19. 12 Tit. ii. 15.

13 Matt. xv. 18. 14 cf. 2 Cor. xii. 20 and 1 Peter ii. 1.

18 cf, 1 Peter iii. 16, 1'7, and James iv. 11. 16 Eph. v. 4.

1 This charge is probably founded on Luke vi. 21 and 2s,
and James ἵν. 9. Yet our Lord’s promise that they who hunger
and weep ‘‘ shall laugh,” admits of fulfilment in the kingdom
of God on earth. Chcerfulness is a note of the Church, whose
members, ‘if sorrowful,’ are yet ‘ alway rejoicing.’ (2 Cor.
Vi. 10.) 18 Hyph. v. 4.

19 Tt is less easy to find explicit Scriptural sanction even for
such a modified rule of silence as is here given bv St. Basil.
St. Paul can only be quoted for the ‘* silence” of the woman.
But even St. Basil’s ‘silence ” with a view to preservine his
σα ΠΟ τ πὶ. from vain conversation, is a long way off the
**siience”’ of St. Bruno’s Carthusians,


9 Rom. xii. 17.
10 Matt. v. 22.


ought not to be enslaved by wine;' nor to
be eager for flesh meat,’ and as a general
rule ought not to be a lover of pleasure in
eating or drinking,® ‘ for every man _ that
striveth for the mastery is temperate in all
things.” * The Christian ought to regard all
the things that are given him for his use, not
as his to hold as his own or to lay up;° and,
giving careful heed to all things as the
Lord’s, not to overlook any of the things that
are being thrown aside and disregarded,
should this be the case. No Christian ought
to think of himself as his own master, but
each should rather so think and act as though
given by God to be slave to his like minded
brethren ;° but ‘‘every man in his own
order. 7

2. The Christian ought never to murmur ὃ
either in scarcity of necessities, or in toil or
labour, for the responsibility in these matters
lies with such as have authority in them.
There never ought to be any clamour, or any
behaviour or agitation by which anger is
expressed,® or diversion of mind from the
full assurance of the presence of σοι."

The voice should be modulated; no one
ought to answer another, or do anything,
roughly or contemptuously,”’ but in all things
moderation” and respect should be shewn to
every one.'* No wily glances of the eye are
to be allowed, nor any behaviour or gestures
which grieve ἃ brother and shew con-
tempt.’* Any display in cloak or shoes is to
be avoided; it is idle ostentation.’® Cheap
things ought to be used for bodily necessity ;
and nothing ought to be spent beyond what
is necessary, or for mere extravagance; this
is a misuse of our property. The Christian
ought not to seek for honour, or claim pre-
cedence.’® Every one ought to put all others
before himself.'7 The Christian ought not
to be unruly.'* He who is able to work ought
not to eat the bread of idleness,’® but even he
who is busied in deeds well done for the
glory of Christ ought to force himself to the
active discharge of such work as he can do.*?
Every Christian, with the approval of his
superiors, ought so to do everything with
reason and assurance, even down to actual
eating and drinking, as done to the glory of
God." The Christian ought not to change
over from one work to another without the
approval of those who are appointed for the
Oey. Eph. iv. 21:


10 cf. Heb. iv. 13.
icf. Tit. iii. 2.


5 cf. Acts iv. 32.

6 cf. τ Cor. ix. 19.
1 cf..t Cor, σεν 5.22:
8 cf. 1 Cor. xX. To.
In 1 Tim.


1 1 Pet. iv. 3.

2 Rom. xiv. 21.

32 Tim, il. 4.

* 7 Corvix. 25,

12 Phil. iv. 5, τὸ ἐπιεικές.
ἐπιεικής:

13 Rom, xii. 10 and 1 Pet. ii. 17.

14 Rom. xiv. 10.

15 Matt. vi. 29, Luke xii. 27.

16 Mark ix. 37. 20-1 Thess. iv. 11.


ii, 3, “patient as
1 ῬΠ τ: 2.
18 Tit. i. 10.
19 2 Thess. ill. το.
Al ΘΟ; XJ21s


LETTERS.


arrangement of such matters; unless some
unavoidable necessity suddenly summon
any one to the relief of the helpless. Every
one ought to remain in his appointed post,
not to go beyond his own bounds and in-
trude into what is not commanded him, un-
less the responsible authorities judge any one
to be in need of aid. Noone ought to be found
going from one workshop to another.
Nothing ought to be done in rivalry or strife
with any one.

3. The Christian ought not to grudge
another’s reputation, nor rejoice over any
man’s faults;’ he ought in Christ’s love to
grieve and be afflicted at his brother’s faults,
and rejoice over his brother’s good deeds.’
He ought not to be indifferent or silent be-
fore sinners.” He who shows another to be
wrong ought to do so with all tenderness,’
in the fear of God, and with the object of
converting the sinner.* He who is proved
wrong or rebuked ought to take it willingly,
recognizing his own gain in being set right.
When any one is being accused, it is not
right for another, before him or any one else,
to contradict the accuser; but if at any time
the charge seems groundless to any one, he
ought privately to enter into discussion with
the accuser, and either produce, or acquire,
conviction. Every one ought, as far as he is
able, to conciliate one who has ground of
complaint against him. No one ought to
cherish a grudge against the sinner who
repents, but heartily to forgive him.® He
who says that he has repented of a sin
ought not only to be pricked with compunc-
tion for his sin, but also to bring forth fruits
worthy of repentance.”. He who has been
corrected in first faults, and received pardon,
if he sins again prepares for himself a judg-
ment of wrath worse than the former.® He,
who after the first and second admonition °
abides in his fault, ought to be brought be-
fore the person in authority,’° if haply after
being rebuked by more he may be ashamed.”
If even thus he fail to be set right he is to be
cut off from the rest as one that maketh to
offend, and regarded as a heathen and a
publican,” for the security of them that are
obedient, according to the saying, When the
impious fall the Tighteous tremble.""):; He
should be grieved over as a limb cut from
the body. The sun ought not to go down
upon a brother’s wrath,'* lest haply night


come between brother
42 Tim. iv. 2. 7 Luke iii. 8.
52 Tim. iv. 2. 8 Heb. x. 26, 27.
31 Tim. v. 20. Re Or. 11... 9 ΤΙ. 111. 10.
10 τῷ προεστῶτι. O προεστὼς is the “ president” in_ Justin
Martyr’s description of the Christian serv ice in Afol. Maj. i.
U cf, Tit. ii. 8. 13 Prov, xxix. 16, LXX.
12 Matt. xviii. 17. 14 Eph, iv. 26.


11 Cor. ΧΙ. 6.
21 Cor. xii. 26.


and brother, and.


129


make the charge stand in the day of jude-
ment. A Christian ought not to wait for an
opportunity for his own amendment,’ be-
cause there is no certainty about the morrow; :
for many after many devices have not reached
the morrow. He ought not to be beguiled
by over eating, whence come dreams in the
night. He ought not to be distracted by im-
moderate toil, nor overstep the bounds of
sufficiency, as the apostle says, ‘* Having
food and raiment let us be therewith con-
tent;”* unnecessary abundance gives ap-
pearance of covetousness, and covetousness
is condemned as idolatry. A Christian
ought not to be a lover of money,* nor lay
up “treasure for unprofitable ends. He who
comes to God ought to embrace poverty in
all things, and to. be riveted in the fear of
God, according to the words, ‘ Rivet my
πὸ in thy fear, for 1 am afraid of thy judg-
ments.” °® The Lord grant that you may re-
ceive what I have said with full conviction
and shew forth fruits worthy of the Spirit to
the glory of God, by God’s good pleasure,
and the codperation of our Lord Jesus


Christ.
ΤΕ ΕΝ ἌΧ ΧΤΠΠ’


To a Solitary.


A CERTAIN man, as he says, on condemn-
ing the vanity of this life, and perceiving
that its joys are ended here, since they only
provide material for eternal fire and then
quickly pass away, has come to me with the
desire of separating from this wicked and
miserable life, of abandoning the pleasures
of the flesh, and of treading for the future a
road which leads to the mansions of the
Lord. Now if he is sincerely firm in his
truly blessed purpose, and has in his soul
the glorious and laudable passion, loving the
Lord his God with all his heart, with all his
strength, and with all his mind, it is neces-
sary for your reverence to show him the dif-
ficulties and distresses of the strait and
narrow way, and establish him in the hope
of the good things which are as yet unseen,
but are laid up in promise for all that are
worthy of the Lord. I therefore write to
entreat your incomparable perfection in
Christ, if it be possible to mould his charac-
ter, and, without me, to bring about his
renunciation according to what is pleasing
to God, and to see that he receive element-
ary instruction in accordance with what
has been decided by the Holy Fathers, and
‘ cf. Matt. xxiv. 14; Luke xii. 40. 21 Tim. vi. 8.

δ Col. ili. 5. ie Mark x. 23, 24; Luke xviii. 24.


δι exix. 120, LISS
6 Written at Casarea during his presbyterate.


130


BASIL.


put forth by them in writing. See too
that he have put before him all things that
are essential to ascetic discipline, and that
so he may be introduced to the life, after
having accepted, of his own accord, the
labours undergone for religion’s sake, sub-
jected himself to the Lord’s casy yoke,
adopted a conversation in imitation of Him
Who for our sakes became poor’ and took
flesh, and may run without fail to the prize
of his high calling, and receive the approba-
tion of the Lord. He is wishful to receive
here the crown of God’s love, but 1 have
put him off, because I wish, in conjunction
with your reverence, to anoint him for such
struggles, and to appoint over him one of your
number whom he may select to be his trainer,
training him nobly, and making him by his
constant and blessed care a tried wrestler,
wounding and overthrowing the prince of
the darkness of this world, and the spiritual
powers of iniquity, with whom, as the
blessed Apostle says, is ‘¢ our wrestling.” ἢ
What I wish to do in conjunction with you,
let your love in Christ do without me.


LETTER ΧΧΙΝ


To Athanasius, father of Athanasius bishop
of Ancyra.*


TuatT one of the things hardest to achieve,
if indeed it be not impossible, is to rise
superior to calumny, I am myself fully per-
suaded, and so too, I presume, is your excel-
lency. Yet not to give a handle by one’s
own conduct, either to inquisitive critics of
society, or to mischief makers who lie in
wait to catch us tripping, is not only possi
ble, but is the special characteristic of all
who order their lives wisely and according
to the rule oftrue religion. And donot think
me so simple and credulous as to accept de-
preciatory remarks from any one without due
investigation. I bearin mind the admonition
of the Spirit, ‘* Thou shalt not receive a false
report.” ° But you, learned men, yourselves
say that ‘* The seen is significant of the un-
seen.” I therefore beg ; — (and pray do not
take it ill if 1 seem to be speaking as though I
were giving a lesson ; for ** God has chosen the
weak ” and ‘* despised things of the world,” δ
and often by their means brings about the
salvation of such as are being saved) ;


1 2Cor. viii. 9.

2 Eph. vi. 12.

3 Placed before Basil’s episcopate.

4 Vide note on Letter xxv. Nothing more is known of the
“ay of these two Athanasii than is to be gathered from this
etfer.

‘Ex. xxiii. 1, .XX. and marg.

6 νου. 1.27, 20. Ὁ Ἐπ τ


what I say and urge is this; that by word
and deed we act with scrupulous attention
to propriety, and, in accordance with the
apostolic precept, ‘* give no offence in any-
thing.” The life of one who has toiled
hard in the acquisition of knowledge, who
has governed cities and states, and who is
jealous of the high character of his fore-
fathers, ought to be an example of high
character itself. You ought not now to be
exhibiting your disposition towards your
children in word only, as you have long ex-
hibited it, ever since you became a father;
you ought not only to shew that natural
affection which is shewn by brutes, as you
yourself have said, and as experience shews.
You ought to make your love go further,
and be a love all the more personal and volun-
tary in that you see your children worthy of
a father’s prayers. On this point I do not
need to be convinced. The evidence of
facts is enough. One thing, however, I will
say for truth’s sake. that it is not our brother
Timotheus, the Chorepiscopus, who has
brought me word of what is noised abroad.
For neither by word of mouth nor by letter
has he ever conveyed anything in the shape
of slander, be it small or great. That I have
heard something I do not deny, but it is not
Timotheus who accuses you. Yet while I
hear whatever I do, at least I will follow
the example of Alexander, and will keep
one ear clear for the accused.’


LETTER xxv
To Athanasius, bishop of Ancyra.


1. I HAVE received intelligence from those
who come to me from Ancyra, and they are
many and more than I can count, but they
all agree in what they say, that you, a man
very dear to me, (how can I speak so as to
give no offence?) do not mention me in very
pleasant terms, nor yet in such as your char-
acter would lead me to expect. I, however,
learned long ago the weakness of human
nature, and its readiness to turn from one
extreme to another; and so, be well assured,
nothing connected with it can astonish me,
nor does any change come quite unexpected.
Therefore that my lot should have changed


1 g Cots Wi.183

2cf. Plut., Vit. Alex.

3 Placed, like the former, before the episcopate.

4This Athanasius was appointed to the see of Ancyra
(Angora) by the influence of Acacius the one-eyed, bp. of
Cesarea, the inveterate opponent of Cyril of Jerusalem, and
leader of the Homeans. Ile therefore started his episcopate
under unfavorable auspices, but acquired a reputation for
orthodoxy. cf. Greg. Nyss., Contra Eunom, I. ii. 292. On
Basil’s high opinion of him, cf. Letter xxix.


LETERES:


for the worse, and that reproaches and in-
sults should have arisen in the place of
former respect, I do not make much ado.
But one thing does really strike me as aston-
ishing and monstrous, and that is that it
should be you who have this mind about me,
and go so far as to feel anger and indigna-
tion against me, and, if the report of your
hearers is to be believed, have already pro-
ceeded to such extremities as to utter threats.
At these threats, I will not deny, I really have
laughed. Truly I should have been but a
boy to be frightened at such bugbears. But
it does seem to me alarming and distressing
that you, who, as I have trusted, are pre-
served for the comfort of the churches, a
buttress of the truth where many fall away,
and a seed of the ancient and true love,
should so far fall in with the present course
of events as to be more influenced by the
calumny of the first man you come across
than by your long knowledge of me, and,
without any proof, should be seduced into
suspecting absurdities.

2. But, as I said, for the present I post-
pone the case. Would it have been too hard
a task, my dear sir, to discuss in a short
letter, as between friend and friend, points
which you wish to raise; or, if you objected
to entrusting such things to writing, to get
me to come to you? But if you could not
help speaking out, and your uncontrollable
anger allowed no time for delay, at least you
might have employed one of those about you
who are naturally adapted for dealing with
confidential matters, as a means of commu-
nication with me. But now, of all those
who for one reason or another approach you,
into whose ears has it not been dinned that
I am a writer and composer of certain
** pests”??? For this is the word which those,
who quote you word for word, say that you
have used. The more [ bring my mind to bear
upon the matter the more hopeless is my
puzzle. This idea has struck me. Can any
heretic have grieved your orthodoxy, and
driven you to the utterance of that word by
malevolently putting my name to his own
writings? For you, a man who has sus-
tained great and famous contests on behalf
of the truth, could never have endured to
inflict such an outrage on what I am well
known to have written against those who
dare to say that God the Son is in essence
unlike God the Father, or who _ blasphe-
mously describe the Holy Ghost as created
and made. You might relieve me from
my difficulty yourself, if you would tell me
plainly what it is that has stirred you to be
thus offended with me.


LETTER XXVI.'
To Cesarius, brother of Gregory?


THANKS to God for shewing forth His
wonderful power in your person, and for
preserving you to your country and to us
your friends, from so terrible a death. It
remains for us not to be ungrateful, nor un-
worthy of so great a kindness, but, to the
best of our ability, to narrate the marvellous
works of God, to celebrate by deed the
kindness which we have experienced, and
not return thanks by word only. We
ought to become in very deed what 1,
grounding my belief on the miracles wrought
in you, am persuaded that you now are.
We exhort you still more to serve God, ever
increasing your fear more and more, and
advancing on to perfection, that we may be
made wise stewards of our life, for which
the goodness of God has reserved us. For
if it is a command to all of us ‘ to yield
ourselves unto God as those that are alive
from the dead,” * how much more strongly
is not this commanded them who have been
lifted up from the gates of death? And
this, I believe, would be best effected, did
we but desire ever to keep the same mind
in which we were at the moment of our
perils. For, I ween, the vanity of our life
came before us, and we felt that all that
belongs to man, exposed as it is to vicissi-
tudes, has about it nothing sure, nothing
firm. We felt, as was likely, repentance
for the past; and we gave a promise for
the future, if we were saved, to serve God
and give careful heed to ourselves. If the
imminent peril of death gave me any cause
for reflection, I think that you must have
been moved by the same or nearly the same
thoughts. We are therefore bound to pay a
binding debt, at once joyous at God’s good
gift to us, and, at the same time, anxious
about the future. I have ventured to make
these suggestions to you. It is yours to re-
ceive what I say well and kindly, as you
were wont to do when we talked together
face to face.


LETTER XXVII.‘
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.®
WueEn by God’s grace, and the aid of


1 Placed in 268.

2Czxsarius was the youngest brother of Gregory of Naz-
ianzus. Atter a lite of distinguished service under Julian,
Valens, and Valentinian, he was led, shortly after the escape
narrated in this letter, to retire from the world. A work en-
titled vores, or Questiones (sive Dialogt) de Rebus
Divinus, attributed to him, is of doubtful genuineness. Vide
D.C.B.s.v. The earthquake, from the effects of which Cxsar-
ius was preserved, took. place on the tenth of October, 36S.
cf. Greg. Naz. Orat. x. 3 Rom. vii. 13. 4 Placed in 36S.

5 This, the first of the twenty-two letters addressed by Basil
to Eusebius of Samosata, has no particular interest. Euse-


‘


132


BASIL.


your prayers, I had seemed to be some-
what recovering from my sickness, and had
got my strength again, then came winter,
keeping me a prisoner at home, and com-
pelling me to remain where I was. True,
its severity was much less than usual, but
this was quite enough to keep me _ not
merely from travelling while it lasted, but
even from so much as venturing to put my
head out of doors. But to me it is no slight
thing to be permitted, if only by letter, to
communicate with your reverence, and to
rest tranquil in the hope of your reply.
However, should the season permit, and
further length of life be allowed me, and
should the dearth not prevent me from un-
dertaking the journey,’ peradventure through
the aid of your prayers I may be able to
fulfil my earnest wish, may find you at
your own fireside, and, with abundant lei-
sure, may take my fill of your vast treasures
of wisdom.


LETTER XXVIII.?


To the Church of Neocesarea. Consolatory.®


1. Wuart has befallen you strongly moved
me to visit you, with the double object of
joining with you, who are near and dear to
me, in paying all respect to the blessed
dead, and of being more closely associated
with you in your trouble by seeing your
sorrow with my own eyes, and so being able
to take counsel with you as to what is to be
done. But many causes hinder my being
able to approach you in person, and it re-
mains for me to communicate with you in
writing. The admirable qualities of the
departed, on account of which we chiefly
estimate the greatness of our loss, are
indeed too many to be enumerated in a
letter; and it is, besides, no time to be dis-
cussing the multitude of his good deeds,
when our spirits are thus prostrated with
grief. For of all that he did, what can we ever
forget? What could we deem deserving of
silence? To tell all at once were impossi-
ble; to tell a part would, I fear, involve dis-


bius, the friend of Basil, Gregory of Nazianzus, and of
Melctius, was bishop of Samosata (in Commagene on the
Euphrates, now Samsat) from 360 to 373, and was of high
character and sound opinions. Theodoret (Ecc. Ast. iv. 15),
in mentioning his exile to Thrace in the persecution under
Valens, calls him “that unflagging labourer in apostolic
work,” and speaks warmly of his zeal. Concerning the sin-
gular and touching circumstances of his death, v/de Theodoret,
£.f1. v. 4, and my note in the edition of this series, Ρ. 134.

1Sim»%sata was about two hundred miles distant from
Ceesarea, as the crow flies.

2 Placed in 368.

8 7,6. on the death of Musonius, bp. of Neoczsarea. Muso-
nius is not named, but he is inferred to be the bishop referred
to in Ep. ccx., in which Basil asserts that sound doctrine
prevailed in Neocesarea up to the time of ‘the blessed Mu-
sonius, whose teaching still rings in your ears.”’


loyalty to the truth. A man has passed
away who surpassed all his contemporaries
in all the good things that are within man’s
reach; a prop of his country; an ornament
of the churches; a pillar and support of the
truth; a stay of the faith of Christ; a pro-
tector of his friends; a stout foe of his
opponents; a guardian of the principles of
his fathers; an enemy of innovation; ex-
hibiting in himself the ancient fashion of
the Church, and making the state of the
Church put under him conform to the
ancient constitution, as to a sacred model,
so that all who lived with him seemed to
live in the society of them that used to shine
like lights in the world two hundred years
ago and more. So your bishop put forth
nothing of his own, no novel invention; but,
as the blessing of Moses has it, he knew
how to bring out of the secret and good
stores of his heart, ** old store, and the old be-
cause of the new.” ὁ Thus it came about that
in meetings of his fellow bishops he was
not ranked according to his age, but, by
reason of the old age of his wisdom, he was
unanimously conceded precedence over all
the rest. And no one who looks at your
condition need go far to seek the advantages
of such a course of training. For, so far as
I know, you alone, or, at all events, you
and but very few others, inthe midst of such
astorm and whirlwind of affairs, were able
under his good guidance to live your lives
unshaken by the waves. You were never
reached by heretics’ buffeting blasts, which
bring shipwreck and drowning on unstable
souls; and that you may for ever live beyond
their reach I pray the Lord who ruleth over
all, and who granted long tranquillity to
Gregory His servant, the first founder of
your church.’

Do not lose that tranquillity now; do not,
by extravagant lamentation, and by entirely
giving yourself up to grief, put the oppor-
tunity for action into the hands of those who
are plotting your bane. If lament you must,
(which I do not allow, lest you be in this
respect like “6 them which have no hope,”)®
do you, if so it seem good to you, like some
wailing chorus, choose your leader, and
raise with him a chant of tears.

2. And yet, if he whom you mourn had
not reached extreme old age, certainly, as
regards his government of your church, he
was allowed no narrow limit of life. He
had as much strength of body as enabled
him to show strength of mind in his dis-
tresses. Perhaps some of you may suppose


1 Lev. xxvi. το. 31 Thess. iv. 13.


2 2,6. Gregory Thaumaturgus.


LETTERS.


133


that time increases sympathy and adds affec-
tion, and is no cause of satiety, so that, the
longer you have experienced kind treatment,
the more sensible you are of its loss. You
may think that of a righteous person the
good hold even the shadow in_ honour.
Would that many of you did feel so! Far
be it from me to suggest anything like dis-
regard of our friend! But I do counsel
you to bear your pain with manly endur-
ance. I myself am by no means insensible
of all that may be said by those who are
weeping for their loss. Hushed is a tongue
whose words flooded our ears like a mighty
stream: a depth of heart, never fathomed
before, has fled, humanly speaking, like an
unsubstantial dream. Whose glance so keen
as his to look into the future? Who with
like fixity and strength of mind able to
dart like lightning into the midst of action?
O Neocaearea, already a prey to many
troubles, never before smitten with so deadly
a loss! Now withered is the bloom of your
beauty; your church is dumb; your assem-
blies are full of mournful faces; your sacred
synod craves for its leader; your holy utter-
ances wait for an expounder; your boys
have lost a father, your elders a brother,
your nobles one first among them, your
people achampion, your poor a supporter.
All, calling him by the name that comes
most nearly home to each, lift up the wailing
cry which to each man’s own sorrow seems
most appropriate and fit. But whither are
my words carried away by my tearful joy?
Shall we not watch? Shall we not meet
together? Shall we not look to our common
Lord, Who suffers each of his saints to serve
his own generation, and summons him back
to Himself at His own appointed time?
Now in season remember the voice of him
who when preaching to you used always


to say ‘* Beware of dogs, beware of evil
workers.” The dogs are many. Why do
I say dogs? Rather grievous wolves, hiding


their euile under the guise of sheep, are, all
over the world, tearing Christ’s flock. Of
these you must beware, under the protection
of some wakeful bishop. Such an one it is
yours to ask, purging your souls of all
rivalry and ambition: such an one it is the
Lord’s to show you. That Lord, from the
time of Gregory the great champion of your
church down to that of the blessed departed,
setting over you one after another, and from
time to time fitting one to another like gem
set close to gem, has bestowed on you glori-
ous ornaments for your church. You have,
then, no need to despair of them that are to


1 Phil. iii. 2.


come. The Lord knoweth who are His.
He may bring into our midst those for whom
peradventure we are not looking.

3. I meant to have come to an end long
before this, but the pain at my heart does
not allow me. Now I charge you by the
Fathers, by the true faith, by our blessed
friend, lift up your souls, each man making
what is being done his own immediate busi-
ness, each reckoning that he will be the first
to reap the consequences of the issue, which-
ever way it turn out, lest your fate be that
which so very frequently befalls, every one
leaving to his neighbour the common inter-
ests of all; and then, while each one makes
little in his own mind of what is going on,
all of you unwittingly draw your own proper
misfortunes on yourselves by your neglect.
Take, I beg you, what I say with all kindli-
ness, whether it be regarded as an expres-
sion of the sympathy of a neighbour, or as
fellowship between fellow believers, or,
which is really nearer the truth, of one
who obeys the law of love, and shrinks
from the risk of silence. I am _ persuaded
that you are my boasting, as [am yours, till
the day of the Lord, and that it depends
upon the pastor who will be granted you
whether I shall be more closely united to
you by the bond of love, or wholly severed
from you. This latter God forbid. By
God’s grace it will not so be; and I should
be sorry now to say one ungracious word.
But this I do wish you to know, that though
I had not that blessed man always at my
side, in my efforts for the peace of the
churches, because, as he himself affirmed, of
certain prejudices, yet, nevertheless, at no
time did 1 fail in unity of opinion with him,
and I have always invoked his aid in my
struggles against the heretics. Of this I call
to witness God and all who know me best.


LETTER, XX,’


To the Church of Ancyra. Consolatory.


My amazement at the most distressing
news of the calamity which has befallen you
for a long time kept me silent. I felt like a
man whose ears are stunned by a loud clap
of thunder. Then I somehow recovered a
little from my state of speechlessness. Now
I have mourned, as none could help mourn-
ing, over the event, and, in the midst of my
lamentations, have sent you this letter. I
write not so much to console you, — for who
could find words to cure a calamity so great?


1 Placed in 368.
2 cf, Letiers xxiv. and xxv., and note,


.


134


BASIL.


—as to signify to you, as well as I can by|am confined to my bed, tossing about in my


these means, the agony of my own heart. 1
need now the lamentations of Jeremiah, or of
any other of the Saints who has feelingly la-
mented a great woe. A man has fallen who
was really a pillar and stay of the Church;
or rather he himself has been taken from us
and is gone to the blessed life, and there is
no small danger lest many at the removal of
this prop from under them fall too, and lest
some men’s unsoundness be brought to light.
A mouth is sealed gushing with righteous
eloquence and words of grace to the edifi-
cation of the brotherhood. Gone are the
counsels of a mind which truly moved in
God. Ah! how often, for 1 must accuse
myselt, was it my lot to feel indignation
against him, because, wholly desiring to
depart and be with Christ, he did not prefer
for our sakes to remain in the flesh!’ To
whom for the future shall I commit the cares
of the Churches? Whom shall I take to
share my troubles? Whom to participate in
my gladness? O loneliness terrible and sad!
How am 1 not like to a pelican of the wil-
derness??» Yet of a truth the members of
the Church, united by his leadership as by
one soul, and fitted together into close union
of feeling and fellowship, are both pre-
served and shall ever be preserved by the
bond of peace for spiritual communion.
God grants us the boon, that all the works
of that blessed soul, which he did nobly in
the churches of God, abide firm and immov-
able. But the struggle is no slight one, lest,
once more strifes and divisions arising over
the choice of the bishop, all your work be
upset by some quarrel.


LETTER XXX.?
To Eusebius of Samosata.


Ir I were to write at length all the causes
which, up to the present time, have kept me
at home, eager as I have been to set out to
see your reverence, 1 should tell an intermi-
nable story. [ say nothing of illnesses coming
one upon another, hard winter weather, and
press of work, for all this has been already
made known to you. Now, for my sins, I
have lost my Mother,* the only comfort I
had in life. Do not smile, if, old as I am,
I lament my orphanhood. Forgive me if I
cannot endure separation from a soul, to com-
pare with whom I see nothing in the future
that lies before me. So once more my com-
plaints have come back to me; once more I

icf. Phil. i. 22. 24. ef. FS cit. ©, 9 Placed in 369.


4Emmelia. Vide account of Basil’s family in the prolego-
mena.


weakness, and every hour all but looking for
the end of life; and the Churches are in
somewhat the same condition as my body,
no good hope shining on them, and their
state always changing for the worse. In the
meantime Neoczsarea and Ancyra have de-
cided to have successors of the dead, and so
far they are at peace. Those who are plot-
ting against me have not yet been permitted
to do anything worthy of their bitterness and
wrath. This we make no secret of attribut-
ing to your prayers on behalf of the Churches.
Weary not then in praying for the Churches
and in entreating God. Pray give all salu-
tations to those who are privileged to minis-
ter to your Holiness.


LETTER XXXI.!
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.


THE dearth is still with us, and I am there-
fore compelled to remain where I am, partly
by the duty of distribution, and partly out of
sympathy for the distressed. Even now,
therefore, I have not been able to accompany
our reverend brother Hypatius,? whom I am
able to style brother, not in mere conven-
tional language, but on account of relation-
ship, for we are of one blood. You know
how ill he 15. It distresses me to think that
all hope of comfort is cut off for him, as those
who have the gifts of healing have not been
allowed to apply their usual remedies in his
case. Wherefore again he implores the aid
of your prayers. Receive my entreaty that
you will give him the usual protection alike
for your own sake, for you are always kind
to the sick, and for mine who am petitioning
on his behalf. If possible, summon to your
side the very holy brethren that he may be
treated under your own eyes. If this be
impossible, be so good as to send him on
with a letter, and recommend him to friends
further on.


LEP GER | AUeetT*
To Sophronius the Master.*
Our God — beloved brother, Gregory


1 Placed in 369. cf. note on Letter ccxxxvi.

2 Nothing more is known of this Hypatius. Gregory of
Nazianzus (Zp. 192) writes to a correspondent of the same
name. 3 Placed in 369.

4 ἡ. Magister oficiorum. Sophronius was a fellow student
with Basil at Athens, and a friend of Gregory of Nazianzus.
He secured the favour of Valens, who was staying at Cesarea
in 365, by conveying him intelligence of the usurpation of
Procopius at Constantinople. (Amm. Marc. xxv.g.) On the
circumstances which gave rise to this letter, cf. Greg. Naz.,
Ep. xviii. Letters \xxvi., xcvi., clxxvii., clxxx., cxcii,, and
cclxxii. are addressed to the same correspondent, the last, as
it will be seen, indicating a breach in their long friendship.


I.


LETEERS.


135


the bishop,’ shares the troubles of the times,
for he too, like everybody else, is distressed
at successive outrages, and resembles a man
buffeted by unexpected blows. For men
who have no fear of God, possibly forced by
the greatness of their troubles, are reviling
him, on the ground that they have lent Czsa-
rius* money. It is not indeed the question
of any loss which is serious, for he has long
learnt to despise riches. ‘The matter rather
is that those who have so freely distributed
all the effects of Casarius that were worth
anything, after really getting very little,
because his property was in the hands of
slaves, and of men of no better character
than slaves, did not leave much for the exec-
utors.” This little they supposed to be
pledged to no one, and straightway spent. it
on the poor, not only from their own prefer-
ence, but because of the injunctions of the
dead. For on his death bed Ceesarius is de-
clared to have said ‘*I wish my goods to
belong to the poor.” In obedience then to
the wishes of Cesarius they made a proper
distribution of them. Now, with the poverty
of a Christian, Gregory is immersed in the
bustle of a chafferer. Sol bethought me of re-
porting the matter to your excellency, in order
that you may state what you think proper
about Gregory to the Comes Thesaurorum,
and so may honour a man whom you have
known for many years, glorify the Lord who
takes as done to Himself what is done to His
servants, and honour me who am specially
bound to you. You will, I hope, of your
great sagacity devise a means of relief from
these outrageous people and intolerable an-
noyances.

2. No one is so ignorant of Gregory as to
have any unworthy suspicion of his giving an
inexact account of the circumstances because
he is fond of money. We have not to go far
to find a proof of his liberality. What is
left of the property of Czsarius he gladly
abandons to the Treasury, so that the prop-
erty may be kept there, and the Treasurer
may give answer to those who attack it and
demand their proofs ; for we are not adapted
for such business. Your excellency may be
informed that, so long as it was possible, no
one went away without getting what he
wanted, and each one carried off what he
demanded without any difficulty. The con-


1 The word Episcopus in this and in the following letter is
supposed by Maran to have crept into the text from the margin.
Gregory of Nazianzus is referred to, who was not then a
bishop. Gregory the Elder, bishop of Nazianzus, was in
good circumstances, and had not adopted the monastic life.

2cf. Letter xxvi. Czsarius died in 368, leaving his brother
Gregory as executor.

3 τούτοις. So the MSS., but the editors here substituted
7 i.e. Gregory, and similarly the singular in the following
words.


sequence indeed was that a good many were
sorry that they had not asked for more at
first; and this made still more objectors, for
with the example of the earlier successful
applicants before them, one false claimant
starts up after another. I do then entreat
your excellency to make a stand against all
this and to come in, like some intervening
stream, and solve the continuity of these
troubles. You know how best you will help
matters, and need not wait to be instructed
by me. Iam inexperienced in the affairs of
this life, and cannot see my way out of our
difficulties. Of your great wisdom discover
some means of help. Be ourcounsellor. Be
our champion.


LETTER ΧΧ ΤΕ"


To Aburgius.?


Wuo knows so well as you do how to
respect an old friendship, to pay reverence
to virtue, and to sympathise with the sick?
Now my God-beloved brother Gregory the
bishop has become involved in matters
which would be under any circumstances
disagreeable, and are quite foreign to his
bent of mind. I have therefore thought it
best to throw myself on your protection,
and to endeavour to obtain from you some
solution of our difficulties. It is really an
intolerable state of things that one who is
neither by nature nor inclination adapted
for anything of the kind should be compelled
to be thus responsible; that demands for
money should be made on a poor man; and
that one who has long determined to pass
his life in retirement should be dragged into
publicity. It would depend upon your wise
counsel whether you think it of any use to
address the Comes Thesaurorum or any other
persons.


LETTER XXXIV.?*
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.


How could I be silent at the present junc-
ture? And if I cannot be silent, how am I
to find utterance adequate to the circum-
stances, so as to make my voice not like a
mere groan but rather a lamentation intelli-
gibly indicating the greatness of the misfort-


1 Placed in 360.

2cf. Ep. xxxiii., lxxv., cxlvii., clxxviii., ccciv., and also
excevi., though the last is also attributed to Greg. Naz. He
was an important lay compatriot of Basil. Tillemont was of
opinion that the dear brother Gregory referred to in this letter
is Gregory of Nyssa; but Maran points out that the events
referred to are the same as those described in Letter xxxii.,
and supposes the word ep/scopus to have been inserted by a
commentator. 3 Placed in 369.


136


DADIL,


une? Ah me! Tarsus is undone.’ This
is a trouble grievous to be borne, but it does
not come alone. It is still harder to think
that a city so placed as to be united with
Cilicia, Cappadocia, and Assyria, should be
lightly thrown away by the’ madness of two
or three individuals, while you are all the
while hesitating, settling what to do, and
looking at one another’s faces. It would
have been far better to do like the doctors.
(I have been so long an invalid that I have
no lack of illustrations of this kind.) When
their patients’ pain becomes excessive they
produce insensibility; so should we pray
that our souls may be made insensible to
the pain of our troubles, that we be not put
under unendurable agony. In these hard
straits I do not fail to use one means of con-
solation. I look to your kindness; 1 try to
make my troubles milder by my thought and
recollection of you.” When the eyes have
looked intently on any brilliant objects it
relieves them to turn again to what is blue
and green; the recollection of your kindness
and attention has just the same effect on my
soul; it is a mild treatment that takes away
my pain. I feel this the more when I re-
flect that you individually have done all that
man could do. You have satisfactorily
shewn us, men, if we judge things fairly,
that the catastrophe is in’no way due to you
personally. The reward which you have
won at God’s hand for your zeal for right
is no small one. May the Lord grant you
to me and to His churches to the improve-
ment of life and the guidance of souls, and
may He once moreallow me the privilege of
meeting you.


LETIER XXXV.*
Without address.


I HAVE written to you about many people
as belonging to myself; now I mean to write
about more. The poor can never fail, and
I can never say, no. There is no one more
intimately associated with me, nor better able
to do me kindnesses wherever he has the
ability, than the reverend brother Leontius.
So treat his house as if you had found me,
not in that poverty in which now by God’s
help I am living, but endowed with wealth

1 Silvanus, Metropolitan of Tarsus, one οἱ the best of the
Semi-Arians (Ath., De Synod. 41), died, according to Tille-
mont, in 373, according to Maran four years earlier, and was
succeeded by an Arian; but events did not turn out so disas-
trously as Basil had anticipated. The majority of the pres-
byters were true to the Catholic cause, and Basil maintained
friendship and intercourse with them. cf. Letters Ixvii., cxiii.,
CXIV.

2 Basil is supposed to have in the meanwhile carried out


his previously-expressed intention of paying Eusebius a visit.
3 Placed before 370.


and landed property. There is no doubt
that you would not have made me poor,
but would have taken care of what I had, or
even added to my possessions. This is the
way I ask you to behave in the house of
Leontius. You will get your accustomed
reward from me; my prayers to the holy
God for the trouble you are taking in shew-
ing yourself a good man and true, and in an-
ticipating the supplication of the needy.


LETTER "3xocvii:*
Without address.


Ir has, 1 think, been long known to your
excellency that the presbyter of this place
is a foster brother of my own. What more
can I say to induce you, in your kindness, to
view him with a friendly eye, and give him
help in his affairs? If you love me, as I
know you do, I am sure that you will en-
deavour, to the best of your power, to relieve
any one whom 1 look upon as a second self.
What then dol ask? That he do not lose
his old rating. Really he takes no little
trouble in ministering to my necessities, be-
cause J, as you know, have nothing of my
own, but depend upon the means of my
friends and relatives. Look, then, upon my
brother’s house as you would on mine, or
let me rather say, on your own. In return
for your kindness to him God will not cease
to help alike yourself, your house, and your
family. Be sure that I am specially anxious
lest any injury should be done to him by the
equalization of rates.


LETTER XXXVII.’?


Without address.


I Look with suspicion on the multiplica-
tion of letters. Against my will, and be-
cause I cannot resist the importunity of
petitioners, Iam compelled to speak. I
write because I can think of no other means
of relieving myself than by assenting to the
supplications of those who are always asking
letters from me. Jam really afraid lest,
since many are carrying letters off, one of
the many be reckoned to be that brother.
I have, I own, many friends and relatives in
my own country, and I am placed zx /oco
parentis by the position? which the Lord
has given me. Among them is this my foster


1 Placed before 370.

2 Of the same time as the preceding.

8 By some supposed to be that of a bishop; but Maran, who
dates the letter before the episcopate, thinks the use of the
phrase is justified by our understanding the presbyterate to be
meant. Vide Prolegomena,


LE ean.


137


brother; son of my nurse, and I pray that
the house in which I was brought up may re-
main at its old assessment, so that the sojourn
among us of your excellency, 80. bene-
ficial to us all, may turn out no occasion of
trouble to him. Now too I am supported
from the same house, because I have nothing
of my own, but depend upon those who
love me. Ido then entreat you to spare the
house in which I was nursed as though you
were keeping up the supply of support for
me. May God in return grant you His
everlasting rest. One thing however, and
it is most true, I think your excellency ought
to know, and that is that the greater number
of the slaves were given him from the out-
set by us, as an equivalent for my suste-
nance, by the gift of my father and mother.
At the same time this was not to be re-
garded as an absolute gift; he was only to
have the use for life, so that, if anything
serious happen to him on their account, he
is at liberty to send them back to me, and
I shall thus in another way be responsible
for rates and to collectors.


LETTER, ΧΧΧΥΤΙΙ, ᾿


To his Brother Gregory, concerning the differ-
ence between οὐσία and ὑπόστασις.


1. Many persons, in their study of the sacred
dogmas, failing to distinguish between what
is common in the essence or substance, and
the meaning of the hypostases, arrive at the
same notions, and think that it makes no
difference whether οὐσία or hypostasis be
spoken of. The result is that some of those
who accept statements on these subjects with-
out any enquiry, are pleased to speak of
‘Cone hypostasis,” just as they do of one
‘Sessence”? or ‘*substance;” while on the
other hand those who accept three hypos-
tases are under the idea that they are
bound in accordance with this confession,
to assert also, by numerical analogy, three
essences or substances. Under these cir-
cumstances, lest you fall into similar error,
I have composed a short treatise for you by
way of memorandum. The meaning of the
words, to put it shortly, is as follows:

2. Ofall nouns the sense of some, which
are predicated of subjects plural and numeri-
cally various, is more general; as for instance
man. ‘Nhen we so say, we employ the
noun to indicate the common nature, and do


1 This important letter is included also among the works of
Gregory of Nyssa,as addressed to Peter, bp. of Sebaste,
brother of Basil and Gregory. The Ben. note says: ‘* Stylus
Basilit fetum esse clamitat.’ It was, moreover, referred to
at Chalcedon as Basil’s. [Mansi, TZ. vii. cod. 464.]


not confine our meaning to any one man in
particular who is known by that name. Peter,
for instance is no more maz, than Andrew,
John, or James. The predicate therefore
being common, and extending to all the
individuals ranked under the same name,
requires some note of distinction whereby we
may understand not man in general, but Peter
or John in particular.

Of some nouns on the other hand the
denotation is more limited; and by the aid
of the limitation we have before our minds
not the common nature, but a limitation of
anything, having, so far as the peculiarity
extends, nothing in common with what is of
the same kind; as for instance, Paul or
Timothy. For, in a word, of this kind there
is no extension to what is common in the
nature; there is a separation of certain cir-
cumscribed conceptions from the general
idea, and expression of them by means of
their names. Suppose then that two or
more are set together, as, for instance, Paul,
Silvanus, and Timothy, and that an enquiry
is made into the essence or substance of hu-
manity ; no one will give one definition of
essence or substance in the case of Paul, a
second in that of Silvanus, and a third in that
of Timothy; but the same words which have
been employed in setting forth the essence or
substance of Paul will apply to the others
also. ‘Those who are described by the same
definition of essence or substance are of the
same essence or substance’ when the en-
quirer has learned what is common, and
turns his attention to the differentiating pro-
perties whereby one is distinguished from
another, the definition by which each is
known will no longer tally in all particulars
with the definition of another, even though
in some points it be found to agree.

3. My» statement, then; is: ‘this. 1 Phat
which is spoken of in a special and peculiar
manner is indicated by the name of the hy-
postasis. Suppose we say “ἃ man.” The
indefinite meaning of the word strikes a cer-
tain vague sense upon the ears. The nature
is indicated, but what subsists and is specially
and peculiarly indicated by the name is not
made plain. Suppose we say “ Paul.” We
set forth, by what is indicated by the name,
the nature subsisting.”

This then is the hypostasis, or ‘* wzder-
standing ;’’ not the indefinite conception of
the essence or substance, which, because
what is signified is general, finds no ‘‘ staxd-
ing,’ but the conception which by means of


1 ὁμοούσιοι. |
5 ὑφεστῶσαν. ὑπόστασις is derivatively that which ‘‘ stands
under’? or subsists, ὃ ὑφέστηκε. cf, my note on Theodoret,


Pp. 30.


138


BASIL,


the expressed peculiarities gives standing
and circumscription to the general and un-
circumscribed. It is customary in Scrip-
ture to make a distinction of this kind, as
well in many other passages as in the His-
tory of Job. When purposing to narrate
the events of his life, Job first mentions the
common, and says “ἃ man;” then he
straightway particularizes by adding ‘‘a
certain.”! As to the description of the
essence, as having no bearing on the scope
of his work, he is silent, but by means of
particular notes of identity, mentioning the
place and points of character, and such
external qualifications as would individualize,
and-separate from the common and general
idea, he specifies the ‘‘ certain man,” in
such a way that from name, place, mental
qualities, and outside circumstances, the de-
scription of the man whose life is being
narrated is made in all particulars perfectly
clear. If he had been giving an account of
the essence, there would not in his explana-
tion of the nature have been any mention of
these matters. The same moreover would
have been the account that there is in the
case of Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the
Naamathite, and each of the men there
mentioned.” Transfer, then, to the divine
dogmas the same standard of difference
which you recognise in the case both of es-
sence and of hypostasis in human affairs,
and you will not go wrong. Whatever your
thought suggests to you as to the mode of the
existence of the Father, you will think also in
the case of the Son, and in like manner too of
the Holy Ghost. For it is idle to halt the
mind at any detached conception from the
conviction that it is beyond all conception.
For the account of the uncreate and of the in-
comprehensible is one and the same in the
case of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost. For one is not more incompre-
hensible and uncreate than another. And
since it is necessary, by means of the notes of
differentiation, in the case of the Trinity, to
keep the distinction unconfounded, we shall
not take into consideration, in order to esti-
mate that which differentiates, what is con-
templated in common, as the uncreate, or
what is beyond all comprehension, or any
quality of this nature; we shall only direct
our attention to the enquiry by what means
each particular conception will be lucidly
and distinctly separated from that which is
conceived of in common.

4. Now the proper way to direct our in-

3 The MSS. vary as to this parenthetical clause, and are


aparently corrupt. Tae rendering avove is conjectural, but
nol satisfactory.


vestigation seems to me to be as follows.
We say that every good thing, which by
God’s providence befalls us, is an operation,
of the Grace which worketh in us all things,
as the apostle says, “" But all these worketh
that one and the self same Spirit dividing to
every man severally as he will.”’ If we
ask, if the supply of good things which thus
comes to the saints has its origin in the Hol

Ghost alone, we are on the other hand
guided by Scripture to the belief that of the
supply of the good things which are wrought
in us through the Holy Ghost, the Originator
and Cause is the Only-begotten God; ? for
we are taught by Holy Scripture that ‘ All
things were made by Him,” ὅ and ““ by Him
consist.”* When we are exalted to this
conception, again, led by God-inspired
guidance, we are taught that by that power
all things are brought from non-being into
being, but yet not by that power to the
exclusion of origination.° On the other
hand there is a certain power subsisting
without generation and without origina-
tion,® which is the cause of the cause of
all things. For the Son, by whom are all
things, and with whom the Holy Ghost is
inseparably conceived of, is of the Father.’
For it is not possible for any one to conceive
of the Son if he be not previously enlight-
ened by the Spirit. Since, then, the Holy
Ghost, from Whom all the supply of good
things for creation has its source, is attached
to the Son, and with Him is inseparably ap-
prehended, and has Its® being attached to
the Father, as cause, from Whom also It pro-
ceeds; It has this note of Its peculiar hypos-
tatic nature, that It is known after the δου
and together with the Son, and that It has
Its subsistence of the Father. The Son,
Who declares the Spirit proceeding from the
Father through Himself and with Himself,
shining forth alone and by only-begetting
from the unbegotten light, so far as the
peculiar notes are concerned, has nothing
in common either with the Father or with


1; Cor. xii. 11.

26 μονογενὴς θεός is the reading of the Sinaitic and Vatican
MSS. in John i. 18. The insertion f the words οὐδὲ ὃ vios,
adopted by R.V. in Matt. xxiv. 36, but of which St. Basil
knows nothing, as appears from his argument on the difference
between the statements of St. Matthew and St. Mark on this
subject in Letter ccxxxvi., is supported by these same two
MSS.

3 John i. 3. 4 Col. i. 17.

ὁ ἀγεννήτως Kal ἀνάρχως ὑφεστῶσα.

7 For similar statements by St. Basil, cf. De Sp. S.p.
cf. also Cont. Eunom.i: ἐπειδὴ yap ἀπὸ τοὺ πατρὸς ἡ ἀρχὴ τῷ
υἱῷ, κατὰ τοῦτο μείζων O πατὴρ ὡς αἴτιος καὶ ἀρχή-

8 cf. notes, pp. 15, 24.

9 μετὰ τὸν υἱόν. So the Benedictine text with four MSS. in
the Paris Library, and the note. ‘wera τοῦ viod” is a reading
which is inadmissible, repeating as it does the sense of the
following clause καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ. The sense in which the Son is
both “ after the Son ” and ‘* with the Son ἢ is explained further
on by St. Basil, where he says that the three Persons are
known in consecution of order but in conjunction of nature.


5 avapxws.


LETTERS:


139


the Holy Ghost. He alone is known by
the stated signs. But God, Who is over all,
alone has, as one special mark of His own
hypostasis, His being Father,’ and His de-
riving His hypostasis' from no cause; and
through this mark He is peculiarly known.
Wherefore in the communion of the sub-
stance we maintain that there is no mutual
approach or intercommunion of those notes
of indication perceived in the Trinity, where-
by is set forth the proper peculiarity of the
Persons delivered in the faith, each of these
being distinctively apprehended by His own
notes. Hence, in accordance with the stated
signs of indication, discovery is made of the
separation of the hypostases; while so far
as relates to the infinite, the incomprehensi-
ble, the uncreate, the uncircumscribed, and
similar attributes, there is no variableness
in the life-giving nature; in that, I mean, of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but in Them
is seen a certain communion indissoluble and
continuous. And by the same considerations,
whereby a reflective student could perceive
the greatness of any one of the (Persons) be-
lieved in inthe Holy Trinity, he will proceed
without variation. Beholding the glory in
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, his mind all
the while recognises no void interval wherein
it may travel between Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, for there is nothing inserted between
Them ; nor beyond the divine nature is there
anything so subsisting as to be able to divide
that nature from itself by the interposition of
any foreign matter. Neither is there any
vacuum of interval, void of subsistence, which
can make a break in the mutual harmony of
the divine essence, and solve the continuity
by the interjection of emptiness. He who
perceives the Father, and perceives Him by
Himself, has at the same time mental per-
ception of the Son; and he who receives the
Son does not divide Him from the Spirit,
but, in consecution so far as order is con-
cerned, in conjunction so far as nature is
concerned, expresses the faith commingled
in himself in the three together. He who
makes mention of the Spirit alone, embraces
also in this confession Him of whom He is
the Spirit. And since the Spirit is Christ’s
and of God,’ as says Paul, then just as he
who lavs hold on one end of the chain pulls
the other to him, so he who ‘draws the
Spirit,” * as says the prophet, by His means
draws to him at the same time both the Son
and the Father. And if any one verily
receives the Son, he will hold Him on both
“Limooriva. Ss? Rom. viii.g; 1Cor.ii.12. ΄ὖἷἢ΄

3 Apparently a mistaken interpretation of the LXX. ver-


sion of Ps. cxix.131, εἵλκυσα πνεῦμα = “1 drew breath.” A.V.
and R.V., “1 panted.” Vulg., attraxt spiritum.


sides, the Son drawing towards him on the
one His own Father, and on the other His
own Spirit.


For He who eternally exists in
the Father can never be cut off from the


Father, nor can He who worketh all things


by the Spirit ever be disjoined from His own
Spirit. Likewise moreover he who receives
the Father virtually receives at the same
time both the Son and the Spirit; for it is in
no wise possible to entertain the idea of
severance or division, in such a way as that
the Son should be thought of apart from the
Father, or the Spirit be disjoined from the
Son. But the communion and the distinc-
tion apprehended in Them are, in a certain
sense, ineffable amd inconceivable, the con-
tinuity of nature being never rent asunder by
the distinction of the hypostases, nor the
notes of proper distinction confounded in
the community of essence. Marvel not then
at my speaking of the same thing as being
both conjoined and parted, and thinking as
it were darkly in a riddle, of a certain’ new
and strange conjoined separation and sepa-
rated conjunction. Indeed, even in objects
perceptible to the senses, any one who ap-
proaches the subject in a candid and uncon-
tentious spirit, may find similar conditions
of things.

5. Yet receive what I say as at best a
token and reflexion of the truth; not as the
actual truth itself. For it is not possible
that there should be complete correspond-
ence between what is seen in the tokens and
the objects in reference to which the use of
tokens is adopted. Why then do I say that
an analogy of the separate and the conjoined
is found in objects perceptible to the senses?
You have before now, in springtime, beheld
the brightness of the bow in the cloud; the
bow, I mean, which, in our common par-
lance, is called Iris, and is said by persons
skilled in such matters to be formed when
a certain moisture is mingled with the air,
and the force of the winds expresses what
is dense and moist in the vapour, after it
has become cloudy, into rain. The bow is
said to be formed as follows. When the
sunbeam, after traversing obliquely the
dense and darkened portion of the cloud-
formation, has directly cast its own orb on
some cloud, the radiance is then reflected
back from what is moist and shining, and
the result is a bending and return, as it
were, of the light upon itself. For flame-
like flashings are so constituted that if they


1 ὥσπερ ἐκ αἰνίγματι. cf.1 Cor. xiii. 12. ἐν αἰνίγματι or ἐξ
αἰνιγμάτων, as in Adsch., Ag. 1113==by dark hints. The bold
oxymoron concluding this sentence is illustrated by Ovid’s
‘*imptetate pia’’ (Met. viii. 477), Lucan’s ** concordia discors””
(Phars, i. 98), or Tennyson’s * faith unfaithful.”


140


ola tes Soe


fall on any smooth surface they are refracted
on themselves; and the shape of the sun,
which by means of the beam is formed on
the moist and smooth part of the air, is
round. The necessary consequence there-
fore is that the air adjacent to the cloud is
marked out by means of the radiant brill-
iance in conformity with the shape of the
sun’s disc. Now this brilliance is both
continuous and divided. It is of many
colours; it is of many forms; it is insensi-
bly steeped in the variegated bright tints of
its dye; imperceptibly abstracting from our
vision the combination of many coloured
things, with the result that no space, mixing
or parting within itself the difference of col-
our, can be discerned either between blue and
flame-coloured, or between flame-coloured
and red, or between red and amber. For
all the rays, seen at the same time, are far
shining, and while they give no signs of their
mutual combination, are incapable of being
tested, so that it is impossible to discover
the limits of the flame-coloured or of the
emerald portion of the light, and at what
point each originates before it appears as it
does in glory. As then in the token we
clearly distinguish the difference of the col-
ours, and yet it is impossible for us to
apprehend by our senses any interval be-
tween them; so in like manner conclude,
I pray you, that you may reason concerning
the divine dogmas; that the peculiar prop-
erties of the hypostases, like colours seen
in the Iris, flash their brightness on each of
the Persons Whom we believe to exist in the
Holy Trinity; but that of the proper nature
no difference can be conceived as existing
between one and the other, the peculiar
characteristics shining, itm community of
essence, upon each. Even in our example,
the essence emitting the many-coloured
radiance, and refracted by the sunbeam, was
one essence; it is the colour of the phenom-
enon which is multiform. My argument
thus teaches us, even by the aid’ ofthe
visible creation, not to feel distressed at
points of doctrine whenever we meet with
questions difficult of solution, and when at the
thought of accepting what is proposed to us,
our brains begin to reel. In regard to visi-
ble objects experience appears better than
theories of causation, and so in matters
transcending all knowledge, the apprehen-
sion of argument is inferior to the faith
which teaches us at once the distinction in
hypostasis and the conjunction in essence.
Since then our discussion has included both
what is common and what is distinctive in
the Holy Trinity, the common is to be


understood as referring to the essence; the
hypostasis on the other hand is the several
distinctive sign.’

6. It may however be thought that the
account here given of the hypostasis does
not tally with the sense of the Apostle’s
words, where he says concerning the Lord
that He is ‘‘ the brightness of His glory, and
the express image of His person,”? for if
we have taught hypostasis to be the conflux
of the several properties; and if it is con-
fessed that, as in the case of the Father
something is contemplated as proper and
peculiar, whereby He alone is known, so
in the same way is it believed about the
Only-begotten ; how then does Scripture in
this place ascribe the name of the hypostasis
to the Father alone, and describes the Son
as form of the hypostasis, and designated
not by His own proper notes, but by those
of the Father? For if the hypostasis is the
sign of several existence, and the property
of the Father is confined to the unbegotten
being, and the Son is fashioned according
to His Father’s properties, then the term
unbegotten can no longer be_ predicated
exclusively of the Father, the existence of
the Only-begotten being denoted by the
distinctive note of the Father.

7. My opinion is, however, that in this
passage the Apostle’s argument is directed
to a different end; and it is looking to this
that he uses the terms ‘‘ brightness of glory,”
and ‘* express image of person.” Whoever
keeps this carefully in view will find nothing
that clashes with what I have said, but that
the argument is conducted in a special and
peculiar ‘sense. ‘For. the: sobjecty of ΝΕ
apostolic argument is not the distinction of
the hypostases from one another by means
of the apparent notes; it is rather the
apprehension of the natural, inseparable,
and close relationship of the Son to the
Father. He does not say ‘* Who being the
glory of the Father” (although in truth He
is); he omits this as admitted, and then
in the endeavour to teach that we must not
think of one form of glory in the case of the
Father and of another in that of the Son,
He defines the glory of the Only-begotten
as the brightness of the glory of the Father,
and, by the use of the example of the light,
causes the Son to be thought of in indisso-


1The scientific part of the analogy of the rainbow is of
course obsolete and valueless. The general principle holds
good that what is beyond comprehension in theology finds its
parallel in what is beyond comprehension in the visible world.
We are not to be staggered and turn dizzy in either sphere of
thought at the discovery that we have reached a limit beyond
which thought cannot go. We may live in a finite world,
though infinite space is beyond our powers of thought; we mav
trust in God revealed in the Trinity, though we cannot analyse
or define Him. 2 ΗεΌ. 1. 2.


LETTERS.


141


luble association with the Father. For just
as the brightness is emitted by the flame,
and the brightness is not after the flame,
but at one and the same moment the
flame shines and the light beams brightly,
so does the Apostle mean the Son to be
thought of as deriving existence from the
Father, and yet the Only-begotten not to
be divided from the existence of the Father
by any intervening extension in space, but
the caused to be always conceived of to-
gether with the cause. Precisely in the
same manner, as though by way of inter-
pretation of the meaning of the preceding
cause, and with the object of guiding us to
the conception of the invisible by means of
material examples, he speaks also of ‘* ex-
press image of person.” For as the body
is wholly in form, and yet the definition of
the body and the definition of the form
are distinct, and no one wishing to give
the definition of the one. would be found in
agreement with that of the other; and yet,
even if in theory you separate the form
from the body, nature does not admit of
the distinction, and both are inseparably
apprehended; just so the Apostle thinks
that even if the doctrine of the faith repre-
sents the difference of the hypostases as
unconfounded and distinct, he is bound by
his language to set forth also the continuous
and as it were concrete relation of the Only-
begotten to the Father. And this he states,
not as though the Only-begotten had not
also a hypostatic being, but in that the
union does not admit of anything inter-
vening between the Son and the Father,
with the result that he, who with his soul’s
eyes fixes his gaze earnestly on the express
image of the Only-begotten, is made percep-
tive also of the hypostasis of the Father.
Yet the proper quality contemplated in
them is not subject to change, nor yet to
commixture, in such wise as that we should
attribute either an origin of generation to
the Father or an origin without generation
to the Son, but so that if we could compass
the impossibility of detaching one from the
other, that one might be apprehended sev-
erally and alone, for, since the mere name
implies the Father, it is not possible that
any one should even name the Son without
apprehending the Father.'

8. Since then, as says the Lord in the
Gospels,’ he that hath seen the Son sees
the Father also; on this account he says
that the Only-begotten is the express image

1The simpler explanation of the use of the word hypos-
tasis in the passage under discussion is that it has the earlier


sense, equivalent to οὐσία. cf. Athan., Or.c. Ar. iii. 65, iv. 33,
and Ad. Apos. 4. 2 John xiv. 9.


of His Father’s person. That this may
be made still plainer I will quote also
other passages of the apostle in which he
calls the Son ‘*the image of the invisible
God,”? and again ‘‘image of His good-
ness;” 2 not because the image differs from
the Archetype according to the definition of
indivisibility and goodness, but that it may
be shewn that it is the same as the prototype,
even though it be different. For the idea
of the image would be lost were it not to pre-
serve throughout the plain and invariable
likeness. He therefore that has perception
of the beauty of the image is made per-
ceptive of the Archetype. So he, who has,
as it were mental apprehension of the form
of the Son, prints the express image of the
Father’s hypostasis, beholding the latter in
the former, not beholding in the reflection
the unbegotten being of the Father (for thus
there would be complete identity and no
distinction), but gazing at the unbegotten
beauty in the Begotten. Just as he who in
a polished mirror beholds the reflection of
the form as plain knowledge of the repre-
sented face, so he, who has knowledge of the
Son, through his knowledge of the Son
receives in his heart the express image of the
Father’s Person. For all things that are the
Father’s are beheid inthe Son, and all things
that are the Son’s are the Father’s; because
the whole Son is in the Father and has all
the Father in Himself.* Thus the hypostasis
of the Son becomes as it were form and face
of the knowledge of the Father, and the
hypostasis of the Father is known in the
form of the Son, while the proper quality
which is contemplated therein remains for
the plain distinction of the hypostases.


LETTER XXXD<*
Julian® to Basie.


THE proverb says ‘‘ You are not pro-


1Col. i. 15.

2 This phrase is not in the Epistles, nor indeed does the
substantive ἀγαϑότης occur in the N.T. αἱ 411. ‘* Image of his
goodness ᾽ἢ is taken from Wisdom vii. 26, and erroneously in
cluded among the “‘ words of the Apostle.”

8 ε΄. John xiv. τι.

4To be placed probably in 362, if genuine.

5 These Letters are placed in this order by the Ben. Editors
as being written, if genuine, before Basil’s episcopate. Maran
(Vita S. Bas. Cap. ii.) is puzzled at Basil’s assertion in xli.
that he learned the Bible with Julian, and points out that at
Athens they devoted themselves to profane literature. But this
may have allowed intervals for other work. In 344, when Basil
was at Cesarea, Julian was relegated by Constantius to the
neighbouring fortress of Macellum, and there, with his elder
half-brother Gallus, spent six years in compulsory retirement.
Sozomen tells us that the brothers studied the Scriptures_and
became Readers (Soz. v. 2; Amm. Marc. xv. 2, 7). ‘Their
seclusion, in which they were reduced to the society of their
own household (Greg. Naz., Or. iii., Julian, Ad Ath. 271 c.),
mav not have been so complete as to prevent all intercourse
with a harmless schoolboy like Basil. ‘* Malgré Vauthorité de
dom Maran, nous croyons avec Tillemont, Dupont et mM.
Albert de Broglie, que cette lettre a été réellement adressée par


142


BASIL:


1 and, let me add, out of the


. . 5 493
claiming war, ἡ»


comedy, ‘*O messenger of golden words.
Come then; prove this in act, and hasten to
me. You will come as friend to friend.
Conspicuous and unremitting devotion to
business seems, to those that treat it as of
secondary importance, a heavy burden; yet
the diligent are modest, as 1 persuade
myself, sensible, and ready for any emer-
gency. [allow myself relaxation, so that even
rest may be permitted to one who neglects
nothing. Our mode of life is not marked
by the court hypocrisy, of which I think you
have had some experience, and in accord-
ance with which compliments mean deadlier
hatred than is felt to our worst foes; but,
with becoming freedom, while we blame
and rebuke where blame is due, we love
with the love of the dearest friends. I may
therefore, let me say, with all sincerity,
both be diligent in relaxation and, when at
work, not get worn out, and sleep secure 5
since when awake I do not wake more for
myself, than, as is fit, for every one else. ]
am afraid this is rather silly and trifling, as
I feel rather lazy, (I praise myself like
Astydamas*) but I am writing to prove to
you that to have the pleasure of seeing you,
wise man as you are, will be more likely to
do me good than to cause any difficulty.
Therefore, as I have said, lose no time;
travel post haste. After you have paid me
as long a visit as you like, you shall go on
your journey, whithersoever you will, with
my best wishes.


LETTER Xt.”
Julian to Basil.


WuiLe showing up to the present time
the gentleness and benevolence which have


been natural to me from my boyhood, I


have reduced all who dwell beneath the
sun to obedience. For lo! every tribe of
barbarians to the shores of ocean has come
to lay its gifts before my feet. So too
the Sagadares who dwell beyond the
Danube, wondrous with their bright tattoo-
ing, and hardly like human beings, so wild
and strange are they, now grovel at my feet,
and pledge themselves to obey all the behests
my sovereignty imposes on them. I have a
Fulien, non aun homonyme de St. Rasile mats a St. Rasile
ui-méme.” Etude historique et littératre sur St. Basile.
Fialon.

17.e. your words are friendly.” cf. Plat., Legg. 7o2 D.
ov πόλεμόν ye ἐπαγγέλλεις, ὦ Κλεινία,

2 ᾧ χρυσὸν ἀγγείλας ἐπῶν. Aristoph., P/ut. 268.

3 A playwright of Athens, who puta boastful epigram on
his own statue, and became a byword for self-praise. Vide
Suidas s.v., σαυτὸν ἐπαινεῖς,


41f genuine, which is exceedingly doubtful, this letter
vrould be placed in the June or July οἵ 352.


further object. I must as soon as possible
march to Persia and rout and make a tribu-
tary of that Sapor, descendant of Darius.
I mean too to devastate the country of the
Indians and the Saracens until they all ac-
knowledge my superiority and become my
tributaries. You, however, profess a wisdom
above and beyond these things; you call
yourself clad with piety, but your clothing
is really impudence, and everywhere you
slander me as one unworthy of the imperial
dignity. Do you not know that I am the
grandson of the illustrious Constantius?! I
know this of you, and yet I do not change
the old feelings which I had to you, and you
to me in the days when we were both
young.” But of my merciful will I command
that a thousand pounds of gold be sent me
from you, when I pass by Cesarea; for I
am still on the march, and with all possible
dispatch am hurrying to the Persian cam-
paign. If you refuse I am prepared to
destroy Czsarea, to overthrow the buildings
that have long adorned it; to erect in their
place temples and statues; and so to induce
all men to submit to the Emperor of the
Romans and not exalt themselves. Where-
fore I charge you to send me without fail
by the hands of some trusty messenger the
stipulated gold, after duly counting and
weighing it, and sealing it with your ring.
In thisway I may show mercy to you for
your errors, if you acknowledge, however
late, that no excuses will avail. I have
learned to know, and to condemn, what
once I read.*


LETTER XLI.*
Basil to Julian.


1... THE heroic deeds of your present
splendour are small, and your grand attack
against me, or rather against yourself, is
paltry. When I think of you robed in purple,
a crown on your dishonoured head, which, so
long as true religion is absent, rather dis-
graces than graces your empire, I tremble.
And you yourself who have risen to be so
high and great, now that vile and honour-
hating demons have brought you to this


1 7.e. of Constantius Chlorus. Vide pedigree prefixed to
Theodoret in this edition, p. 32. Julian was the youngest son
of Julius Constantius, half-brother of Constantine the Great.

2 The fact of the early acquaintance of Basil and Julian does
not rest wholly on the authority of this doubtful letter. cf
Greg. Naz., Orat. iv.

3 A strong argument against the genuineness of this letter
is the silence of Gregory of Nazianzus as to this demand on
Basil (Or. v. 39). For Julian’s treatment of Caesarea, vide
Sozomen v. 4. Maran (Vita S. Bas, viii.) remarks that when
Julian approached Czsarea Basil was in his Pontic retreat.
On the punning conclusion, vide note on Letter xli, (ἃ ἀνέγνων
ἔγνων καὶ κατέγνων.)

41Ε genuine, of the same date as xl.


LEFIERS.


143


pass, have begun not only to exalt yourself
above all human nature, but even to uplift
yourself against God, and insult His Church,
mother and nurse of all, by sending
to me, most insignificant of men, orders to
forward you a thousand pounds of gold. I
am not so much astonished at the weight of
the gold, although it is very serious; but it
has made me shed bitter tears over your so
rapid ruin. I bethink me how you and
I have learned together the lessons of the
best and holiest books. Each of us went
through the sacred and God-inspired Scrip-
tures. Then nothing was hid from you.
Nowadays you have become lost to proper
feeling, beleaguered as you are with pride.
Your serene Highness did not find out for
the first time yesterday that I do not live in
the midst of superabundant wealth. To-day
you have demanded a thousand pounds of
gold of me. I hope your serenity will deign
to spare me. My property amounts to so
much, that I really shal! not have enough to
eat as-much 451 shall like to-day. Under
my roof the art of cookery is dead. My ser-
vants’ knife never touches blood. The most
important viands, in which lies our abun-
dance, are leaves of herbs with very coarse
bread and sour wine, so that our senses are
not dulled by gluttony, and do not indulge
in excess.

2. Your excellent tribune Lausus, trusty
minister of your orders, has also reported to
me that a certain woman came as a sup-
pliant to your serenity on the occasion of the
death of her son by poison; that it has been
judged by you that poisoners are not allowed
to exist;* if any there be, that they are to
be destroyed, or, only those are reserved, who
are to fight with beasts. And, this rightly
decided by you, seems strange to me, for
your efforts to cure the pain of great wounds
by petty remedies are to the last degree
ridiculous. After insulting God, it is useless
for you to give heed to widows and orphans.
The former is mad and dangerous; the latter
the part of a merciful and kindly man. It is
a serious thing for a private individual like
myself to speak to an emperor; it will be
more serious for you to speak to God. No
one will appear to mediate between God and
man. What you read you did not under-
stand. If you had understood, you would
not have condemned.’


1 φαουακοὺς μηδαμοῦ εἶναι. The Ben. Ed. compares with the
form of expression the phrase of St. Cyprian: “ Zeg’bus vestris
bene atque utiliter censutstis delatores non esse.’ cf. Letter lv.

2°A avéyvws οὐκ ἔγνως" εἰγὰρ ἔγνως, οὐκ av κατέγνως. In Soz.
v. 18, Julian’s words, ἃ ἀνέγνων ἔγνων καὶ κὰτέγνων, are Stated to
have been written to ‘ the bishops’ in reference to Apologies by
the younger Apollinarius, bp. of the Syrian Laodicea (after-
wards the heresiarch) and others. The reply is credited to
‘the bishops,’ with the remark that some attribute it to Basil.


LETTER XLII.'
To Chilo, his disciple.


1. Ir, my true brother, you gladly suffer
yourself to be advised by me as to what course
of action you should pursue, specially in the
points in which you have referred to me for
advice, you will owe me your salvation.
Many men have had the courage to enter
upon the solitary life; but to live it out to
the end is a task which perhaps has been
achieved by few. The end is not necessarily
involved in the intention ; yet in the end is the
guerdon of the toil. No advantage, there-
fore, accrues to men who fail to press on to
the end of what they have in view and only
adopt the solitary’s life in its inception.
Nay, they make their profession ridiculous,
and are charged by outsiders with unmanli-
ness and instability of purpose. Of these,
moreover, the Lord says, who wishing to
build a house ‘‘sitteth not down first and
counteth the cost whether he have sufficient
to finish it? lest haply after he hath laid the
foundation and is not able to finish it,’’ the
passers-by “ὁ begin to mock him saying,”
this man laid a foundation ‘‘and was not
able to finish.”? Let the start, then, mean
that you heartily advance in virtue. The
right noble athlete Paul, wishing us not to
rest in easy security on so much of our life
as may have been lived well in the past, but,
every day to attain further progress, says
ες Forgetting those things which are behind,
and reaching forth unto those things which
are before, I press toward the mark for the
prize of the high calling.” * So truly stands
the whole of human life, not contented with
what has gone before and fed not so much on
the past as on the future. For how is a man
the better for having his belly filled yester-
day, if his natural hunger fails to find its
proper satisfaction in food to-day? In the
same way the soul gains nothing by yester-
day’s virtue unless it be followed by the
right conduct of to-day. For it is said “51
shall judge thee as I shall find thee.”

2.. Vain. then \is~the labour of the
righteous man, and free from blame is the
way of the sinner, if a change befall, and the
former turn from the better to the worse, and
the latter from the worse to the better. So
we hear from Ezekiel teaching as it were in

1 This and the four succeeding letters must be placed before
the episcopate. Their genuineness has been contested, but
apparently without much reason. In one of the Parisian
Codices the title of xlii. is given with the note: ** Some attri-
bute this work to the holy Nilus.’? Ceillier (iv. 435-437) is of
opinion that, so far as style goes, they must stand or fall to-
gether, and points out that xlvii. is cited entire as Basil’s by


Metaphrastes.


2 Luke xiv. 2S, 30. 3 Phil. iii, 13, 14.


144


Deol:


the name of the Lord, when he says, “1 the
righteous turneth away and committeth in-
iquity, I will not remember the righteous-
ness which he committed before; in his sin
heshall die,’ ? and so too abovt the sinner ; if
he turn away from his wickedness, and do that
which is right, he shall live. Where were
all the labours of God’s servant Moses, when
the gainsaying of one moment shut him out
from entering into the promised land? What
became of the companionship of Gehazi
with Elisseeus, when he brought leprosy on
himself by his covetousness? What availed
all Solomon’s vast wisdom, and his previous
regard for God, when afterwards from his
mad love of women he fell into idolatry?
Not even the blessed David was blameless,
when his thoughts went astray and he sinned
against the wife of Uriah. One example
were surely enough for keeping safe one who
is living a godly life, the fall from the better
to the worse of Judas, who, after being so
long Christ’s disciple, for a mean gain sold his
Master and got a halter for himself. Learn
then, brother, that it is not he who begins
well who is perfect. It is he who ends well
who is approved in God’s sight. Give then no
sleep to your eyes or slumber to your eye-
lids? that you may be delivered *‘asa_ roe
from the net anda bird from the snare.” ὃ
For, behold, you are passing through the
midst of snares; you are treading on the top
of a high wall whence a fall is perilous to
the faller; wherefore do not straightway at-
tempt extreme discipline; above all things
beware of confidence in yourself, lest you
fall from a height of discipline through
want of training. It is better to advance a
little ata time. Withdraw then by degrees
from the pleasures of life, gradually de-
stroying all your wonted habits, lest you
bring on yourself a crowd of temptations by
irritating all your passions at once. When
you have mastered one passion, then begin
to wage war against another, and in this
manner you will in good time get the better of
all. Indulgence, so far as the name goes, is
one, but its practical workings are diverse.
First then, brother, meet every temptation
with patient endurance. And by what
various temptations the faithful man is
proved; by worldly loss, by accusations, by
lies, by opposition, by calumny, by persecu-
tion! ‘These and the like are the tests of the
taithtul. Further, be quiet, not” rash. in
speech, not quarrelsome, not disputatious,
not covetous of vain glory, not more anxious


1 cf, Ezek. xviii, 24.
A 6F PS. CXR. Ay


3’Prov. vi. 5, LXX.


to get than to give knowledge,’ not a man
of many words, but always more ready to
learn than to teach. Do not trouble yourself
about worldly life ; from it no good can come
to you. It is said, ** That my mouth speak
not the works of men.” ? The man who is
fond of talking about sinners’ doings, soon
rouses the desire for self indulgence ; much
better busy yourself about the lives of good
men for so you will get some profit for your-
self. Do not be anxious to go travelling
about *® from village to village and house to
house ; rather avoid them as traps for souls.
If any one, for true pity’s sake, invite you
with many pleas to enter his house, let him
be told to follow the faith of the centurion,
who, when Jesus was hastening to him to
perform an act of healing, besought him not
to do so in the words, ‘* Lord I am not
worthy that thou shouldest come under my
roof, but speak the word only and my servant
shall be healed,” * and when Jesus had said to
him “ὁ Go thy way ; as thou hast believed, so
be it done unto thee,” ® his servant was
healed from that hour. Learn then, brother,
that it was the faith of the suppliant, not the
presence of Christ, which delivered the sick
man. So too now, if you pray, in whatever
place you be, and the sick man believes that
he will be aided by your prayers, all will
fall out as he desires.

3. You will not love your kinsfolk more
thar the Lord. ‘He that loveth,” tessays,
ὁ. father, or mother, or brother, more than
me, is not worthy of me.”® What is the
meaning of the Lord’s commandment? ‘*‘ He
that taketh not up his cross and followeth
after me, cannot be my disciple?” 7 If, to-
gether with Christ, you died to your kinsfolk
according to the flesh, why do you wish to live
with them again? If for your kinsfolk’s sake
you are building up again what you de-
stroyed for Christ’s sake, you make yourself
a transgressor. Do not then for your kins-
folk’s sake abandon your place: if you
abandon your place, perhaps you will
abandon your mode of life. Love not the
crowd, nor the country, nor the town; love
the desert, ever abiding by yourself with no
wandering mind,® regarding prayer and
praise as your life’s work. Never neglect
reading, especially of the New Testament,
because very frequently mischief comes of


1 μὴ ἐξηγητικὸς ἀλλὰ φιλόπευστος, as Suggested by Combefis
for φιλόπιστος.

2 Ps. xvi. 4, LXX. 4 Matt. viii. 8.

3 Another reading is (exhibiting yourself). 5 Matt. viii. 13.
: 6 Matt. x. 37, with ἀδελφούς added perhaps from Luke xiv.
26.
7 Luke xiv. 27 and Matt. x. 28.
8 For the contrary view of life, cf. Seneca, fp. 61: ‘* Omuta
nobis mala solitudo persuadet ; nemo est cut non sanctius sit
cum guolibet esse quam secum.”’


LETTERS.


145


reading the Old; not because what is written
is harmiul, but because the minds of the in-
jured are weak. ΑἹ] bread is nutritious, but
it may be injurious to the sick. Just so all
Scripture is God inspired and _ profitable,’
and there is nothing in it unclean: only to
him who thinks it is unclean, to him it is
unclean... ‘* Prove all things; hold fast that
which is good; abstain from every form of
evil.”? ‘* All things are lawful but all things
are not expedient.” * Among all, with whom
you come in contact, be in all things a giver
pre ne:offence,* ,cheerfuk, ‘loving. as, a
brother,”° pleasant, humble-minded, never
missing the mark of hospitality through ex-
travagance of meats, but always content with
what is at hand. Take no more from any
one than the daily necessaries of the solitary
life. Above all things shun gold as the
soul’s foe, the father of sin and the agent of
the devil. Do not expose yourself to the
charge of covetousness on the pretence of min-
istering to the poor; but, if any one brings
you money for the poor and you know of
any who are in need, advise the owner him-
self to convey it to his needy brothers, lest
haply your conscience may be defiled by the
acceptance of money.

4. Shun pleasures; seek after continence ;
train your body to hard work; accustom
your soul to trials. Regarding the dissolu-
tion of soul and body as release from every
evil, await that enjoyment of everlasting
good things in which all the saints have
part. Ever, as it were, holding the balance,
against every suggestion of the devil throw
in a holy thought, and, as the scale inclines,
do thou go with it. Above all when the evil
thought starts up and says, “Ὁ What is the good
of your passing your life in this place?
What do you gain by withdrawing yourself
from the society of men? Do you not know
that those, who are ordained by God to be
bishops of God’s churches, constantly associ-
ate with their fellows, and indefatigably at-
tend spiritual gatherings at which those who
are present derive very great advantage?
There are to be enjoyed explanations of hard
sayings, expositions of the teachings of the
apostles, interpretations of the thoughts of
the gospels, lessons: in theology and the in-
tercourse of spiritual brethren, who do great
good to all they meet if only by the sight of
their faces. You, however, who have de-
cided to be a stranger to all these good
things, are sitting here ina wild state like the
beasts. You see round you a wide desert
with scarcely a fellow creature in it, lack


8 1 Cor. vi. 12. 5 Pet. iii. δ,


1 of. 2 Tim. iii. 16.
4 cf. 1 Cor. X. 32.


2} Thess. v. 21, R.V.


of all instruction, estrangement from your
brothers, and your spirit inactive in carrying
out the commandments of God.” Now,
when the evil thought rises against you, with
all these ingenious pretexts and wishes to
destroy you, oppose to it in pious reflection
your own practical experience, and say,
You tell me that the things in the world are
good; the reason why I came here is because
I judged myself unfit for the good things of
the world. With the world’s good things
are mingled evil things, and the evil things
distinctly have the upper hand. Once
when 1 attended the spiritual assemblies: I
did with difficulty find one brother, who, so
far as I could see, feared God, but he was a
victim of the devil, and I heard from him
amusing stories and tales made up to deceive
those whom he met. After him I fell in
with many thieves, plunderers, tyrants. I
saw disgraceful drunkards; I saw the blood
of the oppressed; I saw women’s beauty,
which tortured my chastity. From actual
fornication I fled, but I defiled my virginity
by the thoughts of my heart. I heard many
discourses which were good for the soul,
but I could not discover in the case of any
one of the teachers that his life was worthy
of his words. After this, again, I heard a
great number of plays, which were made at-
tractive by wanton songs. Then I heard
a lyre sweetly played, the applause of
tumblers, the talk of clowns, all kinds of jests
and follies and all the noises of a crowd. I
saw the tears of the robbed, the agony of the
victims of tyranny, the shrieks of the tor-
tured. I looked and lo, there was no spirit-
ual assembly, but only a sea, wind-tossed
and agitated, and trying to drown every one
at once under its waves.’ Tell me, O evil
thought, tell me, demon of short lived pleas-
ure and vain glory, what is the good of my
seeing and hearing all these things, when
I am powerless to succour any of those
who are thus wronged; when I am allowed
neither to defend the helpless nor correct the
fallen; when I am perhaps doomed to de-
stroy myself too. For just as a very little
fresh water is blown away by a storm of wind
and dust, in like manner the good deeds, that
we think we do in this life, are overwhelmed
by the multitude of evils. Pieces acted for
men in this life are driven through joy and
merriment, like stakes into their hearts, so
that the brightness of their worship is be-
dimmed. But the wails and lamentations of


1The Ben. note on this painful picture suggests that the
description applies to Palestine, and compares the account of
Jerusalem to be found in Gregory of Nyssa’s letter on_Pil-
erimages in this edition, p. 382. On Basil’s visit to the Holy
Land, cf. Ep. ccxxiii. § 2.


146


men wronged by their fellows are introduced
to make a show of the patience of the poor.
5. What good then do 1 get except the
loss of my soul? For this reason I migrate
to the hills like a bird. “41 am escaped as
a bird out of the snare of the fowlers.”’ I
am living, O evil thought, in the desert in
which the Lord lived. Here is the oak of
Mamre; here is the ladder going up to
heaven, and the stronghold of the angels
which Jacob saw; here is the wilderness in
which the people purified received the law,
and so came into the land of promise and
saw God. Here is Mount Carmel where
Elias sojourned and pleased God. Here is the
plain whither Esdras withdrew, and at God’s
bidding uttered all the God inspired books.’
Here is the wilderness in which the blessed
John ate locusts and preached repentance
to men. Here is the Mount of Olives,
whither Christ came and prayed, and taught
us to pray. Here is Christ the lover of the
wilderness, for He says ‘* Where two or three
are gathered together in my name there am
iin ‘ihe midst of Ὁ °** Fiere -is ‘the
strait and narrow way which leadeth unto
life.’ * Here are the teachers and prophets
ἐς wandering in deserts and in mountains and
in dens and caves of the earth.” ° Here are
apostles and evangelists and solitaries’ life
remote from cities. This I have embraced
with all my heart, that I may win what has
been promised to Christ’s martyrs and all
His other saints, and so I may truly say,
ἐς Because of the words of thy lips I have
kept hard ways.” δ I have heard of Abra-
ham, God’s friend, who obeyed the divine
voice and went into the wilderness; of Isaac
who submitted to authority; of Jacob, the
patriarch, who left his home; of Joseph, the
chaste, who was sold; of the three children,
who learnt how to fast, and fought with the
fire; of Daniel thrown twice into the lion’s
den;’ of Jeremiah speaking boldly and
thrown into a pit of mud; of Isaiah, who
saw unspeakable things, cut asunder with a
saw; of Israel led away captive; of John
the rebuker of adultery, beheaded ; of Christ’s
martyrs slain. But why say more? Here
our Saviour Himself was crucified for our
sakes that by His death He might give us
life, and train and attract us all to endurance.
To Him I press on, and to the Father and to
the Holy Ghost. I strive to be found true,
judging myself unworthy of this world’s goods.


DPS vex πιῖν. ἢ,

2 cf. Esdrasii. 14; Ireneus, Adv. Her. iii, 21, 2; Tertullian,
De Cult. Fam.i.3; Clem. Alex., Strom. i. 22.

8 Matt. xviii. 20; a curious misapplication of the text.

4 Matt. vii. 14. 6 5. XVil. 4, X.

5 Heb. xi. 38. 7 Vide Bel and the dragon.


another .


BASIL.


And yet not I because of the world, but the
world because of me. Think of all these
things in your heart; follow them with zeal ;
fight, as you have been commanded, for the
truth to the death. For Christ was made
* obedient” even’ ** mio ΠΕ τ Pike
Apostle says, ‘‘ Take heed lest there be in
any of you an evil heart in depart-
ing from the living God. But exhort one
(and edify one another *)
while it is called to-day.” * To-day means
the whole time of our life. Thus living,
brother, you will save yourself, you will
make me glad, and you will glorify God
from everlasting to everlasting. Amen.


LETTER XLIIL*


Admonition to the Young.


O FAITHFUL man of solitary life, and
practiser of true religion, learn the lessons of
the evangelic conversation, of mastery over
the body, of a meek spirit, of purity of mind,
of destruction of pride. Pressed into the
service,’ add to your gifts, for the Lord’s
sake; robbed, never go to law; hated, love;
persecuted, endure; slandered, entreat. Be
dead to sin; be crucified to God. Cast all
your care upon the Lord, that you may be
found where are tens of thousands of angels,
assemblies of the first-born, the thrones of
prophets, sceptres of patriarchs, crowns of
martyrs, praises of righteousmen. Earnestly
desire to be numbered with those righteous
men in Christ Jesus our Lord. To Him be
glory for ever. Amen.


LETTER \ XLIV,*
To a lapsed Monk."


1. I po not wish you joy, for there is no joy
for the wicked. Even now I cannot believe
it; my heart cannot conceive iniquity so
great as the crime which you have commit-
ted; if, that is, the truth really is what is
generally understood. Iam at a loss to think
how wisdom so deep can have been made to
disappear; how such exact discipline can
have been undone; whence blindness so
profound can have been shed round vou;
how with utter inconsiderateness you have
wrought such destruction of souls. If this


1 Phil. ii. 8. 2h hess. Va τς 3 Heb. iii. 12, 13.

4 Ranked with the preceding, and of dubious genuineness.
δ ἀγγαρενόμενος. cf. Matt. v. 41.

6 To be ranked with the former letter.

7 One MS. adds, in a later hand, Alexius.


LETTERS.


147


be true, you have given over your own soul
to the pit, and have slackened the earnest-
ness of all who have heard of your impiety.
You have set at nought the faith; you have
missed the glorious fight. I grieve over
you. What cleric’ does not lament as he
hears? What ecclesiastic does not beat the
breast? + What layman is not downcast?
What ascetic is not sad? Haply, even the
sun has grown dark at your tall, and the
powers of heaven have been shaken at your
destruction. Even senseless stones have shed
tears at your madness; even your enemies
have wept at the greatness of your iniquity.
Oh hardness of heart! Oh cruelty! You
did not fear God; you did not reverence
men; you cared nothing for your friends ;
you made shipwreck of all at once; at once
you were stripped of all. Once more I
grieve over you, unhappy man. You were
proclaiming to all the power of the kingdom,
and you fell from it. You were making all
stand in fear of your teaching, and there was
no fear of God before your eyes. You were
preaching purity, and you are found polluted.
You were priding yourself on your poverty,
and you are convicted of covetousness; you
were demonstrating and explaining the chas-
tisement of God, and you yourself brought
chastisement on your own head. How am I
to lament you, how grieve for your? How
is Lucifer that was rising in the morning
fallen and dashed on the ground? Both the
ears of every hearer will tingle. How is the
Nazarite, brighter than gold, become dark
above pitch? How has the glorious son of
Sion become an unprofitable vessel! Of
him, whose memory of the sacred Scriptures
was in all men’s mouths, the memory to-day
has perished with the sound. The man of
quick intelligence has quickly perished. The
man of manifold wit has wrought manifold
iniquity. All who profited by your teaching
have been injured by your fall. All who
came to listen to your conversation have
stoped their ears at your fall. I, sorrowful
and downcast, weakened in every way, eat-
ing ashes for bread and withsackcloth on my
wound, am thus recounting your praises; or
rather, with none to comfort and none to
cure, am making an inscription for a tomb.
For comfort is hid from my eyes. I have no
salve, no oil, no bandage to put on. My
wound is sore, how shall I be healed?

2. Ifyou have any hope of salvation; if
you have the least thought of God, or any


1 ἱερεύς. When first this word and its correlatives came to
be used of the Christian ministry it was applied generally to
the clergy. cf. Letter of the Council of Illyricum in Theod.,
£cc. Hist. iv.8, and note on Letter liv. p. 157.


desire for good things to come; if you have
any fear of the chastisements reserved for the
impenitent, awake without delay, lift up
your eyes to heaven, come to your senses,
cease from your wickedness, shake off the
stupor that. enwraps you, make ἃ stand
against the foe who has struck you down.
Make an effort to rise from the ground. Re-
member the good Shepherd who will follow
and rescue you. Though it be but two legs
or a lobe of an ear,’ spring back from the
beast that has wounded you. Remember
the mercies of God and how He cures with
oiland wine. Do not despair of salvation.
Recall your recollection of how it is written
in the Scriptures that he who is falling rises
and he who turns away returns ;? the wounded
is healed, the prey of beasts escapes ; he who
owns his sin is not rejected. The Lord
willeth not the death of a sinner but rather’
that he should turn and live.* Do not de-
spise, like the wicked in the pit of evil.‘
There is a time of endurance, a time of long
suffering, a time of healing, a time of correc-
tion. Have you stumbled? Arise. Have
you sinned? Cease. Do not stand in the
way of sinners,® but spring away. When
you are converted and groan you shall be
saved. Out of labour comes health, out of
sweat salvation. eware lest, from your
wish to keep certain obligations, you break
the obligations to God which you professed
before many witnesses.® Pray do not hesi-
tate to come to me for any earthly considera-
tions. When I have recovered my dead I shall
lament, I shall tend him, I will weep ““ be-
cause of the spoiling of the daughter of my
people.” 7 Allare ready to welcome you,
all will share your efforts. Do not sink back.
Remember the days of old. There is salva-
tion; there is amendment. Be of good
cheer; do not despair. It is not a law con-
demning to death without pity, but mercy
remitting punishment and awaiting improve-
ment... The doors: are. not \ yet shut). the
bridegroom hears; sin is not the master.
Make another effort, do not hesitate, have
pity on yourself and on all of us in Jesus
Christ our Lord, to Whom be glory and might
now and for ever and ever. Amen.


LETTER XLV.°
To a lapsed Monk.


1. I amdoubly alarmed to the very bottom
of my heart, and you are the cause. I am


1 cf, Amos iii. 12. 5 cf. PS.i. Te
5. οὐο Pers νὰ, ἂς 6 cf, 1 Tim. vi. 12.
3 cf, Ezek. Xvili..32- Tis: Sacre As


4 Prov. xviii. 3, LXX. 8 To be ranked with the preceding.


;


148


BASIL.


either the victim of some unkindly prepos-
session, and soam driven to make an unbroth-
erly charge; or, with every wish to feel
for you, and to deal gently with your troubles,
I am forced to take a different and an un-
friendly attitude. Wherefore, even as I take
my pen to write, I have nerved my unwilling
hand by reflection; but my face, downcast as
it is, because of my sorrow over you, I have
had no power to change. [I am so covered
with shame, for your sake, that my lips are
turned to mourning and my mouth straight-
way falls) Ah me! Whatam I to write?
What shall I think in my perplexity?

If I call to mind your former empty mode
of life, when you were rolling in riches and
had abundance of petty mundane reputation,
I shudder; then you were followed by a mob
of flatterers, and had the short enjoyment of
luxury, with obvious peril and unfair gain ;
on the one hand, fear of the magistrates scat-
tered your care for your salvation, on the
other the agitations of public affairs disturbed
your home, and the continuance of troubles
directed your mind to Him Who is able to
help you. Then, little by little, you took to
seeking for the Saviour, Who brings you
fears for your good, Who delivers you and
protects you, though you mocked Him in
your security. Then you began to train
yourself for a change to a worthy life, treat-
ing all your perilous property as mere dung,
and abandoning the care of your household,
and the society of your wife. All abroad,
like a stranger and a vagabond, wandering
through town and country, you betook your-
self to Jerusalem.’ There I myself lived
with you, and, for the toil of your ascetic dis-
cipline, called you blessed, when fasting for
weeks you continued in contemplation before
God, shunning the society of your fellows,
like a routed runaway. Then you arranged
for yourself a quiet and solitary life, and re-
fused all the disquiets of society. You
pricked your body with rough sackcloth ;
you tightened a hard belt round your loins;
you bravely put wearing pressure on your
bones; you made your sides hang loose
from front to back, and all hollow with fast-
ing; you would wear no soft bandage, and
drawing in your stomach, like a gourd, made
it adhere to the parts about your kidneys.
You emptied out all fat from your flesh; all
the channels below your belly you dried


tcf, note on Letter xlii. p. 145. Maran, Vit. S. Bas. cap.
xii., regards this implied sojourn at Jerusalem as unfavourable
to the genuineness of the letter; but supposing the letter to be
genuine, and grounds to exist for doubting Basil to have
spent any long time in the Holy Land, there seems no reason
why “‘ Jerusalem ” may not be taken ina figurative sense for the
companionship of the saints. See also Proleg. on Basil’s
baptism,


up; your belly itself you folded up for want
οἵ food; your ribs, like the eaves of a house,
you made to overshadow all the parts about
your middle, and, with all your body con-
tracted, you spent the long hours of the night
in pouring out confession to God, and made
your beard wet with channels of tears. Why
particularize? Remember how many mouths
of saints you saluted with a kiss, how many
holy bodies you embraced, how many held
your hands as undefiled, how many servants
of God, as though in worship, ran and
clasped you by the knees.

2. And what is the end of all this? My
ears are wounded by a charge of adultery,
flying swifter than an arrow, and piercing
my heart with a sharper sting. What crafty
wiliness of wizard has driven you into so
deadly a trap? What many-meshed devil’s
nets have entangled you and disabled all the
powers of your virtue? What has become
of the story of your labours? Or must we
disbelieve them? How can we avoid giving
credit to what has long been hid when we
see what is plain? What shall we say of
your having by tremendous oaths bound souls
which fled for refuge to God, when what is
more than yea and nay is carefully attributed
to the devil?’ You have made yourself se-
curity for fatal perjury; and, by setting the
ascetic character at nought, you have cast
blame even upon the Apostles and the very
Lord Himself. You have shamed the boast
of purity. You have disgraced the promise
of chastity; we have been made a tragedy of
captives, and our story is made a play of be-
fore Jews and Grecks. You have made a
split in the solitaries’ spirit, driving those of
exacter discipline into fear and cowardice,
while they still wonder at the power of the
devil, and seducing the careless into imitation
of your incontinence. So far as you have
been able, you have destroyed the boast of
Christ, Who said, ‘* Be of good cheer I have
overcome the world,” and its Prince. You
have mixed for your country a bowl of ill
repute. Verily you have proved the truth of
the proverb, ‘** Like a hart stricken through
the liver.”

But what now? The tower of strength
has not fallen, my brother. The remedies
of correction are not mocked; the city of
refuge is not shut. Do not abide in the
depths of evil. Do not deliver yourself to
the slayer of souls. The Lord knows how
to set up them that are dashed down. Do
not try to flee afar off, but hasten to me.
Resume once more the labours of your youth,


1 of. Matt. v.37. 2 John xvi. 33. 3 cf. Prov. vii. 22, 23, LXX,.


LEETERS:


149


and by a fresh course of good deeds destroy
the indulgence that creeps foully along the
ground. Look to the end, that has come so
near to our life. See how now the sons of
Jews and Greeks are being driven to the
worship of God, and do not altogether deny
the Saviour of the World. Never let that
most awful sentence apply to you, ‘* Depart
from me, I never knew you.” ?


LETTER XLVI.’


To a fallen virgin.


1. Now is the time to quote the words of
the prophet and to say, ‘*Oh that my head
were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night for the slain
of the daughter of my people.” * Though
they are wrapped in profound silence and lie
stunned by their misfortune, robbed of all
sense of feeling by the fatal blow, I at all
events must not let such a fall go unlamented.
If, to Jeremiah, it seemed that those whose
bodies had been wounded in war, were wor-
thy of innumerable lamentations, what shall
be said of such a disaster of souls? ‘** My
slain men,” it is said, δ" are not slain with
the sword, nor dead in battle.’ * But Iam
bewailing the sting of the real death, the
grievousness of sin and the fiery darts of the
wicked one, which have savagely set on fire
souls as well as bodies. Truly God’s laws
would groan aloud on seeing so great a pol-
lution on the earth. They have pronounced
their prohibition of old ** Thou shalt not
covet thy neighbour’s wife”;° and through
the holy gospels they say that ‘* Whosoever
looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath
committed adultery already with her in his
heart.”° Now they see the bride, of. the
Lord herself, whose head is Christ, boldly
committing adultery.7 So too would groan
the companies® of the Saints. Phinehas,
the zealous, because he can now no more
take his spear into his hands and avenge the
outrage on the bodies; and John the Baptist,
because he cannot quit the realms above, as
in his life he left the wilderness, to hasten to
convict iniquity, and if he must suffer for the
deed, rather lose his head than his freedom
to speak. But, peradventure, like the blessed
Abel, he too though dead yet speaks to us,”
and now exclaims, more loudly than John of


5 Deut. v. 21.
6 Matt. v. 28. ;
7 cf. Letter ccxvii. ὃ 60.


1 Luke xiii, 27.

2 Placed with the preceding.

Scr, ax. ks

#Is. xxii. 2.

8 Τάγματα, with two MSS,
πνεύματα.


The alternative reading is
9 cf, Heb, xi. 4.


old concerning Herodias, ‘‘ It is not lawful
for thee to have her.” * For even if the body
of John in obedience to the law of nature
has received the sentence of God, and his
tongue is silent, yet ‘‘the word of God is
not bound.” ? John, when he saw the wed-
lock of a fellow servant set at nought, was
bold to rebuke even to the death: how
would he feel on seeing such an outrage
wreaked on the marriage chamber of the
Lord?

2. You have flung away the yoke of that
divine union; you have fled from the unde-
filed chamber of the true King; you have
shamefully fallen into this disgraceful and
impious corruption; and now that you can-
not avoid this painful charge, and have no
means or device to conceal your trouble, you
rush into insolence. The wicked man after
falling into a pit of iniquity always begins
to despise, and you are denying your actual
covenant with the true bridegroom; you say
that you are not a virgin, and made no prom-
ise, although you have undertaken and pub-
licly professed many pledges of virginity.
Remember the good profession which you
witnessed? before God, angels, and men.
Remember the hallowed intercourse, the
sacred company of virgins, the assembly of
the Lord, the Church of the holy. Remem-
ber your grandmother, grown old in Christ,
still youthful and vigorous in virtue; and
your mother vying with her in the Lord, and
striving to break with ordinary life in strange
and unwonted toils; remember your sister,
who copies their doings, nay, endeavours to
surpass them, and goes beyond the good
deeds of her fathers in her virgin graces,
and earnestly challenges by word and deed
you her sister, as she thinks, to like efforts,
while she earnestly prays that your virginity
be preserved.* All these call to mind, and
your holy service of God with them, your
life spiritual, though in the flesh; your con-
versation heavenly, though on earth. Re-
member days of calm, nights lighted up,
spiritual songs, sweet music of psalms,
saintly prayers, a bed pure and undefiled,
procession of virgins, and moderate ἔαγο.
What has become of your grave appearance,
your gracious demeanour, your plain dress,
meet for a virgin, the beautiful blush of
modesty, the comely and bright pallor due
to temperance and vigils, shining fairer than
any brilliance of complexion? How often
have you not prayed, perhaps with tears,


1 Matt xiv. 4. 22 Tim. ii. 9. 3 cf. 1 Tim. vi, 12.

4’These words occur in the MSS. after ‘moderate fare,”
below, where they make nosense. The Ben. Ed. conjectures
that they may belong here,


5 Vide note above.


150


BASIL.


that you might preserve your virginity with-
out spot! How often have you not written
to the holy men, imploring them to offer up
prayers in your behalf, not that it should be
your lot to marry, still less to be involved in
this shameful corruption, but that you should
not fall away from the Lord Jesus?) How
often have you received gifts from the Bride-
groom? Why enumerate the honours given
you for His sake by them that are His?
Why tell of your fellowship with virgins,
your progress with them, your being greeted
by them with praises on account of virginity,
eulogies of virgins, letters written as to a
virgin? Now, nevertheless, at a little blast
from the spirit of the air, ‘‘ that now worketh
in the children of disobedience,” * you have
abjured all these; you have changed the
honourable treasure, worth fighting for at all
costs, for short-lived indulgence which does
for the moment gratify the appetite ; one day
you will find it more bitter than gall.

3. Who would not grieve over such
things and say, ** How is the faithful city
become an harlot?”?? How would not the
Lord Himself say to some of those who
are now walking in the spirit of Jeremiah,
‘¢ Hast thou seen what the virgin of Israel
has done to mer” *. I betrothed her to me
in trust, in purity, in righteousness, in judg-
ment, in pity, and in mercy;* as I pro-
mised her through Hosea the prophet. But
she loved strangers, and while 1, her hus-
band, was yet alive, she is called adulteress,
and is not afraid to belong to another hus-
band. What then says the conductor of
the bride,® the divine and blessed Paul,
both that one of old, and the later one of
to-day under whose mediation and instruc-
tion you left your father’s house and were
united to the Lord? Might not either, in
‘sorrow for such a trouble, say, ‘* The thing
which I greatly feared is come upon me,
and that which I was afraid of is come
unto me.”° ‘*I have espoused you to one
husband that I may present you as a chaste
virgin to Christ.”* I was indeed ever
afraid ‘¢lest by any means as the serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your
mind should be corrupted;”*® wherefore by
countless counter-charms I strove to control
the agitation of your senses, and by count-
less safeguards to preserve the bride of the
Lord. So I continually set forth the life
of the unmarried maid, and described how


1 Eph. ii. 2. 8 cf. Jer. xviii. 13.

218, 1, 21. 4 cf. Hosea ii. 19.

5 The νυμφαγωγός was the friend who conducted the bride
from her parents’ or her own house to the bridegroom’s. cf,
Luc., Dial. Deor, 20, τό.


6 Job iii. 25. 1.2 Cor. xi, 2. 8.2 Cor. xi. 3.


‘‘the unmarried”: alone **careth for the
things of the Lord, that she may be holy
both’ in » body and /spirit.” =e. used -to
describe the high dignity of virginity, and,
addressing you as a temple of God, used
as it were to give wings to your zeal as I
strove to lift you to Jesus. Yet through
fear of evil I helped you not to fall by the
words ‘‘if any man defile the temple of
God, him shall God destroy.”*? So by my
prayers I tried to make you more secure,
if by any means ‘‘your body, soul, and
spirit might be preserved blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” ®
Yet all my toil on your behalf has been in
vain. Bitter to me has been the end of
those sweet labours. Now I needs must
groan again at that over which I ought to
have ‘rejoiced. (Yow ‘have “been! (deceived
by the serpent’: more ‘ bitterly dhan Eve;
and not only your mind but also your body
has been defiled. Even that last horror
has come to pass which I shrink from
saying, and yet cannot leave unsaid, for it
is as a burning and blazing fire in my
bones, and I am undone and cannot endure.
You have taken the members of Christ and
made them the members of a harlot.* This
is an evil with which no other can be
matched. This outrage in life is new.
‘‘For pass over the Isles of Chittim and
see; and send unto Chedar and consider
diligently, and see if there be such a thing.
Hath a nation changed their gods which
are yet no gods.”* But the’ virgin /has
changed her glory, and her glory is in her
shame. ‘The heavens are astonished at this,
and the earth is horribly afraid, saith the
Lord, for the virgin has committed two
evils; she has forsaken® Me, the true and
holy Bridegroom of holy souls, and has
betaken herself to an impious and lawless
destroyer of body and soul alike. She has
revolted from God, her Saviour, and yielded
her members servants to uncleanness and to
iniquity.’ She forgot me and went after
her lover ® from whom she will get no good.

4. It were better for him that a mill-stone
had been hanged about his neck, and that
he had been cast into the sea, than that he
should have offended the virgin of the
Lord. What slave ever reached such a
pitch of mad audacity as to fling himself
upon his master’s bed? What robber ever
attained such a height of folly as to lay
hands upon the very offerings of God, not


11 Cor. vii. 34.
21 Cor. 111: 77.
381 Thess. v. 23.
ἘΠ Ομ Wie Τα.
5 Jer. ii. 10, 11.


6 cf. Jer. ii. 12, 13, LXX,
7 cf. Rom. vi. 19.
8 cf, TOSen il. 13.
9¢f. Luke xvii. 2.


LETTERS.


151


dead vessels, but bodies living and enshrin-
ing a soul made after the image of God?!

Who was ever known to have the hardi-
hood, in the heart of a city and at high noon,
to mark figures of filthy swine upon a royal
statue? He who has set at naught a mar-
riage of man, with no mercy shewn him,
in the presence of two or three witnesses,
dies.” Of how much sorer punishment, sup-
pose you, shall he be thought worthy who
hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and
defiled His pledged bride and done despite
unto the spirit of virginity?* But the
woman, he urges, consented, and I did no
violence to her against her will. So, that
unchaste lady of Egypt raged with love for
comely Joseph, but the chaste youth’s virtue
was not overcome by the frénzy of the
wicked woman, and, even when she laid
her hand upon him, he was not forced into
iniquity. But still, he urges, this was no
new thing in her case; she was no longer
a maid; it I had been unwilling, she would
have been corrupted by some one else.
Yes; and it is written, the Son of Man was
ordained to be betrayed, but woe unto that
man by whom He was betrayed.* It must
needs be that offences come, but woe to
that man by whom they come.’

5. Insuch astate of things as this, “6 Shall
they fall and not arise? Shall he turn away
aud ,not return?” * (Why did the virgin
turn shamefully away, though she had heard
Christ her bridegroom saying through the
mouth of Jeremiah, ‘* And I said, after she
had done all these things (committed all
these fornications, LX X.), turn thou unto me,
but she returned not?”” ‘Is there no balm
in Gilead; is there no physician there?
Why then is not the health of the daughter
of my people recovered?”*® You might
indeed find many remedies for evil in Scrip-
ture, many medicines to save from destruc-
tion and lead to health; the mysteries of
death and resurrection, the sentences of
terrible judgment and everlasting punish-
ment; the doctrines of repentance and of
remission of sins; all the countless illustra-
tions of conversion, the piece of money, the
sheep, the son who wasted his substance
with harlots, who was lost and was found,
who was dead and alive again. Let us not
use these remedies for ill; by these means let
us heal our soul. Bethink you of your last


1 St. Basil has no idea of the image and likeness of God
being a bodily likeness, as in the lines of Xenophanes.

27.e. by the old Jewish law. Deut. xvii.6, Adultery was
not capital under the Lex Julia, but was made so by Constan-
tine.

3cf. Heb... 20.

4 cf. Mark xiv. 21.

5 cf. Matt. xviii. 7.


6 Jer, viii. 4.
7 Jer. iii. 7.
8 Jer, viii. 22.


day, for you will surely not, unlike all other
women, live for ever. The distress, the
gasping for breath, the hour of death, the
imminent sentence of God, the angels
hastening on their way, the soul fearfully
dismayed, and lashed to agony by the con-
sciousness of sin, turning itself piteously to
things of this life and to the inevitable
necessity of that long life to be lived else-
where. Picture to me, as it rises in your
imagination, the conclusion of all human
life, when the Son of God shall come in
His glory with His angels, ‘* For he shall
come and shall not keep silence;”}! when
He shall come to judge the quick and dead,
to render to every one according to his
work; when that terrible trumpet with its
mighty voice shall wake those that have
slept through the ages, and they that have
done good shall come forth unto the resur-
rection of life, and they that have done evil
unto the resurrection of damnation.? Re-
member the vision of Daniel, and how he
brings the judgment before us: ‘*I beheld
till the thrones were cast down, and the
Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was
white as snow, and the hair of His head like
the pure wool; . ... and His wheelgiaa
burning fire. A fiery stream issued and
came forth before Him; thousand thousands
ministered unto Him, and ten thousand times
ten thousand stood before Him: the judg-
ment was set, and the books were apened,” ὃ
clearly disclosing in the hearing of all,
angels and men, things good and evil,
things done openly and in secret, deeds,
words, and thoughts all at once. What
then must those men be who have lived
wicked lives? Where then shall that soul
hide which in the sight of all these specta-
tors shall suddenly be revealed in its fulness
of shame? With what kind of body shall
it sustain those endless and unbearable pangs
in the place of fire unquenched, and of the
worm that perishes and never dies, and of
depth of Hades, dark and horrible; bitter
wailings, loud lamenting, weeping and
enashing of tecth and anguish without end?
From all these woes there is no release after
death; no device, no means of coming forth
from the chastisement of pain.

6. Wecanescape now. While we can, let
us lift ourselves from the fall; let us never de-
spair of ourselves, if only we depart from evil.
Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners. “Ὁ come, let us worship and fall
down ; let us weep before Him.” * The Word


2 Ps. b.4
3 cf. John v. 29.


8 Dan. vii. 9, 10.
« Ps, xcv. 6, LXX,.


152


BASIL.


nnn en


Who invited us to repentance calls aloud,
‘¢Come unto me all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.”’
There is, then, a way of salvation, if we will.
ςς Death in his might has swallowed up, but
again the Lord hath wiped away tears from off
all faces” ? of them that repent. The Lord is
faithful in all His words.* He does not lie
when He says, ‘¢ Though your sins be as scar-
let they shall be as white as snow. ‘Though
they be red like crimson they shall be as
wool.”* The great Physician of souls, Who
is the ready liberator, not of you alone, but of
all who are enslaved by sin, is ready to heal
your sickness. From Him come the words,
it was His sweet and saving lips that said,
‘+ They that be whole need not a physician
but they thatare sick. . . . Tamnotcome
to call the righteous but sinners to repent-
ance.” > What excuse have you, what ex-
cuse has any one, when He speaks thus?
The Lord wishes to cleanse you from the
trouble of your sickness and to show you
light after darkness. The good Shepherd,
\Vho left them that had not wandered away,
is seeking after you. If you give yourself to
Him He will not holdback. He, in His love,
will not disdain even to carry you on His own
shoulders, rejoicing that He has found His
sheep which was lost. The Father stands and
awaits your return from your wandering.
Only come back, and while you are yet afar
off, He will run and fall upon your neck,
and, now that you are cleansed by repentance,
will enwrap you in embraces of love. He
will clothe with the chief robe the soul that
has put off the old man with all his works;
He will put a ring on hands that have
washed off the blood of death, and will put
shoes on feet that have turned from the evil
way to the path of the Gospel of peace. He
will announce the day of joy and gladness to
them that are His own, both angels and men,
and will celebrate your salvation far and
wide. For ‘‘ verily I say unto you,” says He,
‘¢ there is joy in heaven before God over one
sinner that repenteth.”° If any of those who
think they stand find fault because of your
quick reception, the good Father will Himself
make answer for you in the words, ‘* It was
meet that we should make merry and be
glad for this” my daughter ‘‘ was dead and
is alive again, was lost and is found.” 7


1 Matt. xi. 28.

2 Is. xxv. 8, LXX.

3 Ps. cxlv. 13, LXX.
41Is.i. 18.


5 Matt. ix. 12, 13.
6 cf. Luke xv. 7.
7 Luke xv. 32.


LETTER XLVI?


To Gregory?


‘¢Wuo will give me wings like a dove?’
Or how can my old age be so renewed
that I can travel to your aflection, satisfy my
deep longing to see you, tell you ail the
troubles of my soul, and get from you some
comfort in my affliction? For when the
blessed bishop Eusebius * fell asleep, we
were under no small alarm lest plotters against
the Church of our Metropolis, wishful to fill
it with their heretical tares, should seize the
present opportunity, root out by their wicked
teaching the true faith sown by much la-
bour in men’s souls, and destroy its unity.
This has been the result of their action in
many churches.’ When however I received
the letters of the clergy exhorting me not to
let their needs be overlooked at such a crisis,
as I ranged my eyes in all directions 1 be-
thought me of your loving spirit, your right
faith, and your unceasing zeal on behalf of
the churches of God. I have therefore sent
the well beloved Eustathius,® the deacon, to
invite your reverence, and implore you to


1 Placed in 370. The letters numbered 47 to 291, inclusive,
are placed by the Benedictine editors during St. Basil’s epis-
copate.

2 On this title the Benedictine editors remark that no care-
ful reader can fail to note that the letter is written not by Basil
but about Basil. ““ Hodte,’’ they write, ‘‘zzter erudttos fere
convenit eam a Gregorio patre, filit manu, ad Eusebium
Samosatensem scriptam fuissé. Nam senem se esse declarat
auctor Epistole et tn Cappadocia Episcopum, ut qui litteris
clert ad electionem Episcopt, et Ecclest@ Ca@sariensis defe-
stonem invitatus fuerit. Is autem ad quem scribit et eadem
dignitate preditus erat, et laboribus pro Ecclesia susceptis
clarus, et amicus Basilio, nec Cappadoctea vicinus. Omnia
in Eusebium Samosatensem mirificé conveniunt, quem Bastlit
ordinationi scimus tnterfulsse,” and they give, moreover, as
their descriptive heading: “ Gregorius Theologt pater Luse-
bium Samosatensem, misso Eustathio diacono, invitat ad
electionem Episcopi Cesartensis ut eo adjuvante Bastlius eligt
possit.” Fialon, however, apparently forgetting the reference


to old age, writes (Etude Hist. p-'87, n.): ** Cette lettre est
évidemment de Grégotre de Naztanze,’? meaning the younger.
The election of St. Basil, who probably ‘ volu?l episcopari”’
to the archiepiscopal throne, was indeed mainly due to the
intervention of the elder Gregory. Basil’s unfortunate and
indefensible disingenuousness in summoning the younger
Gregory to Czsarea on the plea of his own severe illness
defeated its object. But for the prompt and practical in-
tervention of Gregory the elder, and this appeal to Eusebius
of Samosata, the archbishopric might have fallen into un-
worthy, or at least inferior, hands. Vide Biog. Notice in
Proleg., ᾿

9 cf. Ps. lv. 6, LXX.

4 Eusebius, at the time of his election an unbaptized lay-
man, was elevated to the throne of Caesarea on the death of
Dianius in 362. In this case too it was due to the counsels
of the elder Gregory that the objections both of Eusebius and
of the bishops, torced by the opposing party to consecrate him,
were finally overcome. It was he who ordained Basil to the
presbyterate and chafed against the ascendancy of his more
able and brilliant subordinate.

5 In 365 Valens came to Cxsarea with Arian bishops, and
endeavoured to put down the Catholics. Basil returned from
his retreat in order to aid Eusebius in resisting the attack, and
seems to have shown much tact and good feeling as well as
vigour and ability. cf. Greg. Naz., Or. xx. 340.

8 cf. Letter cxxxvi., where it appears that Basil kindly
nursed a deacon Eustathius. The fact of an Eustathius being
one of Basil’s deacons is so far in favour of Basil’s having
written the letter. But Eustathius was a common name, and
Eustathius, a monk, is mentioned in the will of Gregory of
Nazianzus.


LEVTIEES.


add this one more to all your labours on be-
half of the Church. I entreat you also to
refresh my old age by a sight of you; and to
maintain for the true Church its famous or-
thodoxy, by uniting with me, if I may be
deemed worthy of uniting with you, in the

ood work, to give it a shepherd in accord-
ance with the will of the Lord, able to guide
His people aright. I have before my eyes,a
man not unknown even to yourself. If only
we be found worthy to secure him, I am
sure that we shall acquire a confident access
to God and confer a very great benefit on the
people who have invoked our aid. Now
once again, aye, many times 1 call on you,
all hesitation put aside, to come to meet me,
and to set out before the difficulties of winter
intervene.


LETTER XLVIII.’
To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata?


I wAvE had considerable difficulty in
finding a messenger to convey a letter to
your reverence, for our men are so afraid of
the winter that they can hardly bear even
to put their heads outside their houses.
We have suffered from such a very heavy
fall of snow that we have been buried,
houses and all, beneath it, and now for two
months have been living in dens and caves.
You know the Cappadocian character and
how hard it is to get us to move.’ Forgive
me then for not writing sooner and bring-
ing to the knowledge of your excellency
the latest news from Antioch. To tell you
all this now, when it is probable that you
learnt it long ago, is stale and uninterest-
ing. But asIdo not reckon it any trouble
to tell you even what you know, I have
sent you the letters conveyed by the reader.
On this point I shall say no more. Constanti-
nople has now for some time had Demophi-
lus,* as the bearers of this letter will them-
selves tell you, and as has doubtless been
reported to your holiness. . From all who
come to us from that city there is unani-
mously reported about him a certain counter-
feit of orthodoxy and sound religion, to such
an extent that even the divided portions of


1 Placed at the beginning of the episcopate.
Rey, 1 675 XXXi., KXXiv.

8 The Cappadocians were of notoriously bad character, and
shared with the Cretans and Cilicians the discredit of illus-
trating τρία κάππα κάκιστα. cf. note on Theodoret, Ecc. Ast.
11. xi. p.75. It was Phrygians, however, who were specially
notorious for cowardice. cf. the proverb: ‘* More cowardly than
a Phrygian hare.” cf. Lightfoot, Codoss., etc., p. 378 n. But
Cappadocia may claim the counter credit of having given birth
to three of the most famous divines, Basil and the two Gregorys.

4 On the death of Eudoxius, in 370, Demophilus was elected
by the Arians to fill the vacant see. Eustathius, the deposed
bishop of Antioch, ordained Evagrius. Eustathius and
Evagrius were both banished by Valens, and their adherents
cruelly treated. Soc., Ecc. Hist. iv. 14, 16; Soz., Ecc. Hist. vi.
13, 14, and Philost., Ecc. Hist. ix. 10.


153


the city have been brought to agreement,
and some of the neighbouring bishops have
accepted the reconciliation. Our men here
have not. turned’ out better than I ex-

ected. They came directly you were aes
said and did many painful things, and a
last went home again, after making ee
separation from me wider.” Whether any-
thing better will happen in the future, and
whether they will give up their evil ways,
is unknown to all but God. - So much for
our present condition. The rest of the
Church, by God’s grace, stands sound, and
prays that in the spring we may have you
with us again, and be renewed by your good
counsel. My health is no better than it ever
18.

LETIER XLS
To Arcadius the Bishop.


I THANKED the Holy God when I read
your letter, most pious brother. I pray
that I may not be unworthy of the expecta-
tions you have formed of me, and that you
will enjoy a full reward for the honour which
you pay me in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. I was exceedingly pleased to hear
that you have been occupied in a matter
eminently becoming a Christian, have raised
a house to the glory of God, and have in
practical earnest loved, as it is written,
‘* the ‘beauty: of the: house of. the: Lordi?
and have so provided for yourself that
heavenly mansion which is prepared in His
rest for them that love the Lord. If I am
able to find any relics of martyrs, I pray that
I may take part in your earnest endeavour.
If **the righteous shall be had in everlast-
ing remembrance,” ὃ I shall without doubt
have a share in the good fame which the
Holy One will give you.


LETTER L.°


To Bishop Innocentius."


Wuom, indeed, could it better befit to


1 After the departure of Eusebius at the close of the visit
which he had undertaken, in accordance with the request of
the previous letter, in order to secure Basil’s consecration to
the vacant see.

2 On the difficulties thrown in Basil’s way by the bishops
who had opposed his election, cf. Letters xcvili., cxli., and
cclxxxii.

3 Of about the same date as the preceding.

4Ps. xxvi.8, LXX. © BS: cxit.G.

6 Placed at the beginning of the Episcopate.

7The Benedictine title runs, Basilius gratias agit Epis-
copo cuidam, and a Ben. note points out that the common
dition of *‘of Rome” to the title must be an error, because
iaasees not Innocent, was Bishop of Rome at the time.
Combefis supposed that the letter was written to Innocent,
then a presbyter, and that the allusion at the end of the letter
is to Damasus; the Ben, note says absurde. Innocent did not
become Bishop of Rome till 402, three years after Basil’s
death. Whatever was the see of the recipient of this letter,
it was one of importance. cf. Letter 1xxxi.


154


BASIL,


encourage the timid, and rouse the slumber-
ing, than you, my godly lord, who have
shewn your general excellence in this, too,
that you have consented to come down
among us, your lowly inferiors, like a true dis-
ciple of Him Who said, ‘¢ 1 am among you,”
not as a fellow guest, but ‘‘as he that
serveth.”! For you have condescended to
minister to us your spiritual gladness, to
refresh our souls by your honoured letter,
and, as it were, to fling the arms of your
greatness round the infancy of children.
We, therefore, implore your good soul to
pray, that we may be worthy to receive aid
from the great, such as yourself, and to have
a mouth and wisdom wherewith to chime
in with the strain of all, who like you are
led by the Holy Spirit. Of Him [ hear
that you are a friend and true worshipper,
and I am deeply thankful for your strong
and unshaken love to God. I pray that my
lot may be found with the true worshippers,
among whom we are sure your excellency
is to be ranked, as well as that great and true
bishop who has filled all the world with his
wonderful work.


BETTER 11
To Bishop Bosporius.*


How do you think my heart was pained
at hearing of the slanders heaped on me by
sone of those that feel no fear of the Judge,
who ‘‘ shall destroy them that speak leas-
ing”?* I spent nearly the whole night
sleepless, thinking of your words of love;
so did grief lay hold upon my heart of
hearts. For verily, in the words of Solomon,
slander humbleth a man.® And no man is
so void of feeling as not to be touched at
heart, and bowed down to the ground, if he
falls in with lips prone to lying. But we
must needs put up with all things and en-
dure all things, after committing our vin-
dication to the Lord. He will not despise
us; for ‘he that oppresseth the poor re-
proacheth his Maker.”® They, however,
who have patched up this new tragedy of
blasphemy seem to have lost all belief in the
Lord, Who has declared that we must give
account at the day of judgment even for an
idle word.” And I, tell me, I anathema-

1 Luke xxii. 27.

2 Placed at the beginning of Basil’s episcopate, c. 370.

3 Bosporius, an intimate friend of Basil and of Gregory of
Nazianzus, was bishop of Colonia, in Cappadocia Secunda.
Basil left Czsarea in 360 in distress at hearing that Dianius
had subscribed the creed of Ariminum, but was hurt at the
charge that he had anathematized his friend and bishop.
Dianius died in Basil’s arms in 362.

4 Ps, v. 6.

ὅ συκοφαντία ἄνδρα ταπεινοῖ, for Eccles. vii. 7, LXX.
συκοφαντία περιδέρει σοῴόν: oppression maketh a wise man


mad, A.V.; extortion maketh a wise man foolish, R.V.
6 Prov, Xiv. 31. 7 Matt. xii. 36.


tized the right blessed Dianius? For this
is what they have said against me. Where?
When? In whose presence? On what
pretext? In mere spoken words, or in
writing? Following others, or myself the
author and originator of the deed? Alas
for the impudence of men who make no
difficulty at saying anything! Alas for their
contempt of the judgment of God! Un-
less, indeed, they add this further to their
fiction, that they make me out to have been
once upon a time so far out of my mind as
not to know what I was saying. For so
long as I have been in my senses I know
that I never did anything of the kind, or
had the least wish to do so. What I am,
indeed, conscious of is this; that from my
earliest childhood I was brought up in love
for him, thought as I gazed at him how
venerable he looked, how dignified, how
truly reverend. Then when I grew older
I began to know him by the good qualities
of his soul, and took delight in his society,
gradually learning to perceive the simplicity,
nobility, and liberality of his character, ἀπά
all his most distinctive qualities, his gen-
tleness of soul, his mingled magnanimity
and meekness, the seemliness of his con-
duct, his control of temper, the beaming
cheerfulness and affability which he com-
bined with majesty of demeanour. From all
this I counted him among men most illus-
trious for high character.

However, towards the close of his life (I
will not conceal the truth) I, together with
many of them that in our country’ feared
the Lord, sorrowed over him with sorrow
unendurable, because he signed the creed
brought from Constantinople by George.’
Afterwards, full of kindness and gentle-
ness as he was, and willing out of the
fulness of his fatherly heart to give satisfac-
tion to everyone, when he had already
fallen sick of the disease of which he died,
he sent for me, and, calling the Lord to
witness, said that in the simplicity of his
heart he had agreed to the document sent
from Constantinople, but had had no idea of
rejecting the creed put forth by the holy
Fathers at Niczea, nor had had any other dis-
position of heart than from the beginning he
had always had. He prayed, moreover, that
he might not be cut off from the lot of those


1 Here Czsarea appears to be called πατρίς. cf. Ep. viii.
Vide Proleg.

2 2.6. τε Homcean creed of Ariminum, as revised at Nike
and accepted at the Acacian Synod of Constantinople in 360.
George is presumably the George bp. of Laodicea, who at
Seleucia opposed the Acacians, but appears afterwards to have
become reconciled to that party, and to have joined them in
Bo ie the Catholics at Constantinople. cf. Basil, Ep.
ccli.


LETTERS,


155


blessed three hundred and eighteen bishops
who had announced the pious decree" to the
world. In consequence of this satisfactory
statement I dismissed all anxiety and doubt,
and, as you are aware, communicated with
him, and gave over grieving. Such have
been my relations with Dianius. If anyone
avers that he is privy to any vile slander
on my part against Dianius, do not let him
buzz it slave-wise in acorner; let him come
boldly out and convict me in the light of day.


LETTER: DI’


To the Canonice.


1. I AVE been very much distressed by a
painful report which reached my ears; but I
have been equally delighted by my brother,
beloved of God, bishop Bosporius,* who has
brought a more satisfactory account of you.
He avers by God’s grace that all those stories
spread abroad about you are inventions of
men who are not exactly informed as to the
truth about you. He added, moreover, that
he found among you impious calumnies
about me, of a kind likely to be uttered by
those who do not expect to have to give the
Judge in the day of His righteous retribution
an account of even an idle word. I thank
God, then, both because I am cured of my
damaging opinion of you, an opinion which
I have derived from the calumnies of men,
and because I have heard of your abandon-
ment of those baseless notions about me, on
hearing the assurances of my brother. He,
in all that he has said as coming from him-
self, has also completely expressed my own
feeling. For in us both there is one mind
about the faith, as being heirs of the same
Fathers who once at Nicza promulgated
their great decree ° concerning the faith. Of
this, some portions are universally accepted
without cavil, but the term homocusion, ill
received in certain quarters, is still rejected
by some. These objectors we may very
properly blame, and yet on the contrary
deem them deserving of pardon. To refuse
to follow the Fathers, not holding their
declaration of more authority than one’s own
opinion, is conduct worthy of blame, as being

1 κήρυγμα. cf. p. 41.

2 Placed at the beginning of St. Basil’s episcopate, c. 370.

3 Canonice, in the early church, were women enrolled in a
list in the churches, devoted to works of charity, and living
apart from men, though not under vows, nor aJways in a cceno-
bium. In Soc., /7.£. i. 17 they are described as the recipients
of St. Helena’s hospitality. St. Basil is supposed to refuse to
recognise marriage with them as legitimate in Zp. cclxxxviii.
The word ce vovixwy may stand for either gender, but the mar-
riage of Canonici was commonly allowed. Letter clxxiii. is
addressed to the canonica Theodora,

4 Vide the Letter li.


δ κήρυγμα. On Basil’s use of this word and of dogma, vide
note on p. 41.


brimful of self-sufficiency. On the other
hand the fact that they view with suspicion
a phrase which is misrepresented by an op-
posite party does seem to a small extent to
relieve them from blame. Moreover, as a
matter of fact, the members of the synods
which met to discuss the case of Paul of
Samosata ' did find fault with the term as an
unfortunate one.

For they maintained that the homoousion
set forth the idea both of essence and of what
is derived from it, so that the essence, when
divided, confers the title of co-essential on
the parts into which it is divided. This ex-
planation has some reason in the case of
bronze and coins made therefrom, but in the
case of God the Father and God the Son
there is no question of substance anterior or
even underlying both; the mere thought and
utterance of such a thing is the last extrava-
gance ofimpiety. What can be conceived of
as anterior to the Unbegotten? By this blas-
phemy faith in the Father and the Son is de-
stroyed, for things, constituted out of one,
have to one another the relation of brothers.

2. Because even at that time there were
men who asserted the Son to have been
brought into being out of the non-existent,
the term homoousion wasadopted, to extirpate
this impiety. For the conjunction of the
Son with the Father is without time and
without interval. The preceding words
shew this to have been the intended mean-
ing. For after saying that the Son was
light of light, and begotten of the substance
of the Father, but was not made, they went
on to add the homoousion, thereby showing
that whatever proportion of light any one
would attribute in the case of the Father will
obtain also in that of the Son. For very
light in relation to very light, according to
the actual sense of light, will have no varia-


oO
tion. Since then the Father is light without


1/e, the two remarkable Antiochene synods of 264 and 2609,
to enforce the ultimate decisions of which against Paul of
Samosata appeal was made to the pagan Aurelian. On the
explanation of how the Homoousion came to be condemned in
one sense by the Origenist bishops at Antioch in 26a, and as-
serted in another by the 31S at Niczwa in 325, see prolegomena
to Athanasius in Schaff and Wace’s ed. p. xxxi. cf. Ath., De
Syn. ὃ 45, Hil., De Trin. iv. 4, and Basil, Cont. Eunom. i. το.
‘“Wurde seiner Lehre: ‘Gott sey mitt dem Logos zugleich
Eine Person, ἕν πρόσωπον wie der Mensch mit seiner Vernunft
Eines sey, entgegengehalten, die Kirchenlehre verlange
Einen Gott, aber mehrere πρόσωπα desselben, so sagte er. da
auch thm Christus eine Person (nimlich als Mensch) sey, so
habe auch sein Glaube mehrere πρόσωπα, Gott und Christus
stehen sich als ὃμούσιοι, d.h. wahrscheinlich gleich person-
liche gegeniiber, Diese -veratorische Dialekttk konnte zwar
nicht tiuschen; wohl aber wurde das Wort ὁμοούσιος, so
gebraucht und auf die Person iiberhaupt bezogen, dadurch eine
Weile verdichtig (man fiirchtete nach Athan. De Syn. Ar.
et Sel. c. 45. eine menschliche Person nach Paulin die
Trinitat einlassen zu miissen), bis das vierte Fahrhun-
dert jenem Wort bestimmten kirchlichen Stempel gab.’ Dor.
ner, Christologie. B. i. 513.

Ms also Thomasius, Christliche Dogmengeschichte, B.1,
p. 188.


156


BASIL.


beginning, and the Son begotten light, but
each of Them light and light; they rightly
said “ὁ of one substance,” in order to set forth
the equal dignity of the nature. Things, that
have a relation of brotherhood, are not, as
some persons have supposed, of one sub-
stance; but when both the cause and _ that
which derives its natural existence from the
cause are of the same nature, then they are
called ‘* of one substance.”

3. This term also corrects the error of
Sabellius, for it removes the idea of the
identity of the hypostases, and introduces in
perfection the idea of the Persons. For
nothing can be of one substance with itself,
but one thing is of one substance with
another. The word has therefore an excel-
lent and orthodox use, defining as it does
both the proper character of the hypostases,
and setting forth the invariability of the
nature. And when we are taught that the
Son is of the substance of the Father, begot-
ten and not made, let us not fall into the
material sense of the relations. For the sub-
stance was not separated from the Father
and bestowed on the Son; neither did the
substance engender by fluxion, nor yet by
shooting forth’ as plants their fruits. The
mode of the divine begetting is ineffable and
inconceivable by human thought. It is in-
deed characteristic of poor and carnal in-
telligence to compare the things that are
eternal with the perishing things of time,
and to imagine, that as corporeal things beget,
so does God in like manner; it is rather our
duty to rise to the truth by arguments of the
contrary, and to say, that since thus is the
mortal, not thus is He who isimmortal. We
must neither then deny the divine generation,
nor contaminate our intelligence with cor-
poreal senses.

4. The Holy Spirit, too, isnumbered with
the Father and the Son, because He is above
creation, and is ranked as we are taught by
the words of the Lord in the Gospel, ‘* Go
and baptize in the name of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Ghost.” ? He who,
on the contrary, places the Spirit before the
Son, or alleges Him to be older than the
Father, resists the ordinance of God, and is a
stranger to the sound faith, since he fails to
preserve the form of doxology which he has
received, but adopts some new fangled device
in order to be pleasing té men. Τί is written
“The Spirit is of ‘God,;” * ‘and if ‘Hes ‘of
God, how can He be older than that of
which He is? And what folly is it not,
when there is one Unbegotten, to speak of


1 cf. Luke xxi. 30. δὺ Cor, τιν 02,


2 Matt. xxviii. 19.


something else as superior to the Unbegotten ἢ
He is not even anterior, for nothing inter-
venes between Son and Father. If, how-
ever, He is not of God but is through Christ,
He does not even exist at all. It follows,
that this new invention about the order really
involves the destruction of the actual exist-
ence, and is a denial of the whole faith. It
is equally impious to reduce Him to the
level of a creature, and to subordinate Him
either to Son or to Father, either in time or
in rank. These are the points on which I
have heard that you are making enquiry. If
the Lord grant that we meet I may possi-
bly have more to say on these subjects, and
may myself, concerning points which I am
investigating, receive satisfactory information
from you.


LETTER LI.’
Zo the Chorepiscopt.”


1. My soul is deeply pained at the enormity
of the matter on which I write, if for this
only, that it has caused general suspicion
and talk. But so far it has seemed to me in-
credible. I hope then that what I am writ-
ing about it may be taken by the guilty as
medicine, by the innocent as a warning, by
the indifferent, in which class I trust none of
you may be found, as a testimony. And
what is it of which I speak? There is a re-
port that some of you take money from can-
didates for ordination,? and excuse it on


grounds of religion. ‘This is indeed worse.


If any one does evil under the guise of good
he deserves double punishment; because he
not only does what is in itself not good, but,
so to say, makes good an accomplice in the
commission of sin. If the allegation be true,
let, it be so. πὸ. mote, . Let a better. δι Ὁ
things begin. To the recipient of the bribe
it must be said, as was said by the Apostles
to him who was willing to give money ta


1 Placed in the beginning of the episcopate.

2 A class of ministers between bishops proper and pres-
byters, defined in the Arabic version of the Nicene canons to
be ‘ loco episcopt super villas et monasteria et sacerdotes vil-
larum ;? called into existence in the latter part of the third
century, and first in Asia Minor, in order to meet the wants of
episcopal supervision in the country parts of the now enlarged
dioceses without subdivision: first mentioned in the Councils
of Ancvra and Neo-Cesarea A.D. 214. D.C.A.i. 354. Three
MSS. give the title ‘*to the bishops under him.” The Ben.
Ed. remarks: “ Liguet Bastlium agere de episcopts stbt sub-
ditis. Nam quit proprie dicebantur fara manus non
ponebant, sed clero infertores mintstros ascribebant, ut videre
est tn eptst. sequenti. Sed tamen ipst etiam episcopi, qut
Ecclesias metropolt subjectas regebant, tnterdum vocabantur
chorepiscopt. Senin entm Gregorius Naz.tn carmine De
vita sua, quod a Basilio, qui quinguaginta chorepiscopos sub
se habebat, vilissimi oppiduli constitutus episcopus futsset.

τούτοις μ᾽ ὃ πεντήκοντα χωρεπισκόποις

στενούμενος δέδωκεν.
ffoc exemplo confirmatur vetustissimorum codicum scriptura
quam secuti sumus.

3 cf, note on Theodoret, iv. 20, p. 125.


LETTERS.


157


buy the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, ‘* Thy
money perish with thee.! It is a lighter sin
to wish in ignorance to buy, than it is to
sell, the gift of God. A sale it was; and if
you sell what you received asa free gift you
will be deprived of the boon, as though you
were yourself sold toSatan. You are obtrud-
ing the traffic of the huckster into spiritual
things and into the Church where we are en-
trusted with the body and blood of Christ.
These things must not be. And I will mention
wherein lies an ingenious contrivance. They
think that there is no sin because they take
the money not before but after the ordina-
tion; but to take is to take at whatever time.

2. Iexhort you, then, abandon this gain,
or, 1 would rather say, this approach to Hell.
Do not, by defiling your hands with such
bribes, render yourselves unfit to celebrate
holy mysteries. But forgive me. I began
by discrediting; and now I am threatening
as though I were convinced. If, after this
letter of mine, any one do anything of the
kind, he will depart from the altars here and
will seek a place where he is able to buy and
to sell God’s gift. We and the Churches of
God have no such custom.” One word
more, and I have done. These things come
of covetousness. Now covetousness is the
root of all evil and is called idolatry.?
Do not then price idols above Christ for the
sake of a little money. Do not imitate
Judas and once more betray for a bribe Him
who was crucified for us. For alike the
lands and the hands of all that make such
gain shall be called Aceldama.*


ERP TER LAY?
Zo the Chorepiscopt.


I am much distressed that the canons of
the Fathers have fallen through, and that the
exact discipline of the Church has been ban-
ished from among you. Iam apprehensive
lest, as this indifference grows, the affairs of
the Church should, little by little, fall into
confusion. According to the ancient custom
observed in the Churches of God, ministers
in the Church were received after careful
examination; the whole of their life was in-
vestigated ; an enquiry was made as to their
being neither railers nor drunkards, not
quick to quarrel, keeping their youth in
subjectign, so as to be able to maintain ‘‘ the
holiness without which no man shall see the
Lord.” 5 This examination was made by

1 Acts viii. 20. 3 cf, Col. iii. 5.
2 cf. 1 Cor. xi. 16. 4 cf. Acts 1, 19,


5 Placed at the same time as the foregoing.
6 Heb. xii. 14.


presbyters and deacons living with them.
Then they brought them to the Chorepis-
copi; and the Chorepiscopi, after receiving
the suffrages of the witnesses as to the truth
and giving information to the Bishop, so ad-
mitted the minister to the sacerdotal order.’
Now, however, you have quite passed me
over; you have not even had the grace to
refer to me, and have transferred the whole
authority to yourselves. Furthermore, with
complete indifference, you have allowed
presbyters and deacons to introduce un-
worthy persons into the Church, just any one
they choose, without any previous examina-
tion of life and character, by mere favoritism,
on the score of relationship or some other
tie. The consequence is, that in every village,
there are reckoned many ministers, but not
one single man worthy of the service of the
altars. Of this you yourselves supply proof
from your difficulty in finding suitable candi-
dates for election. As, then, I perceive that
the evil is gradually reaching a point at
which it would be incurable, and especially
at this moment when a large number of per-
sons are presenting themselves for the min-
istry through fear of the conscription, I am
constrained to have recourse to the restitution
of the canons of the Fathers. I thus order
you in writing to send me the roll of the
ministers in every village, stating by whom
each has been introduced, and what is his
mode of life. You have the roll in your own
keeping, so that your version can be com-
pared with the documents which are in mine,
and no one can insert his own name when
he likes. So if any have been introduced by
presbyters after the first appointment,” let


1 The Ben. note runs, “ Ministros, sive subdiacenos, sacra-
torum ordini ascribit Bastlius. Synodus Laodicena tnfer-
tores clericos sacratorum numero non comprehendit, sed
numerat sacratos a presbyteris usque ad diaconos, ἀπὸ πρεσ-
βυτέρων ἕως διακόνων, can. 24, distinguit canone 27, ἱερατικοὺς,
ἢ κληρικοὺς ἢ λαικοὺς, sive sacratos, sive clericos, stve laicos.
Et can. 30. “Ore ov Set ἱερατικὸν ἢ κληρικὺν ἢ ἀσκητὴν ἐν βαλανειῳ
μετὰ γυναικῶν ἀπολούεσθαι, μηδὲ πάντα Χοιστιανὸν ἢ λαϊκόν.
Non oportet sacratum vel clericum aut ascetam in balneo cum
muliertbus lavart. sed nec ullum Christianum aut laicum.
Non sequuntur hujus synodi morem ecclesiasticr scriptores.
Basilius, epist. 287, excommunicato omne cum sacratis com-
merctum tntercludit. Et in epist. 198, ἱερατεῖον intelligit
catum clertcorum, etque ascribit clericos qui epistolas episcopt
perferebant. Athanasius ad Rufinianum scribens, rogat eum
ut epistolam legat icpateiw et populo. Gregorius Nazianzenus
lectores sacri ordintis, ἱεροῦ τάγματος, partem esse agnoscit in
epist. 45. Notandus etiam canon ὃ apostolicus, εἰ τις ἐπίσκοπος
ἢ etc. πρεσβύτερος ἢ διάκονος ἢ ἐκ τοὺ ἱεραρικοὺ καταλόγον, etc.
St guts episcopus vel presbyter vel diaconus, vel ex sacro
ordine. Hac visa sunt observanda, quia pluribus RBastlit
locits, quae detnceps occurrent, non parum afferent lucis.”
The letter of the Council in Illyricum uses ἱερατικὸν τάγμα in
precisely the same way. Theod., Ecc. Hist. iv. 8, where see
note on p. 113. SoSozomen, On the Council of Nicea, i. 23.
Ordo, the nearest Latin equivalent to the Greek τάγμα, was
originally used of any estate in the church, e.g. St. Jerome, On |
Isatah v. 19, 18.

On the testing of qualifications for orders, cf. St. Cyprian,
Ep. \xviii.

2 μετὰ THY πρώτην ἐπινέμησιν. ᾿ἘΕπινέμησις is in later Greek
the recognised equivalent for ‘‘zzdict/o’’ in the sense of a
period of fifteen years (Cod. Theod. xi. 2S, 3). I have had
some hesitation as to whether it could possibly in this passage


158


BASIL.


them be rejected, and take their place among
the laity. Their examination must then be
begun by you over again, and, if they prove
worthy, let them be received by your deci
sion. Drive out unworthy men from the
Church, and so purgeit. Jor the future, test
by examination those who are worthy, and
then receive them; but do not reckon them
of the number before you have reported to
me. Otherwise, distinctly understand that he
who is admitted to the ministry without my
authority will remain a layman.


Pel VER hae


To Paregorius the presbyter.


I HAVE given patient attention to your
letter, and I am astonished that when you
are perfectly well able to furnish me witha
short and easy defence by taking action at
once, you should choose to persist in what 15
my ground of complaint, and endeavour to
cure the incurable by writing a long story
about it. I am not the first, Paregorius, nor
the only man, to lay down the law that
women are not to live with men. Read the
canon put forth by our holy Fathers at the
Council of Nicza, which distinctly forbids
subintroducts. Unmarried life is honourably
distinguished by its being cut off from all fe-
male society. If, then, any one, who is known
by the outward profession, in reality follows
the example of those who live with wives, it
is obvious that he only affects the distinction
of virginity in name, and does not hold aloof
from unbecoming indulgence. You ought
to have been all the more ready to submit
yourself without difficulty to my demands, in
that you allege that you are free from all
bodily appetite. I do not suppose that a
man of three score years and ten lives with a
woman from any such feelings, and I have
not decided, as I have decided, on the ground
of any crime having been committed. But
we have learnt from the Apostle, not to put
a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in a
brother’s way;” ?. and I know that what is
done very properly by some, naturally be-
comes to others an occasion for sin. I have
therefore given my order, in obedience to the
injunction of the holy Fathers, that you are
to separate from the woman. Why then. do
you find fault with the Chorepiscopus? What


indicate a date. But ἐπινέμησις does not appear to have been
used in its chronological sense before Evagrius, and his ex-
pression (iv. 29) τοὺς περιόδους τῶν κύκλων καλουμένων ἐπινεμής-
σεων looks as though the term were not yet common; ἐπινέμησις
here I take to refer to the assignment of presbyters to different
places on ordination. I am indebted to Mr. 7. W. Parker for
valuable information and suggestions on this question.

1 Placed at the beginning of the Episcopate.

2 Rom. xiv. 13.


is the good of mentioning ancient ill-will?
Why do you blame me for lending an easy
ear to slander? Why do you not rather lay
the blame on yourself, for not consenting to
break off your connexion with the woman?
Expel her from your house, and establish her
in a monastery. Let her live with virgins,
and do you be served by men, that the name
of God be not blasphemed in you. Till you
have so done, the innumerable arguments,
which you use in your letters, will not do you
the slightest service. You will die useless,
and you will have to give an account to God
for your uselessness. If you persist in cling=
ing to your clerical position without correct-
ing your ways, you will be accursed before

all the people, and all, who receive you, will —
be excommunicate throughout the Church.’


LETIER: LVF


To Pergamius.?


I NATURALLY forget very easily, and I
have had lately many things to do, and so my
natural infirmity is increased. 1 have no
doubt, therefore, that you have written to
me, although I have no recollection of having
received any letter from your excellency ; for
Iam sure you would not state what is not the
case. But for there having been no reply, it
is not I that am in fault; the guilt lies with
him who did not ask for one. Now, how-
ever, you have this letter, containing my de-
fence for the past and affording ground for a
second greeting. So, when you write to
me, do not suppose that you are taking
the initiative in another correspondence.
You are only discharging your proper
obligation in this. For really, although
this letter of ‘mine is ἃ ‘returm for a’ pre
vious one of yours, as it is more than
twice as bulky, it will fulfil a double pur-
pose. You see to what sophisms my idle-
ness drives me. But, my dear Sir, do not in
a few words bring serious charges, indeed
the most serious of all. Forgetfulness of
one’s friends, and neglect of them arising
from high place, are faults which involve
every kind of wrong. Do we fail to love

1 On the subject of the subintroducte or συνείσακτοι, one of
the greatest difficulties and scandals of the early church, vide
the article of Can. Venables in D.C.A. ii. 1937. The earliest
prohibitive canon against the custom is that of the Council of
Elvira, A.D. 305. (Labbe i. 973.) The Canon of Nicza, to
which Basil refers, only allowed the introduction of a mother,
sister, or aunt. The still more extraordinary amd perilous
custom of ladies of professed celibacy entertaining male
συνε σακτοι, referred to by Gregory of Nazianzus in his advice
to virgins, ἄρσενα πάντ᾽ adéetve συνείσακτον δὲ μάλιστα, may be
traced even so far back as ‘*the Shepherd of Hermas” (iii.
Simil. ix. 11). On the charges against Paul of ‘Samosata
under this head, vide Eusebius, vii. 30.


2 Placed at the beginning of the Episcopate.
8 A layman, of whom nothing more is known.


4


LETTERS,


159


according to the commandment of the Lord?
Then we lose the distinctive mark imprinted
on us. Are we puffed to repletion with
empty pride and arrogance? Then we fall
into the inevitable condemnation of the
devil. If, then, you use these words because
you held such sentiments about me, pray
that I may flee from the wickedness which
you have found in my ways; if, however,
your tongue shaped itself to these words, in
a kind of inconsiderate conventionality, I
shall console myself, and ask you to be good
enough to adduce some tangible proof of
your allegations. Be well assured of this,
that my present anxiety is an occasion to me
of humility. I shall begin to forget you,
when I cease to know myself. Never, then,
think that because a man is a very busy man
he is a man of faulty character.


LETTER LVII.!
To Meletius, Bishop of Antioch?


Tr your holiness only knew the greatness
of the happiness you cause me whenever you
write to me, I know that you would never
have let slip any opportunity of sending me
a letter; nay, you would have written me
many letters on each occasion, knowing
the reward that is kept in store by our loving
Lord for the consolation of the afflicted.
Everything here is still in a very painful
condition, and the thought of your holiness is
the only thing that recalls me from my own
troubles; a thought made more distinct to me
by my communication with you through that
letter of yours which is so full of wisdom and
grace.’ When, therefore; 1 take your letter
into my hand, first of all, I look at its size, and
I love it all the more for being so big; then, as
I read it, I rejoice over every word I find in it;
as I draw near the end I begin to feel sad;
so good is every word that I read, in what you
write. The overflowing of a good heart is
good. Should I, however, be permitted, in
answer to your prayers, while I live on this
earth, to meet you face to face, and to enjoy
the profitable instruction of your living
voice, or any aids to help me in the life that
now is, or that which is to come, I should
count this indeed the best of blessings, a pre-
lude to the mercy of God. I should, ere


1 Placed in the year 371.

2 This letter, the first of six to Meletius of Antioch, is sup-
posed to be assigned to this date, because of Basil’s statement
that the state of the Church at Caesarea was still full of pain to
him. Basil had not yet overcome the opposition of his suffra-
gans, or won the position secured to him after his famous
intercourse with Valens in 372. Meletius had now been for
seven years exiled from Antioch, and was suffering for the
sake of orthodoxy, while not in full communion with the
Catholics, because of the unhappy Eustathian schism.


now, have adhered to this intention, had I
not been prevented by true and loving
brothers. I have told my brother Theo-
phrastus! to make a detailed report to you of
matters, as to which | do not commit my in-
tentions to writing.


LETTER ‘Lyi?


To Gregory my brother?


How am I to dispute with you in writing?
How can I lay hold of you satisfactorily,
with all your simplicity? Tell me; who
ever falls a third time into the same nets?
Who ever gets a third time into the same
snare? Even a brute beast would find it
difficult todo so. You forged one letter, and
brought it me as though it came from our
right reverend uncle the bishop, trying to
deceive me, I have no idea why. I received
it as a letter written by the bishop and de-
livered by you. Why should I not? I was
delighted ; I shewed it to many of my friends ;
I thanked God. The forgery was found out,
on the bishop’s repudiating it in person. 1
was thoroughly ashamed; covered as I was
with the disgrace of cunning trickery and
lies, I prayed that the earth might open for
me. Then they gave me a second letter, as
sent by the bishop himself by the hands of
your servant Asterius. Even this second
had not really been sent by the bishop, as my
very reverend brother Anthimus* has told
me. Now Adamantius has come bringing
me a third. How ought I to receive a letter
carried by you or yours? I might have
prayed to have a heart of stone, so as ncituer
to remember the past, nor to feel the present;
so as to bear every blow, like cattle, with
bowed head. But what am [ to think, now
that, after my first and second experience, I
can admit nothing without positive proof?
Thus I write attacking your simplicity,
which I see plainly to be neither what gen-
erally becomes a Christian man, nor is appro-
priate to the present emergency; I write


1This Theophrastus may be identified with the deacon
Theophrastus who died shortly after Easter A.D. 372. (cf. Let-
tery xcv.) ‘The secret instructions given him ‘‘seem to refer to
Basil’s design for giving peace to the Church, which Basil did
not attempt to carry out before his tranquilization of Cappa-
docia, but may have had in mind long befure.” Maran, Vit.
Bas. chap. xvi.

2 Placed in 371.

8Three MSS. give the title Τρηγορίῳ ἐπισκόπῳ καὶ ἀδελφ,
but, as is pointed out by the Ben. Ed.,the letter itself is hardly
one which would be written to one with the responsibilities of
a bishop. Basil seems to regard his brother as at liberty to
come and help him at Cesarea. Gregory’s consecration to the
see of Nyssa is placed in 372, when his reluctance had to be
overcome by force. cf. Letter ccxxv. On the extraordinary
circumstance of his well meant but futile forgery of the name
of his namesake and uncle, bishop of an unknown see, vide
Prolegom.

4 Bishop of Tyana, estranged from Basil, cf. Letters cxx.,
cxxi., cxxii., and ccx.


160


“BASIL.


that, at least for the future, you may take
care of yourself and spare me. I must speak
to you with all freedom, and I tell you that
you are an unworthy minister of things so
great. However, whoever be the writer
of the letter, I have answered as is fit.
Whether, then, you yourself are experiment-
ing on me, or whether really the letter which
you have sent is one which you have re-
ceived from the bishops, you have my
answer. At such a time as this you ought
to have borne in mind that you are my
brother, and have not yet forgotten the ties
of nature, and do not regard me in the light
of an enemy, for I have entered on a life
which is wearing out my strength, and is so
far beyond my powers that it is injuring
even my soul. Yet for all this, as you have
determined to declare war against me, you
ought to have come to me and shared my
troubles. For it is said, “Ἅ Brethren and
help are against time of trouble.”' If the
right reverend bishops are really willing to
meet me, let them make known to mea place
and time, and let them invite me by their
own men. Ido not refuse to meet my own
uncle, but I shall not do so unless the in-
vitation reaches me in due and proper form.?


LEVTER. LIX?


To Gregory, his uncle."


1. “1 HAVE long time holden my peace.
Am Ito ΠΟΙ τὰν peace for ever?”*® Shall I
still further endure to enforce against myself
the hardest punishment of silence, by neither
writing myself, nor receiving any statement
from another? By holding fast to this stern
determination up to the present time I am
able to apply to myself the pr phet’s words,
“1 endure patiently like ~. travailing wo-
man.”* Yet I am ever longing for com-
munication either in person or by letter, and
ever, for my own sins’ sake, missing it. For
I cannot imagine any reason for what is hap-
pening, other than what I am convinced is
the true one, that by being cut off from your
love I am expiating old sins; if indeed I am
not wrong in using such a phrase as ** cut off”


1 Eccles. xl. 24.

* Negat Rasilius seadfuturum, nist decenter advocetur, id
est, nist mittantur quit eum in tndictum locum deducant. Erat
Bastlius. ut in ejus modi offictis exhibendis diligentissimus,
tta etiam in_reposcendis attentus. Meletius Antiochenus et
Theodorus Nicopolitanus, cum Basilium ad celebritatem
guamdam obiter advocassent per Hellenium Nazianzt Pere.
guatorem, nec tterum mistssent gut de tisdem admoneret aut
deduceret ; displicuit Basiho perfunctoria invitandt ratio, ac
ΡΣ ne suspectus illis esset, adesse noluit.’”? Note by Ben.


5 Placed in 361, at about the same time as the preceding.
4 Vide n, on preceding page.


5 Isa. xlii. 14, LXX. 6 Isa. xlii. 14, LXX.


in your case, from any one, much less from me,:
to whom you have always been as a father.
Now my sin, like some dense cloud over-
shadowing me, has made me forget all this.
When I reflect that the only result to me of
what is going on is sorrow, how can 1 attribute
itto anything but to my own wickedness?
But if events are to be traced to sins, be this
the end of my troubles; if there was any in-
tended discipline in it, then your object has
been very completely attained, for the pun-
ishment has been going on for a long time;
so I groan no longer, but am the first to
break silence, and beseech you to remember
both me and yourself who, to a greater degree
than our relationship might have demanded,
have shewn me strong affection all my life.
Now, I implore you, show kindness to the
city for my sake. Do not on my account
alienate yourself from it.

2. If, then, there is any consolation in
Christ, any fellowship of the Spirit, any
mercy and pity, fulfil my prayer. Put a stop
to my depression. Let there be a beginning
of brighter things for the future. Be your-
self a leader to others in the road to all that
is best, and follow no one else in the way to
what is wrong. Never was any feature so
characteristic of any one’s body as gentleness
and peace are of your soul. It were well
becoming such a one as you are to draw all
others to yourself, and to cause all who come
near you to be permeated with the goodness
of your nature, as with the fragrance of
myrrh. For though there be a certain
amount of opposition now, nevertheless ere
long there will be a recognition of the bless-
ings of peace. So long, however, as room is
found for the calumnies that are bred of dis-
sension, suspicion is sure to grow from
worse to worse. It is most certainly unbe-
coming for the rest to take no notice of me,
but it is especially unbecoming in your ex-
cellency. If Iam wrong I shall be all the
better for being rebuked. This’is im-
possible if we never meet. But, if I am
doing no wrong, for what am I disliked?
So much I offer in my own defence.

4. As to what the Churches might say in
their own behalf, perhaps it is better for me
to be silent: they reap the result of our dis-
agreement, and it is not to their gain. Iam
not speaking to indulge my grief but to put
a stop to it. And your intelligence, I am
sure, has suffered nothing to escape you.
You will yourself be better able to discern
and to tell to cthers points of far greater im-
portance than I can conceive. You saw the
mischief done to the Churches before I did ;
and you are grieving more than I am, for you


EE PIERS,


16I


have long learnt from the Lord not to despise
even the least." And now the mischief is
not confined to one or two, but whole cities
and peoples are sharers in my calamities.
What need to tell what kind of report will
spread about me even beyond our borders?
It were well for you, large hearted as you
are, to leave the love of strife to others; nay
rather, if it be possible, to root it from their
hearts, while you yourself vanquish what is
grievous by endurance. Any angry man
can defend himself, but to rise above the
actual anger belongs only to you, and any
one as good as you, if such there be. One
thing I will not say, that he who has a
grudge against me is letting his anger fall on
the innocent. Do then comfort my soul by
coming to me, or by a letter, or by inviting
me to come to you, or by some means or
other. My prayer is that your piety may be
seen in the Church and that you may heal at
once me and the people, both hy the sight of
you and by the words of your good grace.
If this be possible it is best; if you deter-
mine on any other course 1 shall willingly
accept it. Only accede to my entreaty that
you will give me distinct information as to
what your wisdom decides.


BE TER Rie?


To Gregory his uncle.


ForMERLY I was glad to see my brother.
Why not, since he is my brother and such
a brother? Now 1 have received him on his
coming to visit me with the same feelings, and
have lost none of my affection. God forbid
that I should ever so feel as to forget the ties
of nature and be at war with those who are
near and dear to me. I.have found his
presence acomfort in my bodily sickness and
the other troubles of my soul, and I have
been especially delighted at the letter which
he has brought me from your excellency.
For a long time I have been hoping that it
would come, for this only reason, that I need
not add to my life any doleful episode of
quarrel between kith and kin, sure to give
pleasure to foes and sorrow to friends, and
to be displeasing to God, Who has laid down
perfect love as the distinctive characteristic
of His disciples. So I reply, as I am in-
deed bound, with an earnest request for your
prayers for me, and your care for me in all
things, as your relative. Since I, from want
of information, cannot clearly understand the
meaning of what is going on, I have judged


1 cf. Matt. xviii. ro. ᾿
2 Of the same time as the preceding.


it right to accept the truth of the account
which you are so good as to give me. It is
for you of your wisdom to settle the rest,
our meeting with one another, the fitting
time and a convenient place. If your rever-
ence really does not disdain to come down
to my lowliness and to have speech with me,
whether you wish the interview to take place
in the presence of others or in private, I shall
make no objection, for I have once for all
made up my mind to submit to you in love,
and to carry out, without exception, what
your reverence enjoins on me for the glory
of God.

I have not laid my reverend brother under
the necessity of reporting anything to you
by word of mouth, because on the former
occasion what he said was not borne out by
facts.


LETTER LXI.1
To Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.?


I HAVE read the letter of your holiness,
in which you have expressed your distress at
the unhappy governor of Libya. I am
grieved that my own country should have
given birth to and nurtured such vices. I am
grieved too that Libya, ἃ neighbouring
country, should suffer from our evils, and
should have been delivered to the inhumanity
of a man whose life is marked at once by
crueity and crime. This however is only
in accordance with the wisdom of the
Preacher, “Ὁ Woe to thee O land when thy
King is a child;’’* (a still further touch of
trouble) and whose ‘* Princes ” do not ** eat’”
after night but revel at mid-day, raging after
other men’s wives with less understanding
than brute beasts. This man must surely
lock for the scourges of the righteous Judge,
repaid him in exact requital for those which he
himself has previously inflicted on the saints.
Notice has been given to my Church in ac-
cordance with the letter of your reverence,
and he shall be held by all as abominable,
cut off from fire, water and sheiter, if indeed
in the case of men so possessed there is any
use in general and unanimous condemnation.
Notoriety is enough for him, and your own
letter, which has been read in all directions,
for I shall not fail to show it to all his friends
and relatives. Assuredly, even if retribution


1 Placed in 370 or 371.

2 This, the first of Basil’s six extant letters to Athanasius, is
placed by the Ben. Ed. in 371. It has no certain indication of
date. Athanasius, in the few years of comparative calm
which preceded his death in May, 373, had excommunicated a
vicious governor in Libya, a native of Cappadocia, and an-
nounced his act to Basil. The intercourse opened by this off.
cial comniunication led to a more important correspondence,

8 Eccles. x. 16.


162


‘does not reach him at once, as it did
Pharaoh, certainly it will bring on him here-
after a heavy and hard requital.


LETTER LX
To the Church of Parnassus.?


FoLLowING an ancient custom, which has
obtained for many years, and at the same
time shewing you love in God, which is the
fruit of the Spirit, I’now, my pious friends,
address this letter to you. I feel with you
at once in your grief at the event which has
befallen you, and in your anxiety at the matter
which you have in hand. Concerning all
these troubles I can only say, that an occasion
is given us to look to the injunctions of the
Apostle, and not to sorrow ‘‘ even as others
which have no hope.” * I do not mean that
we should be insensible to the loss we have
suffered, but that we should not succumb to
our sorrow, while we count the Pastor happy
in hisend. He has died ina ripe old age,
and has found his rest in the great honour
given him by his Lord.

As to the future I have this recommenda-
tion to give you. You must now lay aside
all mourning; you must come to yourselves ;
you must rise to the necessary management
of the Church; to the end that the holy
God may give heed to His own little flock,
and may grant you a shepherd in accord-
ance with His own will, who may wisely


feed you.
LETTER LXIII.*


To the Governor of Neocesarea.


THE wise man, even if he dwells far
away, even if I never set eyes on him, I
count a friend. So says the tragedian Euri-
pides. And so, if, though I have never had
the pleasure of meeting your excellency in
“person, I speak of myself as a familiar
friend, pray do not set this down to mere
empty compliment. Common report, which
loudly proclaims your universal benevo-
lence, is, in this instance, the promoter of
friendship. Indeed since I met the highly
respectable Elpidius,® I have known you as


1 Placed about 371.

2 A town in Northern Cappadocia, on the right bank of the
Halys, on or near a hill whence it was named, on the road be-
tween Ancyra and Archelais. The letter appears to Maran
(Vita S. Bas. xvi.) to have been written before the encourage-
ment given to the Arians by the visit of Valens in 372. The
result of Basil’s appeal to the Parnassenes was the election of
an orthodox bishop, expelled by the Arians in 375, and named
Hypsis or Hypsinus. cf. Letter ccxxxvii., where Ecdicius is
said to have succeeded Hypsis; and ccxxxviii., where Ecdicius
is called Uapvacanves. Sa° Thess: iv. 13.

4 Of about the same date as the preceding.

5 Another reading is Helladius. cf. Letters Ixiv., Ixxvii.,
and Ixxviii. The identification of these Elpidii is conjectural.
The name was common,


ADT.


well, and I have been as completely cap-
tured by you, as though I had long lived with
you and had practical experience of your
excellent qualities. For he did not cease
telling me about you, mentioning one by one
your magnanimity, your exalted sentiments,
your mild manners, your skill in business,
intelligence, dignity tempered by cheerful-
ness, and eloquence. All the other points
that he enumerated in his long conversation
with me it is impossible for me to write to
you, without extending my letter beyond all
reasonable bounds. How can I fail to love
such a man? Howcould I put such restraint
upon myself as not loudly to proclaim what
I feel? Accept then, most excellent Sir, the
greeting which I send you, for it is inspired
by true and unfeigned friendship. I abhor
all servile compliment. Pray keep me en-
rolled in the list of your friends, and, by
frequently writing to me, bring yourself
before me and comfort me in your absence.


LETTER LXTV2
To Hesychius.*


From the beginning I have had many
points in common with your excellency, your
love of letters, everywhere reported by
all who have experienced it, and our old
friendship with the admirable Terentius.
But since that most excellent man, who is
to me all that friendship could require, my
worthy brother Elpidius, has met me, and
told me all your good qualities, (and who
more capable than he at once to perceive a
man’s virtue and to describe it?) he has kin-
dled in me such a desire to see you, that I pray
that you may one day visit me in my old
home, that I may enjoy your good qualities,
not merely by hearing of them, but by
actual experience.


LETIER: Τὰν.
To Atarbius.*


Ir I continue to insist on the privileges to
which my superior age entitles me, and wait
for you to take the initiative in communica-


1 Of about the same date as the preceding,

2 cf. Letter \xii.

8 Placed about 371, or, at all events, according to Maran,
before the year 373, when the ill will of Atarbius towards Basil
was violently manifested.

4 Atarbius is recognised as bishop of Neocesarea, partly on
the evidence of the Codices Coislinanus and Medicus, which
describe him as of Neocaesarea, partly on a comparison of
Letters χν. and cxxvi., addressed to him, wilh the circum.
stances of the unnamed bishop of Neoczsarea referred to in
Letter ccx. Moreover (cf. Bp. Lightfoot, D.C.B. i. 179) at the
Council of Constantinople he represented the province of
Pontus Polemoniacus, of which Neocesarea was metropolis.
On the authority of an allusion in Letter ccx. sec. 4, Atarbius
is supposed to be a kinsman of Basil.


LEAS.


tion, and if you, my friend, wish to adhere
more persistently to your evil counsel of
inaction, what end will there be to our
silence? However, where friendship is
involved, to be defeated is in my opinion to
win, and sol am quite ready to give you
precedence, and retire from the contest as to
which should maintain his own opinion. I
have been the first to betake myself to writ-
ing, because 1 know that ‘‘ charity beareth
all thingsm. . . endureth all things .
seeketh nét her own” and so ‘ never fail-
eth.”! He who subjects himself to his
neighbour in love can never be humiliated.
I do beg you, then, at all events for the
future, show the first and greatest fruit of
the Spirit, Love;? away with the angry
man’s sullenness which you are showing me
by your silence, and recover joy in your
heart, peace with the brothers who are of
one mind with you, and zeal and anxiety for
the continued safety of the Churches of the
Lord. If I were not to make as strenuous
efforts on behalf of the Churches as the op-
ponents of sound doctrine make to subvert
and utterly destroy them, you may be quite
sure that there is nothing to prevent the
truth from being swept away and destroyed
by its enemies, and my being involved in
the condemnation, for not shewing all pos-
sible anxiety for the unity of the Churches,
with all zeal and eagerness in mutual unani-
mity and godly agreement. I exhort you,
then, drive out of your mind the idea that
you need communion with no one else. To
cut one’s self off from connexion with the
brethren is not the mark of one who is walk-
ing by love, nor yet the fulfilling of the com-
mandment of Christ. At the same time I do
wish you, with all your good intentions, to
take into account that the calamities of the
war which are now all round about us * may
one day be at our own doors, and if we too,
like all the rest, have our share of outrage,
we shall not find any even to sympathise
with us, because in the hour of our pros-
perity we refused to give our share of sym-
pathy to the wronged.


LETTER “EXVI?
To Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria.


No one, I feel sure, is more distressed at
the present condition, or, rather to speak
more truly, ill condition of the Churches
than your excellency; for you compare the

1 Cor, xiii. 7 and 8. 2 cf. Gal. ν. 22.


8 7,6. the attacks of Valens on the Church.
“4 Placed in 371. cf. Letter 1xii.


163


present with the past, and take into account
how great a change has come about. You
are well aware that if no check is put to the
swift deterioration which we are witnessing,
there will soon be nothing to prevent the
complete transformation of the Churches.
And if the decay of the Churches seems so
pitiful to me, what must—so I have often
in my lonely musings reflected —be the
feelings of one who has known, by experi-
ence, the old tranquillity of the Churches of
the Lord, and their one mind about the
faith? But as your excellency feels most
deeply this distress, it seems to me only
becoming that your wisdom should be more
strongly moved to interest itself in the
Church’s behalf. I for my part have long
been aware, so far as my moderate intelli-
gence has been able to judge of current
events, that the one way of safety for the
Churches of the East lies in their having the
sympathy of the bishops of the West. For
if only those bishops liked to show the same
energy on behalf of the Christians sojourn-
ing in our part of the world’ which they
have shewn in the case of one or two of the
men convicted of breaches of orthodoxy in
the West, our common interests would prob-
ably reap no small benefit, our sovereigns
treating the authority of the people with
respect, and the laity in all quarters unhesi-
tatingly following them.” But, to carry out
these objects, who has more capacity than


yourself, with your intelligence and_ pru-


Who is keener to see the needful
course to be taken? Who has more practi-
cal experience in working ἃ profitable
policy? Who feels more deeply the troubles
of the brethren? What through all the
West is more honoured than your venerable
gray hairs?? O most honoured father,
leave behind you some memorial worthy of
your life and character. By this one act
crown your innumerable efforts on behalf
of true religion. Despatch from the holy
Church placed under your care men of
ability in sound doctrine to the bishops in
the West. Recount to them the troubles
whereby we are beset. Suggest some mode
of relief. Be a Samuel to the Churches.
Share the grief of the beleaguered people.
Offer prayers for peace. Ask favour from


dence?


1 ὑπὲρ τῆς παροικίας τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς μερῶν. On the use of
παροικία in this sense, cf. Bp. Lightfoot, Ap. Fathers I.
ii. 5. So Apollon. in Eus., HWE. v. 18. ἡ ἰδέα παροικία, of
the Christians society. Thus the meaning passes to parochia
and parish.

2** Them” is referred by the Ben. Ed. not to the sovereigns
(τῶν κρατούντων they understand to mean Valens) but to the
Western bishops.

3 A various reading (‘' Tres MSS. et secunda manu Medi-
ceus,’’ Ben. Ed.) for πολιᾶς reads πολιτείας, * the life and con-
versation of your Holiness,’* — Athanasius was now about 75.
His death is placed in 373.


104


the Lord, that He will send some memorial
of peace to the Churches. I know how
weak letters are to move men in matters of
such importance; but you yourself no more
need exhortation from others than the noblest
athletes need the children’s cheers. It is not
as though I were instructing one in igno-
rance; I am only giving a new impulse to
one whose energies are already roused. For
the rest of the affairs of the East perhaps
you may need the aid of more, and we
must wait for the Westerns. But plainly
the discipline of the Church of Antioch
depends upon your reverence’s being able
to control some, to reduce others to silence,
and to restore strength to the Church by
concord.'. No one knows better than you
do, that, like all wise physicians, you ought
to begin your treatment in the most vital parts,
and what part is more vital to the Churches
throughout the world than Antioch? Only
let Antioch be restored to harmony, and
nothing will stand in the way of her supply-
ing, as a healthy head, soundness to all the
body. ‘Truly the diseases of that city, which
has not only been cut asunder by heretics,
but is torn in pieces by men who say that
they are of one mind with one another,
stand in need of your wisdom and evangelic
sympathy. To unite the sundered parts
again, and bring about the harmony of one
body, belongs to Him alone Who by His
ineffable power grants even to the dry bones
to come back again to sinews and _ flesh.
But the Lord always works His mighty
works by means of them that are worthy of
Him. Once again, in this case too, we trust
that the ministry of matters so important
may beseem your excellency, with the result
that you will lay the tempest of the people,
do away with the party superiorities, and sub-
ject all to one another in love, and give back
to the Church her ancient strength.


LAUPER XVI
To Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria.


In my former letter it seemed to me sufh-
cient to point out to your excellency, that
all that portion of the people of the holy
Church of Antioch who are sound in the
faith, ought to be brought to concord and


1Toend the schism caused by the refusal of the Eustathian
or old Catholic party to recognise Meletius as bishop of the
whole orthodox body. The churches of the West and of
Egypt, on the whole, supported Paulinus, who had been
ordained by Lucifer of Cagliari, bishop of the old Catholics.
The Ben. Ed. supposes the word οἰκονομῆσαι, which I have
rendered “‘ control,’ to refer to Paulinus. The East supported
Meletius, and if the οἰκονομία in Basil’s mind does refer to
Paulinus, the ‘* management” meant may be management to
get rid of him.

2 Of the same year as the preceding.


BASIL.


unity. My object was to make it plain
that the sections, now divided into several
parts, ought to be united under the God-be-—
loved bishop Meletius. Now the same be-
loved deacon, Dorotheus, has requested a
more distinct statement on these subjects,
and I am therefore constrained to point out
that it is the prayer of the whole East, and
the earnest desire of one who, like myself, is
so wholly united to him, to see him in au-
thority over the Churches of the . Heis
a man of unimpeachable faith ; manner
of life is incomparably excellent, he stands
at the head, so to say, of the whole body of
the Church, and all else are mere disjointed
members. On every ground, then, it is
necessary as well as advantageous, that the
rest should be united with him, just as
smaller streams with great ones. About the
rest,! however, a certain amount of manage-
ment is needed, befitting their position, and
likely to pacify the people. This is in keep-
ing with your own wisdom, and with your


famous readiness and energy. It has however


by no means escaped your intelligence, that
this same course of procedure has already
recommended itself to the Westerns who are
in agreement with you, as I learn from the
letters brought to me by the blessed Silvanus.


LETTER LXVIE-
To Meletius, bishop of Antioch.


I wIsHED to detain the reverend brother
Dorotheus, the deacon, so long at my side,
with the object of keeping him until the end
of the negociations, ard so by him acquaint-
ing your excellency with every detail. But
day after day went by; the delay was be-
coming protracted; now, the moment that
some plan, so far as is possible in my difhi-
culties, has occurred to me concerning the
course to be taken, I send him to approach
your holiness, to make a personal report to
you on ali the circumstances, and show you
my memorandum, to the end that, if what
has occurred to me seems to you to be likely
to be of service, your excellency may urge
on its accomplishment. To be brief, the
opinion has prevailed that it is best for this
our brother Dorotheus to travel to Rome, to
move some of the Italians to undertake a
voyage by sea to visit us, that they may
avoid all who would put difficulties in their
way. My reason for this course is that I
see that those, who are all powerful with the
Emperor, are neither willing nor able to
make any suggestion to him about the


1 7.e. Paulinus and his adherents, 2 Of the same time.


LETFTERS.


exiled, but only count it so much to the good |
that they see no worse thing befalling the
Churches. If, then, my plan seems good
also to your ‘prudence, you will be good
enough both to indite letters and dictate
memoranda as to the points on which he
must enlarge, and as to whom he had better
address himself. And so that your de-
spatches may have weight and authority,
you will add all those who share your senti-
ments, even though they are not on the
spot. Here all is ‘uncertain ; Euippius' has
arrived, but so far has made nosign. How-
ever, he and those who think with him from
the Armenian Tetrapolis and Cilicia are
threatening a tumultuous meeting.


LETTER LXIX.?
To Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria.


1. As time moves on, it continually con-
firms the opinion which I have long held
of your holiness; or rather that opinion is
strengthened by the daily course of events.
Most men are indeed satisfied with observ-
ing, each one, what lies especially within his
own province; not thus is it with you, but
your anxiety for all the Churches is no less
than that which you feel for the Church that
has been especially entrusted to you by our
common Lord; inasmuch as you leave no
interval in speaking, exhorting, writing, and
despatching emissaries, who from time to
time give the best advice in each emergency
as it arises. Now, from the sacred ranks of
your clergy, you have sent forth the venerable
brother Peter, whom I have welcomed with
great joy. I have also approved of the good
object of his journey, which he manifests in
accordance with the commands of your ex-
cellency, in effecting reconciliation where he
finds opposition, and bringing about union
instead of division. With the object of
offering some contribution to the action
which is being taken in this matter, I have
thought that I could not make a more fitting
beginning than by having recourse to your
excellency, as to the head and chief of all,
and treating you as alike adviser and com-
mander in the enterprise. I have therefore
determined to send to your reverence our
brother Dorotheus the deacon, of the Church
under the right honourable bishop Meletius,
being one who at once is an energetic sup-
porter of the orthodox faith, and is earnestly
desirous of seeing the peace of the Churches.
The results, I hope, will be, that, following


icf. Letter ccli. % Of the same period as the preceding,


165


your suggestions (which you are able tc
make with the less likelihood of failure,
both from your age and your experience in
affairs, and because you have ἃ greater
measure than all others of the aid of the
Spirit), he may thus attempt the achieve-
ment of our objects. You will welcome
him, I am sure, and will look upon him
with friendly eyes. You will strengthen
him by the help of your prayers; you will
give him a letter as provision by the way;
you will grant him, as companions, some of
the good men and true that you have about
you; so you will speed him on the road to
what is before him. It has seemed to me to
be desirable to send a letter to the bishop of
Rome, begging him to examine our condi-
tion, and since there are difficulties in the
way of representatives being sent from the
West by a general synodical decree, to
advise him to exercise his own personal
authority in the matter by choosing suitable
persons to sustain the labours of a journey, —
suitable, too, by gentleness and firmness of
character, to por eee the unruly among us
here; able to speak with proper reserve and
appropriateness, and thoroughly well ac-
quainted with all that has been effected after
Ariminum to undo the violent measures
adopted there. I should advise that, without
any one knowing anything about it, they
should travel hither, attracting as little at-
tention as possible, by the sea, with the
object of escaping the notice of the enemies of
peace. 2. A point also that is insisted upon
by some of those in these parts, very neces-
sarily, as is plain even to myself, is that
they’ should drive away the heresy of
Marcellus,? as grievous and injurious and
opposed to the sound faith. For up to this
time, in all the letters which they write, they
are constant in thoroughly anathematizing
the ill-famed Arius and in repudiating him
from the Churches. But they attach no
blame to Marcellus, who propounded a
heresy diametrically opposite to that of
Arius, and impiously attacked the very ex-
istence of the Only begotten Godhead, and
erroneously understood the term ‘** Word.” ὅ
He grants indeed that the Only begotten
was called *‘ Word,” on coming forth at
eed and in season, but states that He re-


1 7,6. the Romans; speciaily the proposed commissioners.
It was a sore point with Basil that Marcellus, whom he re-
garded as a trimmer, should have been “ received into com-
munion by Julius and Athanasius, popes of Rome and Alex-
andria.” Jer., De Vir. μέ. c. 86.

2On the heretical opinions attributed to Marcellus of
Ancyra, cf. Letters cxxv. and cclxiii.

3 Although he strongly espoused the Catholic cause of Nicza
later in attacking the errors of Asterius, he was supposed to
teach that the Son had no real personality, but was merely an
external manifestation of the Father.


166


BASIL.


turned again to Him whence He had come
forth, and had no existence before His com-
ing forth, nor hypostasis’ after His return.
The books in my possession which contain
his unrighteous writings exist as a proof of
what I say. Nevertheless they nowhere
openly condemned him, and are to this extent
culpable that, being from the first in igno-
rance of the truth, they received him into the
communion of the Church. The present
state of affairs makes it specially necessary
that attention should be called to him, so
that those who seek for their opportunity,
may be prevented from geting it, from the
fact of sound men being united to your ho-
liness, and all who are lame in the true faith
may be openly known; that so we may
know who are on our side, and may not
struggle, as in a night battle, without being
able to distinguish between friends and foes.
Only I do beseech you that the deacon,
whom I have mentioned, be despatched by
the earliest possible packet, that at least
some of the ends which we pray for may be
accomplished during the ensuing year. One
thing, however, even before 1 mention it,
you quite understand and I am sure will
give heed to, that, when they come, if God
will, they must not let loose schisms among
the Churches; and, even though they find
some who have personal reasons for mutual
differences, they must leave no means _ un-
tried to unite all who are of the same way
of thinking. For we are bound to regard
the interests of peace as paramount, and
that first of all attention be paid to the
Church at Antioch, lest the sound portion
of it grow diseased through division on per-
sonal grounds. But you will yourself give
more complete attention to all these matters,
so soon as, by the blessing of God, you find
every one entrusting to you the responsibility
of securing the peace of the Church.


LETTER LXxX.?


Without address.*


To renew laws of ancient love, and once
again to restore to vigorous life that heavenly
and saving gift of Christ which in course
of time has withered away, the peace, I
mean, of the Fathers, is a labour neces-
sary indeed and profitable to me, but
pleasant too, as I am sure it will seem to
your Christ-loving disposition. For what
could be more delightful than to behold all,

1 ὑφεστάναι. 2 Of the same period as the preceding.


8‘** This letter is obviously addressed to Pope Damasus.”?
— Be Ed. πη.


who are separated by distances so vast,
bound together by the union effected by love
into one harmony of members in Christ’s
body? Nearly all the East (I include under
this name all the regions from Illyricum
to Egypt) is being agitated, right honourable
father, by a terrible storm and_ tempest.
The old heresy, sown by Arius the enemy of
the truth, has now boldly and unblushingly
reappeared. Like some sour root, it is pro-
ducing its deadly fruit and is prevailing.
The reason of this is, that in every district
the champions of right doctrine have been
exiled from their Churches by calumny and
outrage, and the control of affairs has been
handed over to men who are leading captive
the souls of the simpler brethren. I have
looked upon the visit of your mercifulness as
the only possible solution of our difficulties.
Ever in the past I have been consoled by
your extraordinary affection 3 and for a short
time my heart was cheered by the gratifying
report that we shall be visited by you. But,
as I was disappointed, I have been con-
strained to beseech you by letter to be,
moved to help us, and to send some of those,
who are like minded with us, either to con-
ciliate the dissentient and bring back the
Churches of God into friendly union, or at
all events to make you see more plainly who
are responsible for the unsettled state in
which we are, that it may be obvious to you
for the future with whom ‘it befits you to be
incommunion. In this 1 am by no means
making any novel request, but am only ask-
ing what has been customary in the case of
men who, before our own day, were blessed
and dear to God, and conspicuously in your
own case. For I well remember learning
from the answers made by our fathers
when asked, and from documents still pre-
served among us, that the illustrious and
blessed bishop Dionysius, conspicuous in
your see as well for soundness of faith as for
all other virtues, visited by letter my Church
of Czsarea, and by letter exhorted our
fathers, and sent men to ransom our brethren
from captivity.’ But now our condition is
yet more painful and gloomy and_ needs
more careful treatment. We are lamenting
no mere overthrow of earthly buildings, but
the capture of Churches; what we see


1 The Ben. Ed. points out that what is related by Basil, of
the kindness of the bishops of Rome to other churches, is con-
firmed by the evidence both of Dionysius, bishop of Corinth
(cf. Eusebius, Hist. Ecc. iv.i23), of Dionysius of Alexandria
(Dionysius to Sixtus II. Apud Euseb., Ecc. Hist. vii. 5), and
of Eusebius himself who in his history speaks of this prac-
tice having been continued down to the persecution in his
own day. The troubles referred to by Basil took place in the
time of Gallienus, when the Scythians ravaged Cappadocia
and the neighbouring countries. (cf. Sozomen,ii.6.) Dionys-
ius succeeded Sixtus II. at Rome in 259.


LETTERS.


167


before us is no mere bodily slavery, but a
carrying away of souls into captivity, per-
petrated day by day by the champions of
heresy. Should you not, even now, be
moved to succour us, ere long all will have
fallen under the dominion of the heresy, and
you will find none left to whom you may
hold out your hand.


LETTER Dx


Basil to Gregory.’


1. I HAVE received the letter of your holi-
ness, by the most reverend brother Flelenius,
and what you have intimated he has told me
in plainterms. Howl felt on hearing it, you
cannot doubt at all. However, since I have
determined that my affection for you shall
outweigh my pain, whatever it is, I have
accepted it as I ought to do, and I pray the
holy God, that my remaining days or hours
may be as carefully conducted in their dis-
position towards you as they have been in
past time, during which, my conscience tells
me, I have been wanting to you in nothing
small or great. [But that the man who
boasts that he is now just beginning to take
a look at the life of Christians, and thinks
he will get some credit by having something
to do with me, should invent what he has not
heard, and narrate what he has never expe-
rienced, is not at all surprising. What is sur-
prising and extraordinary is that he has got
my best friends among the brethren at Nazi-
anzus to listen to him; and not only to listen
to him, but as it seems, to take in what he
says. On most grounds it might be surpris-
ing that the slanderer is of such a character,
and that I am the victim, but these troub-
lous times have taught us to bear everything
with patience. Slights greater than this
have, for my sins, long been things of com-
mon occurrence with me. 1 have never yet
given this man’s brethren any evidence of my
sentiments? about God, and I have no an-
swer to make now. Men who are not con-
vinced by long experience are not likely to
be convinced by a short letter. If the former
is enouch let the charges of the slanderers be
counted as idle tales. But if I give license
to unbridled mouths, and uninstructed hearts,
WgPierdinthe same period, © 9 os. τ᾿

2 When Gregory, on the elevation of Basil to the Episco-
pate. was at last induced to visit his old friend, he declined the
dignities which Basil pressed upon him (τήνδε τῆς καθέδρας
τιμήν, 2.e. the position of chief presbyter or coadjutor bishop,
Orat. xliii. 39), and made no long stay. Some Nazianzene
scandal-mongers had charged Basil with heterodoxy. Gregory
asked him for explanations, and Basil, somewhat wounded,
rejoins that no explanations are needed. The translation in
the text, with the exception of the passages in brackets, is that


of Newman. cf. Proleg.and reff. to Greg. Naz.
8 προαιρέσεως, as in three MSS,


to talk about whom they will, all the while
keeping my ears ready to listen, I shall not
be alone in hearing what is said by other
people; they will have to hear what I have
to say. |

2. I know what has led to all this, and have
urged every topic to hinder it; but now I
am sick of the subject, and will say no more
about it, I mean our little intercourse. For
had we kept our old promise to each other,
and had due regard to the claims which the
Churches have on us, we should have been
the greater part of the year together; and
then there would have been no opening for
these calumniators. Pray have nothing to
say to them ; let me persuade you to come here
and assist me in my labours, particularly in
my contest with the individual who is now
assailing me. Your very appearance will .
have the eflect of stopping him; directly you
show these disturbers of our home that you
will, by God’s blessing, place yourself at the
head of our party, you will break up their
cabal, and you will shut every unjust mouth
that speaketh unrighteousness against God.
And thus facts will show who are your fol-
lowers in good, and who are the halters and
cowardly betrayers of the word of truth. If,
however, the Church be betrayed, why then
I shall care little to set men right about my-
self, by means of words, who account of me
as men would naturally account who have
not yet learned to measure themselves. Per-
haps, in a short time, by God’s grace, I shall
be able to refute their slanders by very deed,
for it seems likely that I shall have soon to
suffer somewhat for the truth’s sake more
than usual; the best I can expect is banish-
ment, or, if this hope fails, after all Christ’s
judgment-seat is not far distant. [If then
you ask fora meeting for the Churches’ sake,
I am ready to betake myself whithersoever
you invite me. But if it is only a question
of refuting these slanders, I really have no time
to reply to them. |


LETTER: LXXII.’
To Hesychius.*


I kNow your affection for me, and your zeal
for all that is good. I am exceedingly anx-
iousto pacify my verv dear son Callisthenes,
and I thought that if I could associate you
with me in this I might more easily achieve
my object. Callisthenes is very much an-
noyed at the conduct of Eustochius, and he has


1 Placed at about the same period as the preceding.

2 cf. Letter \xiv. Letters \xxii. and Ixxiii. illustrate the
efforts made by Basil to mitigate the troubles caused by slav-
ery, and to regulate domestic as well as ecclesiastical matters,


168


BASIL.


very good ground for being so. He charges
the household of Eustochius with impudence
and violence against himself. I am begging
him to be propitiated, satisfied with the
fright which he has given the impudent fel-
lows and their master, and to forgive, and
end the quarrel. Thus two results will fol-
low; he will win the respect of men, and
praise with God, if only he will combine for-
bearance with threats. If you have any
friendship and intimacy with him, pray ask
this favour of him, and, if you know any
in the town likely tobe able to move him, get
them to act with you, and tell them that it
will be specially gratifying to me. Send back
the deacon so soon as his commission is per-
formed. After men have fled for refuge to
me, I should be ashamed not to be able to be
. of any use to them.


LETTER LXXilt”


To Caltisthenes.


1. WuHENT had read your letter I thanked
God; first, that I been greeted by a man de-
sirous of doing me honour, for truly I highly
estimate any intercourse with persons of high
merit; secondly, with pleasure at the thought
of being remembered. For a letter is a sign
of remembrance; and when I had received
yours and learnt its contents I was aston-
ished to find how, as all were agreed, il paid
me the respect due to a father from a son.
That a man in the heat of anger and indig-
nation, eager to punish those who had an-
noyed him, should drop more than half his
vehemence and give me authority to decide
the matter, caused me to feel such joy as I
might over a son in the spirit. In return,
what remains for me but to pray for all bless-
ings for you? May you be a delight to
your friends, a terror to your foes, an object
of respect to all, to the end that any who fall
short in their duty to you may, when they
learn how gentle you are, only blame them-
selves for having wronged one of sucha char-
acter as yourself!

2. I should be very glad to know the ob-
ject which your goodness has in view, in
ordering the servants to be conveyed to the
spot where they were guilty of their disor-
derly conduct. If you come yourself, and
exact in person the punishment due for the
offence, the slaves shall be there. What
other course is possible if you have made up
your mind? Only that I do not know what
further favour I shall have received, if I shall
have failed to get the boys off their punishment.


1 Of the same date as the preceding,


But if business detain you on the way, who
is to receive the fellows there? Who is to
punish them in your stead? But if you
have made up your mind to meet them
yourself, and this is quite determined on,
tell them to halt at Sasima, and there show
the extent of your gentleness and magna-
nimity. After having your assailants in
your own power, and so showing them that
your dignity is not to be lightly esteemed,
let them go scot free, as I urged you in my
former letter. So you will confer a favour
on me, and will receive the requital of your
good deed from God.

3. I speak in this way, not because the
business ought so to be ended, but as a con-
cession to your agitated feelings, and in
fear lest somewhat of your wrath may re-
main still raw. When a man’s eyes are in-
flamed the softest application seems painful,
and I am afraid lest what I say may rather
irritate than calm you. What would really
be most becoming, bringing great credit to
you, and no little cause of honour to me with
my friends and contemporaries. would be for
you to leave the punishment to me. And
although you have sworn to deliver them to
execution as the law enjoins, my rebuke is still
of no less value as a punishment, nor is the di-
vine law of less account than the laws current
inthe world. But it will be possible for them,
by being punished here by our laws, wherein
too lies your own hope of salvation, both to
release you from your oath and to undergo a
penalty commensurate with their faults.

But once more I am making my letter too
long. In the very earnest desire to persuade
you I cannot bear to leave unsaid any of the
pleas which occur to me,and I am much
afraid lest my entreaty should prove ineffec-
tual from my failing to say all that may con-
vey my meaning. Now, true and honoured
son of the Church, confirm the hopes which
I have of you; prove true all the testimony
unanimously given to your placability and
gentleness. Give orders to the soldier to leave
me without delay ; he is now as tiresome and
rude as he can well be; he evidently prefers
giving no cause of annoyance to you to mak-
ing all of us here his close friends.


LETTER (Ligaye


To Martinianus?


1. How high do you suppose one to prize
the pleasure of our meeting one another once


1 About the same date as the preceding.

2A dignitary of Cappadocia otherwise unknown, whom
Basil asks to intercede with the Emperor Valens to prevent
that division of Cappadocia which afterward led to so much
trouble. Basil had left Cesareain the autumn of 371, 0n a tour


LEDIERS,


169


nn Ὁ “ἷἝἷἝἷἝἷἝὍς͵ῖἝἷἝἷἝἷἝἷ“ὋἝς“΄΄΄΄“΄΄“΄΄“ἷ“ἷ“ΠἷΠἷΠἷἝἷΠἷΠἝἷΠἝἷἝΠἷΠἷΠἷΠΠἷΠΠΠΠΠΠΠ΄Π΄ΠΠΠἷΠἷἷ΄΄ἷἝἕἷἕἷΘΦΘ02ΌϑΌθ᾽ ᾽Ἑ


again? How delightful to spend longer
time with you so as to enjoy all your good
qualities! If powerful proof is given of cul-
ture in seeing many men’s cities and know-
ing many men’s ways,’ such I am sure is
quickly given in your society. For what
is the difference between seeing many men
singly or one who has gained experience of
all together? I should say that there is an
immense superiority in that which gives us
the knowledge of good and beautiful things
without trouble, and puts within our reach
instruction in virtue, pure from all admix-
ture of evil. Is there question of noble deed ;
of words worth handing down ; of institutions
of men of superhuman excellence? ΑἹ] are
treasured in the store house of your mind.
Not then, would I pray, that I might listen
to you, like Alcinous to Ulysses, only for
a year, but throughout all my life; and to
this end I would pray that my life might be
long, even though my state were no easy one.
Why, then, am I now writing when I ought
to be coming to see you? Because my
country in her troubles calls me irresistibly
to her side. You know, my friend, how
she suffers. She is torn in pieces like Pen-
theus by veritable Manads, demons. They
are dividing her, and dividing her again,
like bad surgeons who, in their ignorance,
make wounds worse. Suffering as she is
from this dissection, it remains for me to tend
her like a sick patient. So the Cesareans
have urgently appealed to me by letter, and I
must go, not as though I could be of any
help, but to avoid any blame of neglect.
You know how ready men in difficul-
ties are to hope; and ready too, I ween, to
find fault, always charging their troubles on
what has been left undone.

2. Yet for this very reason I ought to
have come to see you, and to have told you
my mind, or rather to implore you to be-
think you of some strong measure worthy of
your wisdom; not to turn aside from my
country falling on her knees, but to betake
yourself to the Court, and, with the boldness
which is all your own, not to let them sup-
pose that they own two provinces instead of
one. They have not imported the second
from some other part of the world, but have
acted somewhat in the same way in which
some owner of horse or ox might act, who
should cut it in two, and then think that he
had two instead of one, instead of failing to


of visitation, or to consecrate his brother bishop of Nyssa
(Maran, Vit. Bas. Cap. xix.), and returned to Cesarea at the
appeal of his people there. i aah

1cf. the opening of the Odyssey, and the imitation of
Horace, De Arte Poet. 142:


‘© Dut mores hominum multorum vidit et urbes.”


‘made our city famous.


make two and destroying the one he had.
Tell the Emperor and his ministers that
they are not after this fashion increasing the
empire, for power lies not in number but
in condition. I am sure that now men are
neglecting the course of events, some, possi-
bly, from ignorance of the truth, some from
their being unwilling to say anything offen-
sive, some because it does not immediately
concern them. The course likely to be most
beneficial, and worthy of your high princi-
ples, would be for you, if possible, to approach
the Emperor in person. If this is difficult
both on account of the season of the year and
of your age, of which, as you say, inactivity
is the foster brother, at all events you need
have no difficulty in writing. If you thus
give our country the aid of a letter, you will
first of all have the satisfaction of knowing
that you have left nothing undone that was in
your power, and further, by showing sym-
pathy, if only in appearance, you will give
the patient much comfort. Would only
that it were possible for you to come your-
self among us and actually see our deplora-
ble condition! Thus, perhaps, stirred by
the plain evidence before you, you might
have spoken in terms worthy alike of your
own magnanimity and of the affliction of
Cesarea. But do not withhold belief from
what I am telling you. Verily we want
some Simonides, or other like poet, to la-
ment our troubles from actual experience.
But why name Simonides? I should rather
mention A&schylus, or any other who has set
forth a great calamity in words like his, and
uttered lamentation with a mighty voice.

2. Now we have no more meetings, no
more debates, no more gatherings of wise
men in the Forum, nothing more of all that
In our Forum now-
adays it would be stranger for a learned or
eloquent man to put in an appearance, than
it would for men, shewing a brand of in-
iquity or unclean hands, to have presented
themselves in Athens of old. Instead of them
we have the imported boorishness of Mas-
sagete and Scythians. And only one noise
is heard of drivers of bargains, and losers of
bargains, and of fellows under the lash. On
either hand the porticoes resound with dole-
ful echoes, as though they were uttering a
natural and proper sound in groaning at
what is going on. Our distress prevents our
paying any attention to locked gymnasia and
nights when no torch is lighted. There is
no small danger lest, our magistrates being
removed, everything crash down together as
with fallen props. What words can ade-


| quately describe our calamities? Some have


170


BASIL.


fled into exile, a considerable portion of our
senate, and that not the least valuable, pre-
fering perpetual banishment to Podandus.,'
When I mention Podandus, suppose me
to mean the Spartan Ceadas”* or any natu-
ral pit that you may have seen, spots breath-
ing a noxious vapour, to which some have
involuntarily given the name Charonian.
Picture to yourself that the evils of Po-
dandus are a match for such a place. So,
of three parts, some have left their homes
and are in exile, wives and hearth and all;
some are being led away like captives, the
majority of the best men in the city, a piteous
spectacle to their friends, fulfilling their ene-
mies’ prayers; if, that is, any one has ever
been found to call down so dire a curse upon
our heads. A third division yet remains:
these, unable to endure abandonment by their
old companions, and at the same time una-
ble to provide for themselves, have to hate
their very lives.

This is what I implore you to make known
everywhere with an eloquence all your
own, and that righteous boldness of speech
which your manner of life gives you. One
thing distinctly state; that, unless the author-
ities soon change their counsels, they will
find none left on whom to exercise their
clemency. You will either prove some help
to the state, or at least you will have done
as Solon did, who, when he was unable to
defend his abandoned fellow citizens on the
capture of the Acropolis, put on his armour,
and sat down before the gates, thus making
it plain by this guise that he was no party
to what was going on.* Of one thing Iam
assured, even though at the present moment
there may be some who do not approve of
your advice, the day is not far distant when
they will give you the greatest credit for
benevolence and sagacity, because they see
events corresponding with your prediction.


LETTER LXXV.‘
To Aburgius.®


You have many qualities which raise you
above the common run of men, but nothing


1 Now Podando, in Southern Cappadocia, made by Valens
the chief town of the new division of the province.

2So the Spartans named the pit into which condemned
criminals were thrown. Pausanias, Book IV.18,4. Thucyd.,
i. 134. Strabo, viii. 367.

ὁ 7.e.on the seizure of the Acropolis by Pisistratus, Solon,
resisting the instances of his friends that he should flee, returned
them for answer, when they asked him on what he relied for
protection, ‘‘ On my old age.” Plutarch, Solon 30. The senate
being of the faction of Pisistratus, said that he was mad. Solon
replied:

Δείξει δὴ μανίην μὲν ἐμὴν Batds χρόνος ἀστοῖς,
Δείξει ἀληθείης ἐς μέσον ἐρχομένης.
Diog. Lert. 1-49.

4 About the same date as the preceding.

5 cf. Letters xxxiii. cxlvii. clxxviii. cxcvi. and ccciv.


is more distinctly characteristic of you than
your zeal for your country. Thus you, who
have risen to such a height as to become
illustrious throughout all the world, pay a
righteous recompense to the land that gave
you birth. Yet she, your mother city, who
bore you and nursed you, has fallen into the in-
credible condition of ancient story ; and noone
visiting Caesarea, not even those most famil-
iar with her, would recognise her as she
is; to such complete abandonment has she
been suddenly transformed, many of her
magistrates having been previously re-
moved, and now nearly all of them trans-
ferred to Podandus. The remainder, torn
from these like mutilated extremities, have
themselves fallen into complete despair, and
have caused sucha general weight of despon-
dency, that the population of the city is now
but scanty ; the place looks like a desert, a pit-
eous spectacle to all who love it, and a cause
for delight and encouragement to all who have
long been plotting for our fall. Who then
will reach out a hand to help us? Who will
drop a tear of pity over our faith? You have
sympathised with a stranger city in like dis-
tress ; will not your kindly excellency feel for
her who gave you birth? If you have any
influence, show it in our present need. Cer-
tainly you have great help from God, Who
has never abandoned you, and has given
you many proofs of His kindness. Only be
willing to exert yourself in our behalf, and
use all the influence you have for the succour
of your fellow citizens.


LETTER LXXVI.?
To Sophronius the Master.”


THE greatness of the calamities, which
have befallen our native city, did seem likely
to compel me to travel in person to the court,
and there to relate, both to your excellency
and to all those who are most influential in
affairs, the dejected state in which Cesarea
is lying. But I am kept here alike by ill-
health and by the care of the Churches. In
the meantime, therefore, I hasten to tell your
lordship our troubles by letter, and to ac-
quaint you that never ship, drowned in sea
by furious winds, so suddenly disappeared,
never city shattered by earthquake or over-
whelmed by flood, so swiftly vanished out of
sight, as our city, engulfed by this new con-
stitution, has gone utterly to ruin. Our
misfortunes have passed into a tale. Our
institutions are a thing of the past; and all

1 Of the same date as the preceding.


2 7.6. magister oficiorum, cf. Letters xxxii., xcvi., clxxvii.,
clxxx., CxCiii., cclxxii.


LEGIERS.


our men of high civil rank, in despair at
what has happened to our magistrates, have
left their homes in the city and are wander-
ing about the country. There is a break
therefore in the necessary conduct of affairs,
and the city, which ere now gloried both in
men of learning and in others who abound
in opulent towns, has become a most un-
seemly spectacle. One only consolation
have we left in our troubles, and that is to
groan over our misfortunes to your excel-
lency and to implore you, if you can, to
reach out the helping hand to Casarea who
falls on her knees before you. How indeed
you may be able to aid usI am not myself
able to explain; but I'am sure that to you,
with all your intelligence, it will be easy to
discover the means, and not difficult, through
the power given you by God, to use them
when they are found.


LETTER EXXVil?


Without inscription : about Therasius?


OnE good thing we have certainly gained
from the government of the great Therasius,
and that is that you have frequently paid us
a visit. Now, alas! we have lost our gov-
ernor, and we are deprived of this good
thing too. But since the boons once given
us by God remain immovable, and, although
We are parted in body, abide fixed by mem-
ory in the souls of each of us, let us constantly
write, and communicate our needs to one
another. And this we may well do at the


[71


now writing to ask you is to make this favour
complete and suggest to the prefect that he
should by a particular order set over our
city the man who is full of all possible care
for the public interests. You will therefore
have many admirable reasons to urge upon
the prefect for his ordering Elpidius to re-
main at Cesarea. There is at all events no
need for you to be taught by me, since you
yourself know only too well, what is the
position of affairs, and how capable Elpidius
is in administration.


LEVTER ΧΥΧ
To Eustathius bishop of Sebastia,’


Even before receiving your letter I knew
what trouble you are ready to undergo for
every one, and specially for my humble self
because I am exposed in this struggle. So
when I received your letter from the rev-
erend Eleusinius, and saw him actually
before my face, I praised God for bestowing
on me such a champion and comrade, in my
struggles on behalf of true religion by the
aid of the Spirit. Be it known to your ex-
alted reverence that I have hitherto sustained
some attacks from high magistrates, and
these no light ones; while both the prefect
and the high chamberlain pleaded with
sympathy for my opponents. But, so far,
I have sustained every assault unmoved, by
that mercy of God which supplies to me the
aid of the Spirit, and strengthens my weak-
ness through Him.


present moment, when the storm for a brief|


space has cried atruce. Itrust that you will
not part from the admirable Therasius, for I
think that if is very becoming to share his
great anxieties, and I am delighted at the op-
portunity given you both of seeing your friends
and of being seen by them.* Ihave much to
say about many things, but I put it off till
we meet, for it is, I think, hardly safe to
entrust matters of such importance to letters.


LETTER Je x Vine.
Without inscription, on behalf of Elpidius.


I HAVE not failed to observe the interest
you have shown in our venerable friend
Elpidius; and how with your usual intelli-
gence you have given the prefect an oppor-
tunity of showing his kindness. What I am


1 Of the same date as the preceding.

2 Perhaps to Elpidius. Therasius is probably the governor
referred to in Letter xcvi. to Sophronius.

3 The text is here corrupt. The Ben. Ed. say “ corruptisst-
mus.” 4 Of the same date.


LETTER ΟΣ
To Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria.


THE worse the diseases of the Churches
grow, the more do we all turn to your ex-
cellency, in the belief that your champion-
ship is the one consolation left to us in our
troubles. By the power of your prayers,
and your knowledge of what is the best
course to suggest in the emergency, you are
believed to be able to save us from this
terrible tempest by all alike who know your
excellency even to a small extent, whether
by hearsay or by personal experience.
Wherefore, cease not, I implore, to pray
for our souls and to rouse us by your letters.
Did you but know of what service these are


1 Also of the year 371.
2cf. Letter cxix. Sebaste is Siwas on the Halys. On Eus.-
tathius to Basil a type at once of the unwashable Ethiopian
for persistent heresy (Letter cxxx. 1) and of the wind-driven
cloud for shiftiness and time-serving, (Letter ccxliv.g.) Vide
roleg. :
wee Placed in 371 or early in 372.


172


BASIL,


a που τυ πο ““--’».-.--.-.ἥ»"»..--.»-----------“οοσοΘσσΖκΖοεοοοσο


to us you would never have lost a single op-
portunity of writing. Could I only, by the
aid of your prayers, be deemed worthy of
seeing you, and of enjoying your good quali-
ties, and of adding to the story of my life a
meeting with your truly great and apostolical
soul, then I should indecd believe that I had
received from God’s mercy a consolation
equivalent to all the afflictions of my life.


EETTER LAXXXT!
To Bishop Innocent?


I was delighted to receive the letter your
affection sent me; but I am equally grieved
at your having laid on me the load of a re-
sponsibility which is more than I can carry.
How can I, so far removed as I am, under-
take so great a charge? As long as the
Church possesses you, it rests as it were on
its proper buttress. Should the Lord be
pleased to make some dispensation in the
matter of your life, whom, from among us
here can I send to take the charge of the
brethren, who will be in like esteem with
yourself? That is a very wise and proper
wish which you express in your letter, that
while you are yet alive you may see the suc-
cessor destined after you to guide the chosen
flock of the Lord (like the blessed Moses,
who both wished and saw). As the place is
great and famous, and your work has great
and wide renown, and the times are difficult,
needing no insignificant guide on account of
the continuous storms and tempests which
are attacking the Church, I have not thought
it safe for my own soul to treat the matter per-
functorily, specially when I bear in mind the
terms in which you write. For you s.y that,
accusing me of disregard of the Churches,
you mean to withstand me before the Lord.
Not then to be at issue with you, but rather
to have you on my side in my defence
which I make in the presence of Christ
I have, after looking round in the assembly
of the presbyters of the city, chosen the very
honourable vessel, the offspring® of the
blessed Hermogenes, who wrote the great
and invincible creed in the great Synod.‘
He isa presbyter of the Church, of many


1 Placed in 372.

2 cf. Letter 1. The see of this Innocent is unknown. cf.
Letter \xxxi. and note. To the title of this letter one manu-
script adds “οὗ Rome,” as the Ben. Ed. note * prorsus ab-
surde.”?

% ἔκγονος, 2.6. the spiritual offspring of Hermogenes, by
whom he had been ordained.

4 Bishop of Czsarea, in which see he preceded Dianius.
cf. Letters ccexliv. 9g and cclxiii. 3. ‘‘The great Synod” is
Nicea. Baronius on the year 325 remarks that Basil’s memory
must have failed him, inasmuch as not Hermogenes but Leon-
tius was present at Nicwa as Bishop of Czsarea. But Hermo-
genes may have been present in lower orders. cf. Stanley,
Last. Ch. pp. 105, 140.


years standing, of steadfast character, skilled
in canons, accurate in the faith, who has lived
up to this time in continence and ascetic dis-
cipline, although the severity of his austere
life has now subdued the flesh; a man of
poverty, with no resources in this world, so
that he is not even provided with bare bread,
but by the labour of his hands gets a living
with the brethren who dwell with him. It
is my intention to send him. If, then, thisis
the kind of man you went, and not some
younger man fit only to be sent and to dis-
charge the common duties of this world, be
so good as to write to me at the first oppor-
tunity, that I may send you this man, who
is elect of God, adapted for the present work,
respected by all who meet him, and who
instructs with meekness all who differ from
him. I might have sent him at once, but
since you yourself had anticipated me in ask-
ing for a man of honourable character, and
beloved by myself, but far inferior to the one
whom I have indicated, I wished my mind
in the matter to be made known to you. If
therefore this is the kind of man you want,
either send one of the brethren to fetch him
at the time of the fast, or, if you have no one
able to undertake the journey to me, let me
know by letter.


LEYIER ey
To Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria.


WHEN I turn my gaze upon the world,
and perceive the difficulties by which every
effort after good is obstructed, like those of
a man walking in fetters, I am brought to
despair of myself. But then I direct my
gaze in the direction of your reverence; ἡ
remember that our Lord has appointed you
to be physician of the diseases in the
Churches; and I recover my spirits, and rise
from the depression of despair to the hope of
better things. As your wisdom well knows,
the whole Church is undone. And you see
everything in all directions in your mind’s


eye like aman looking from some tall watch


tower,’ as when at sea many ships sail-
ing together are all dashed one against
the other by the violence of the waves, and
shipwreck arises in some cases from the sea
being furiously agitated from without, in
others from the disorder of the sailors hin-
dering and crowding one another. It is
enough to present this picture, and to say


1 Placed at the end of 371 or the beginning of 372.

2 The fitness of this figure in a letter to the bishop of Alex-
andria will not escape notice. At the eastern extremity of the
island of Pharos still stood the marble lighthouse erected
more than 690 years before by Ptolemy II., and not destroyed
till after the thirteenth century.


LETTERS,


173


no more.' Your wisdom requires nothing
farther, and the present state of affairs does
not allow me freedom of speech... What cap-
able pilot can be found in such a storm?
Who is worthy to rouse the Lord to rebuke
the wind and the sea? Who but he who
from his boyhood’ fought a good fight on
behalf of true religion? Since now truly all
that is sound among us is moving in the
direction of fellowship and unity with
those who are of the same opinion, we have
come confidently to implore you to send us
a single letter, advising us what is to be
done. In this way they wish that they may
have a beginning of communication which
may promote unity. They may, peradven-
ture, be suspected by you, when you remem-
ber the past, and therefore, most God-be-
loved Father, do as follows; send me the
letters to the bishops, either by the hand of
some one in whom you place trust in Alex-
andria, or by the hand of our brother Doro-
theus the deacon: when I have received
these letters I will not deliver them till 1
have got the bishops’ answers; if not, let me
Wear the’ blame for ever.” *~ “Truly ‘this
ought not to have struck more awe into him
who first uttered it to his father, than into
me who now say it to my spiritual father.
If however you altogether renounce this
hope, at least free me from all blame in act-
ing as I have, forI have undertaken this
message and mediation in all sincerity and
simplicity, from desire for peace and the
mutual intercourse of all who think alike


about the Lord.


EEE RR EX XX


To a Magistrate.”


I HAVE had only a short acquaintance and
intercourse with your lordship, but I have
no small or contemptible knowledge of you
from the reports through which Lam brought
into communication with many men of po-
sition and importance. You yourself are
better able to say whether I, by report, am
of any account with you. At all events your
reputation with me is such as I have said.
But since God has called you to an occupa-
tion which gives you opportunity of showing
kindness, and in the exercise of which it


1On Basil’s use of this nautical metaphor, cf. De Spiritu
Sancto, chap. xxx. It is of course a literary commonplace,
but Basil’s associations all lay inland.

2 The story of “the boy bishop ” will be remembered, whose
serious game of baptism attracted the notice of Alexander
and led to the education of Athanasius in the Episcopal
palace. Soc., Ecc. Hist. i. 15. Rufinus i. 14. cf. Keble, Lyra
Innocentium, “ Enacting holy rites.”

3 Gen. xlili. 9. 4 Placed in 372.

5 Censitor, t.e. the magistrate responsible for rating and
taxation in the provinces.


lies in your power to bring about the restora-
tion of my own city, now level with the
ground, itis, I think, only my duty to re-
mind your excellency that in the hope of the
requital God will give, you should show
yourself of such a character as to win a
memory that cannot die, and be made an in-
heritor of everlasting rest, in consequence of
your making the afflictions of the distressed
less hard to bear. Ihave a property at Cha-
manene, and I beg you to look after its
interests as though they were yourown. And
pray do not be surprised at my calling my
friend’s property my own, for among other
virtues I have been taught that of friendship,
and I remember the author of the wise say~
ing a friend is another self.’ I therefore
commend to your excellency this property
belonging to my friend, as though it were
my own. I beg you to consider the mis-
fortunes of the house, and both to grant them
consolation for the past, and for the future to
make the place more comfortable for them;
for it is now left and abandoned on account
of the weight of the rates imposed upon it.
I will do my best to meet your excellency
and converse with you on points of detail.


LETIER LAXXiv?


To the President.®


I. You will hardly believe what I am about
to write, but it must be written for truth’s
sake. I have been very anxious to commu-
nicate as often as possible with your excel-
lency, but when 1 got this opportunity of
writing a letter I did not at once seize the
lucky chance. I hesitated and hung back.
What is astonishing is, that when I got what
I had been praying, for, I did not take it.
The reason of this is that I am really
ashamed to write to you every time, not out
of pure friendship, but with the object of
getting something. But then I bethought
me (and when you consider it, 1 do hope you
will not think that I communicate with you
more for the sake of a bargain than of friend-
ship) that there must be a difference between
the way in which one approaches a magis-
trate and a private man. We do not accost
a physician as we do any mere nobody; nor
a magistrate as we do a private individual.
We try to get some advantage from the skill
of the one and the position of the other.


1 “7. Aristotle Eth. Nic. viii. 12,3; and Cic. Lal. xxi. So,
amicus est tanquam alter tdem.

2 Placed in the year 372.

8 Probably Elias. cf. Letters xciv. and xcvi. The orphan
grandson of the aged man in whose behalf Basil writes had
been placed on the Senatorial roll, and the old man in conse-
quence was compelled to serve again.


174


BASIL.


A A a i «(6«0 ΄ᾳἔι σὐ΄΄ππσππππασσπαππσπ ὐτποπτο
Walk in the sun, and your shadow will fol-|the law, or to refuse to yield to the prayers


low you, whether you will or not. Just
so intercourse with the great is followed by
an inevitable gain, the succour of the dis-
tressed. The first object of my letter is
fulfilled in my being able to greet your ex-
cellency. Really, if I had no other cause for
writing at all, this must be regarded as an
excellent topic. Be greeted then, my dear
Sir; may you be preserved by all the world
while you fill office after office, and succour
now some now others by your authority.
Such greeting I am wont to make; such
greeting is only due to you from all who have
had the least experience of your goodness
in your administration.

2. Now, after this prayer, hear my sup-
plication on behalf of the poor old man whom
the imperial order had exempted from serv-
ing in any public capacity; though really I
might say that old age anticipated the Em-
peror in giving him his discharge. You
have yourself satisfied the boon conferred on
him by the higher authority, at once from
respect to natural imfirmity, and, I think,
from regard to the public interest, lest any
harm should come to the state from a man
growing imbecile through age. But how,
my dear Sir, have you unwittingly dragged
him into public life, by ordering his grandson,
a child not yet four years old, to be on the
roll of the senate? You have done the very
same thing as to drag the old man, through
his descendant, again into public business.
But now, I do implore you, have mercy on
both ages, and free both on the ground of
what in each case is pitiable. The one never
saw father or mother, never knew them, but
from his very cradle was deprived of both,
and has entered into life by the help of
strangers: the other has.been preserved so
long as to have suffered every kind of ca-
lamity. He saw a son’s untimely death; he
saw a house without successors; now, un-
less you devise some remedy commensurate
with your kindness, he will see the very
consolation of his bereavement made an oc-
casion of innumerable troubles, for, I sup-
pose, the little lad will never act as senator,
collect tribute, or pay troops; but once
again the old man’s white hairs must be
shamed. Concede a favour in accordance
with the law and agreeable to nature; order
the boy to be allowed to wait till he come to
man’s estate, and the old man to await death
quietly on his bed. Let others, if they will,
urge the pretext of press of business and in-
evitable necessity. But, even if you are
under a press of business, it would not be
like you to despise the distressed, to slight


of your friends.
LETTER oa


That the oath ought not to be taken?


It is my invariable custom to protest at
every synod and to urge privately in conver-
sation, that oaths about the taxes ought not
to be imposed on husbandmen by the col-
lectors. It remains for me to bear witness,
on the same matters, in writing, before God
and men, that it behoves you to cease from
inflicting death upon men’s souls, and to de-
vise some other means of exaction, while
you let men keep their souls unwounded. I
write thus to you, not as though you needed
any spoken exhortation (for you have your
own immediate inducements to fear the
Lord), but that all your dependents may learn
from you not to provoke the Holy One, nor
let a forbidden sin become a matter of in-
difference, through faulty familiarity. No
possible good can be done them by oaths,
with a view to their paying what is exacted
from them, and they suffer an undeniable
wrong to the soul. For when men become
practised in perjury, they no longer put any
pressure on themselves to pay, but they think
that they have discovered in the oath a
means of trickery and an opportunity for de-
lay. If, then, the Lord brings a sharp retri-
bution on the perjured, when the debtors are
destroyed by punishment there will be none
to answer when summoned. If on the other
hand the Lord endures with long suffering,
then, as I said before, those who have tried
the patience of the Lord despise His good-
ness. Let them not break the law in vain;
let them not whet the wrath of God against
them. I have said what Iought. The dis-
obedient will see.


LETTER LXXX Vi.
To the Governor.


I xnow that a first and foremost object of
your excellency is in every way to support
the right; and after that to benefit your |
friends, and to exert yourself in behalf of
those who have fled to your lordship’s pro-
tection. Both these pleas are combined in
the matter before us. The cause is right for


1 Placed in the year 372.

2 The distress of the Cappadocians under the load of taxes
is described in Letter Ixxiv. An objectionable custom arose,
or was extended, of putting the country people on oath as to
their inability to pay.

3 Of the same date as the preceding.

4 Probably to Elias. Three manuscripts add ‘‘ of recom-
mendation on behalf of presbyters about the carrying off of
corn,


LETTERS.


175


which we are pleading’; it is dear to me
who am numbered among your friends ; it is
due to those who are invoking the aid of
your constancy in their sufferings. The corn,
which was all my very dear brother Doro-
theus had for the necessaries of life, has been
carried off by some of the authorities at
Berisi, entrusted with the management of
affairs, driven to this violence of their own
accord or by others’ instigation. Either way
it is an indictable offence. For how does
the man whose wickedness is his own do
less wrong than he who is the mere minister
of other men’s wickedness? To the sufferers
the loss is the same. I implore you, there-
fore, that Dorotheus may have his corn re-
turned by the men by whom he has been
robbed, and that they may not be allowed to
lay the guilt of their outrage on other men’s
shoulders. If you grant me my request I
shall reckon the value of the boon conferred
by your excellency in proportion to the
necessity of providing one’s self with food.


ἃ


ται (LAX ΧΥΤΙ."


Without address on the same subject?


I am astonished that, with you to appeal
to, so grave an offence should have been
committed against the presbyter as that he
should have been deprived of his only means
of livelihood. The most serious part of the
business is that the perpetrators transfer the
guilt of their proceedings to you; while all
the while it was your duty not only not to
suffer such deeds to be done, but to use all
your authority to prevent them in the case of
any one, but specially in the case of pres-
byters, and such presbyters as are in agree-
ment*with me, and are walking in the same
way of true religion. If then you have any
care to give me gratification, see that these
matters are set right without delay. For,
God helping you, you are able to do this,
and greater things than this to whom you
will. I have written to the governor of my
own country,* that, if they refuse to do
what is right of their own accord, they may
be compelled to do so on pressure from the
courts.


LETTER EXXXVIIL*


Without address on the subject of the exaction
of taxes.


Your excellency knows better than any
one else the difficulty of getting together the


1 Of the same date as the preceding. 2 Probably to Elias.
8 llatpis. The Ben. Ed suppose the reference to be here to
Annesi. cf. Letters viii. and li. 4 Of the same date.


gold furnished by contribution." We have
no better witness to our poverty than your-
self, for with your great kindness you have
felt for us, and, up to the present time, so
far as has lain within your power, have
borner with us, never departing from your
own natural forbearance from any alarm
caused by superior authority. Now of the
whole sum there is still something wanting,
and that must be got in from the contribu-
tion which we have recommended to all the
town. What I ask is, that you will grant us
a little delay, that a reminder may be sent to
dwellers in the country, and most of our
magistrates are in the country. If it is pos-
sible for it to be sent in short of as many
pounds as those in which we are still behind-
hand, I should be glad if you would so
arrange, and the amount shall be sent later.
If, however, it is absolutely necessary that
the whole sum should be sent in at once, then
I repeat my first request that we may be
allowed a longer time of grace.


LETTER LXXXIX.’
To Meletius, bishop of Antioch


1. THE eagerness of my longing is soothed
by the opportunities which the merciful God
gives me of saluting your reverence. He
Himself is witness of the earnest desire which
I have to see your face, and to enjoy your
good and soul-refreshing instruction. Now
by my reverend and excellent brother Doro-
theus, the deacon, who is setting out, first of
all I beg you to pray for me that I be no
stumbling block to the people, nor hindrance
to your petitions to propitiate the Lord. In
the second place I would suggest that you
would be so good as to make all arrange-
ments through the afore-mentioned brother ;
and, if it seems well that a letter should be
sent to the Westerns, because it is only right’
that communication should be made in writ-
ing even through our own messenger, that
you will ‘dictate. the Jetter. 1 have me:
Sabinus the deacon, sent by them, and have
written to the bishops in Illyria, Italy, and
Gaul, and to some of those who have written
privately to myself. For it is right that
some one should be sent in the common in-
terests of the Synod, conveying a second let-
ter which I beg you to have written.


1 χρυσίον πραγυατευτικόν, Lat. aurum comparatitium. The
gold collected for the equipment of troops. Cod. Theod. vii. 6. 3.
The provinces of the East, with the exception of Osroene and
Isauria, contributed gold instead of actual equipment. The
Ben. note quotes alaw of Valens that this was to be paid
between Sept. 1 and April 1, and argues thence that this letter
may be definitely dated in March, 372, and not long before
Easter, which fell on April 8.

2 Placed in the year 372.


176


BASIL,


2. As to what concerns the right rever-
end bishop Athanasius, your intelligence is
already aware of what I will mention, that
it is impossible for anything to be advanced
by my letters, or for any desirable objects to
be carried out, unless by some means. or
other he receives communion from you, who
at that time postponed it. He is described
as being very anxious to unite with me, and
to be willing to contribute all he can, but to
be sorry that he was sent away without com-
munion, and that the promise still remains
unfulfilled.’

What is going on in the East cannot have
failed to reach your reverence’s ears, but the
afore mentioned brother will give you more
accurate information by word of mouth. Be
so good as to dispatch him directly after
Easter, because of his waiting for the answer
from Samosata. Look kindly on his zeal;
strengthen him by your prayers and so dis-
patch him on this commission.


ΤΕΤΤΕΚ ΧΟ:


Zo the holy brethren the bishops of the West?


1. THE good God Who ever mixes con-
solation with affliction has, even now in the
midst of my pangs, granted me a certain
amount of comfort in the letters which our
right honourable father bishop Athanasius
has received from you and sent on to me.
For they contain evidence of sound faith and
proof of your inviolable agreement and con-
cord, showing thus that the shepherds are
following in the footsteps of the Fathers and
feeding the people of the Lord with know-
ledge. All this has so much gladdened my
heart as to dispel my despondency and _ to
create something like a smile in my soul in
the midst of the distressing state of affairs in
which we are now placed. The Lord has
also extended His consolation to me by
means of the reverend deacon Sabinus, my
son, who has cheered my soul by giving me
an exact narrative of your condition; and
from personal experience of his own, will
give you clear tidings of ours, that you may,


1 Τὸ is the contention of Tillemont that this cannot apply to
the great Athanasius, to whom Meletius is not’likely to have
refused communion, but is more probably to be referred to
some other unknown Athanasius. Maran, however, points
out ( Vit. Bas. xxii.) not only how the circumstances fit in, but
how the statement that communion was refused by Meletius is
borne out by Letter cclviii, § 3,¢.v. Athanasius was in fact
so far committed to the other side in the unhappy Antiochene
dispute that it was imnossible for him to recognise Meletius.
cf. Newman, Church of the Fathers, chap. vii.

2 Placed in 372.

3 By Newman, who translates the first paragraphs, this
letter, as well as xcii., is viewed in close connection with
Letter \xx., addressed to Damasus.


in the first place, aid me in my trouble by
earnest and constant prayer to God; and
next that you may consent to give such con-
solation as lies in your power to our afflicted
Churches. For here, very honourable breth-
ren, all is in a weak state; the Church has
given way before the continuous attacks of
her foes, like some bark in mid-ocean buf-
feted by successive blows of the waves;
unless haply there be some quick visitation
of the divine mercy. As then we reckon
your mutual sympathy and unity an impor-
tant blessing to ourselves, so do we implore
you to pity our dissensions; and not, be-
cause we are separated by a great extent of
country, to part us from you, but to admit
us to the concord of one body, because we
are united in the fellowship of the Spirit.

2. Our distresses are notorious, even
though we leave them untold, for now their
sound has gone out into all the world. The
doctrines of the Fathers are despised ; apos-
tolic traditions are set at nought; the devices
of innovators are in vogue in the Churches;
now men are rather contrivers of cunning
systems than theologians; the wisdom of this
world wins the highest prizes and has rejected
the glory of the cross. Shepherds are ban-
ished, and in their places are introduced
grievous wolves harrying the flock of Christ.
Houses of prayer have none to assemble in
them; desert places are full of lamenting
crowds. The elders lament when they com-
pare the present with the past. The younger
are yet more to be compassionated, for they
do not know of what they have been de-
prived. All this is enough to stir the pity
of men who have learnt the love of Christ;
but, compared with the actual state of things,
words fall very far short. If then there be
any consolation of love, any fellowship of
the Spirit, any bowels of mercy, be stirred to
help us. Be zealous for true religion, and
rescue us from this storm. Ever be spoken
among us with boldness that famous dogma!
of the Fathers, which destroys the ill-famed
heresy of Arius, and builds up the Churches
in the sound doctrine wherein the Son is
confessed to be of one substance with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost is ranked and
worshipped as of equal honour, to the end that
through your prayers and co-operation the
Lord may grant to us that same boldness for
the truth and glorying in the confession of
the divine and saving Trinity which He has
given you. But the aforenamed deacon will
tell you every thing in detail. We have
welcomed your apostolic zeal for orthodoxy


1 κήρυγμα. cf. note onthe De Sp. Sancto. p. 41.


LETTERS.


177


and have agreed to all that has been canoni-
cally done by your reverences.


LETTER XCI.


To Valerianus, Bishop of Ilyricum?


THanks be to the Lord, Who has per-
mitted me to see in your unstained life the
fruit of primitive love. Far apart as you
are in body, you have united yourself to me
by writing; you have embraced me with
spiritual and holy longing; you have im-
planted unspeakable affection in my soul.
Now I have realized the force of the proverb,
‘* As cold water is to a thirsty soul so is
good news from a far country.” * Honoured
brother, I really hunger for affection. The
cause is not far to seek, for iniquity is mul-
tiplied and the love of many has grown cold.*
For this reason your letter is precious to me,
and Iam replying by our reverend brother
Sabinus. By him I make myself known to
you, and beseech you to be watchful in
prayers on our behalf, that God may one
day grant calm and quiet to the Church here,
and rebuke this wind and sea, that so we
may be freed from the storm and agitation in
which we are now every moment expecting
to be submerged. But in these our troubles
one great boon has God given us in hearing
that you are in exact agreement and unity with
one another, and that the doctrines of true re-
ligion are preached among you without let or
hindrance. For at some time or other, un-
less the period of this world is not already
concluded, and if there yet remain days of
human life, it must needs be that by your
means the faith must be renewed in the East,
and that in due season you recompense her
for the blessings which she has given you.
The sound part among us here, which pre-
serves the true religion of the Fathers, is
sore stricken, and the devil in his wiliness
has shattered it by many and various subtle
assaults. But, by the help of the prayers of
you who love the Lord, may the wicked
and deceitful heresy of the Arian error be
quenched; may the good teaching of the
Fathers, who met at Niczwa, shine forth;
so that the ascription of glory may be
rendered to the blessed Trinity in the terms
of the baptism of salvation.


1 Placed in 372.

2Or, in some MSS., the Illyrians. Valerianus, bishop
of Aquileia, was present at the Synod held in Rome in 371
(Theodoret, Ast. Ecc. ii. 2). and also at the Synod in the
same city in 382. (Theod. Ecc. Hist. v. 9, where see note.)
Dorotheus or Sabinus had brought letters from Athanasius
and at the same time a letter from Valerianus, Basil takes
the opportunity to reply.


3 Prov. v.25; 4 cf. Matt. xxiv. 12.


EBEROres- ΧΕΙ
To the Italians and Gauls.


1. To our right godly and holy brethren who
are ministering in Italy and Gaul, bishops
of like mind with us, we, Meletius,? Euse-
bius,® Basil,* Bassus,®> Gregory,° Pelagius,’
Paul, Anthimus,®’ Theodotus,? Bithus,’”
Abraamius,'' Jobinus, Zeno,’” Theodoretus,
Marcianus, Barachus, Abraamius,'® Liban-


ius, Thalassius, Joseph, Boethus, Iatrius,'* ,
9 ν) b] ν) 3


Theodotus, Eustathius,'? Barsumas, John,
Chosroes, Iosaces,'® Narses, Maris, Gregory,*’
and Daphnus, send greeting in the Lord.
Souls in anguish find some consolation in
sending sigh after sigh from the bottom of
the heart, and even a tear shed breaks the
force of affliction. But sighs and tears give
us less consolation than the opportunity of
telling our troubles to your love. We are
moreover cheered by the better hope that,
peradventure, if we announce our troubles
to you, we may move you to give us that suc-
cour which we have long hoped you would
give the Churches in the East, but which we
have not yet received ; God, Who in His wis-
dom arranges all things, must have ordained
according to the hidden judgments of His
righteousness, that we should be tried for a
longer time in these temptations. The fame
of our condition has travelled to the ends of
the earth, and you are not ignorant of it;
nor are you without sympathy with brethren
of like mind with yourselves, for you are
disciples of the apostle, who teaches us that
love for our neighbour is the fulfilling of the
law.'® But, as we have said, the just judg-
ment of God, which has ordained that the
affliction due to our sins must be fulfilled,
has held you back. But when you have
learnt all, specially what has. not hitherto
reached your ears, from our reverend brother
the deacon Sabinus. who will be able to
narrate in person what is omitted in our
letter, we do beseech you to be roused both
to zeal for the truth and sympathy for us.
We implore you to put on bowels of mercy,
to lay aside all hesitation, and to undertake
the labour of love, without counting length
of way, your own occupations, or any other
human interests.


8 Of Tyana.
9 Of Nicwopolis.
3 Of Samosata. 10 Vitus of Carrhe.
4Of Cesarea. . τι Of Batne. cf. Letter cxxxii.
5 Tillemont conjectures Barses of Edessa.
6 Of Nazianzus, the elder. 12 Of Tyre.
7 Of Laodicea. 13 Of Urimi in Syria.
14 For Iatrius, Maran would read Otreius of Melitine.
15 Of Sebasteia.
16 Maran would read Isaaces, and identify him with the
the Isacoces of Armenia Major.
17 Probably of Nyssa, lately consecrated.
18 cf. Rom. xiii. 10.


1 Placed in 372.
2 Of Antioch.


178


BASIL.


2. It is not only one Church which is in
peril, nor yet two or three which have
fallen under this terrible storm. The mis-
chief of this heresy spreads almost from the
borders of Illyricum to the Thebaid. Its
bad seeds were first sown by the infamous
Arius; they then took deep root through
the labours of many who vigorously culti-
vated the impiety between his time and ours.
Now they have produced their deadly fruit.
The doctrines of true religion are over-
thrown. The laws of the Church are in
confusion. The ambition of men, who have
no fear of God, rushes into high posts, and
exalted office is now publicly known as the
prize of impiety. The result is, that the
worse a man blasphemes, the fitter the peo-
ple think him to be a bishop. Clerical
dignity is a thing of the past. There is
a complete lack of men shepherding the
Lord’s flock with knowledge. Ambitious
men are constantly throwing away the pro-
vision for the poor on their own enjoyment
and the distribution of gifts. There is no
precise knowledge of canons. There is
complete immunity in sinning; for when
men have been placed in office by the favour
of men, they are obliged to return the favour
by continually showing indulgence to of-
fenders. Just judgment is a thing of the
past; and everyone walks according to his
heart’s desire. Vice knows no bounds; the
people know no restraint. Men in author-
ity are. afraid to speak, for those who have
reached power by human interest are the
slaves of those to whom they owe their
advancement. And now the very vindica-
tion of orthodoxy is looked upon in some
quarters as an opportunity for mutual attack ;
and men conceal their private ill-will and
pretend that their hostility is all for the sake
of the truth. Others, afraid of being con-
victed of disgraceful crimes, madden the
people into fratricidal quarrels, that their
own doings may be unnoticed in the general
distress. Hence the war admits of no truce,
for the doers of ill deeds are afraid of a peace,
as being likely to lift the veil from their
secret infamy. All the while unbelievers
laugh; men of weak faith are shaken; faith
is uncertain; souls are drenched in igno-
rance, because adulterators of the word imi-
tate the truth. The mouths of true believers
are dumb, while every blasphemous tongue
wags free; holy things are trodden under
foot; the better laity shun the churches as
schools of impiety ; and lift their hands in the
deserts with sighs and tears to their Lord
in heaven. Even you must have heard
what is going on in most of our cities, how


our people with wives and children and even
our old men stream out before the walls,
and offer their prayers in the open air,
putting up with all the inconvenience of the
weather with great patience, and waiting for
help from the Lord.

3. What lamentation can match these
woes? What springs of tears are sufficient
for them? While, then, some men do
seein to stand, while yet a trace of the old
state of things is left, before utter ship-
wreck comes upon the Churches, hasten to
us, hasten to us now, true brothers, we
implore you; on our knees we implore you,
hold ont ahelping hand. May your brotherly |
bowels be moved toward us; may tears of
sympathy flow; do not see, unmoved, half
the empire swallowed up by error; do not
let the light of the faith be put out in the
place. where it shone first.

By what action you can then help mat-
ters, and how you are to show sympathy
for the afflicted, you do not want to be told
by us; the Holy Ghost will suggest to you.
But unquestionably, if the survivors are to be
saved, there is need of prompt action, and of
the arrival of a considerable number of
brethren, that those who visit us may com-
plete the number of the synod, in order that
they may have weight in effecting a reform,
not merely from the dignity of those whose
emissaries they are, but also from their own
number: thus they will restore the creed
drawn up by our fathers at Nicaa, proscribe
the heresy, and, by bringing into agreement
all who are of one mind, speak peace to the
Churches. For the saddest thing about it
all is that the sound part is divided against
itself, and the troubles we are suflering are
like those which once befel Jerusalem when
Vespasian was besieging it. The Jews of
that time were at once beset by foes without
and consumed by the internal sedition of
their own... people..;..In,.our, case, ἠῶ, ΤῊΝ
addition to the open attack of the heretics,
the Churches are reduced to utter helpless-
ness by the war raging among those who are
supposed to be orthodox. For all these
reasons we do indeed desire your help, that,
for the future all who confess the apostolic
faith may put an end to the schisms which
they have unhappily devised, and be reduced
for the future to the authority of the Church;
that so, once more, the body of Christ may
be complete, restored to integrity with all
its members. Thus we shall not only praise
the blessings of others, which is all we can
do now, but see our own Churches once
more restored to their pristine boast of ortho-
doxy. For, truly, the boon given you by


LETTERS.


179


the Lord is fit subject for the highest con-
gratulation, your power of discernment
between the spurious and the genuine and
pure, and your preaching the faith of the
Fathers without any dissimulation. That
faith we have received; that faith we know
is stamped with the marks of the Apostles;
to that faith we assent, as well as to all that
was canonically and lawfully promulgated
in the Synodical Letter.’


LETTER ΧΟΙ͂Ν."


To the Patrician Cesaria,® concerning
Communion.


Ir is good and beneficial to communicate
every day, and to partake of the holy body
and blood of Christ. For He distinctly says,
‘‘ fe that eateth my flesh and drinketh my
blood hath eternal life.” * And who doubts
that to share frequently in life, is the same
thing as to have manifold life. I, indeed,
communicate four times a week, on the
Lord’s day, on Wednesday, on Friday, and
on the Sabbath, and on the other days if
there is a commemoration of any Saint.’ It
is needless to point out that for anyone in
times of persecution to be compelled to take
the communion in his own hand without the
presence of a priest or minister is not a
serious offence, as long custom sanctions this
practice from the facts themselves. All the
solitaries in the desert, where there is no
priest, take the communion themselves,
keeping communion at home. And at
Alexandria and in Egypt, each one of the
laity, for the most part, keeps the communion
at his own house, and participates in it
when he likes. For when once the priest
has completed the offering, and given it, the


1 After noting that the Synodical Letter is to be found in
Theodoret and in Sozomen (7.6. is in Theodoret I. viii. and
in Socrates I. ix.) the Ben. Ed. express surprise that Basil
should indicate concurrence with the Synodical Letter, which
defines the Son to be τῆς αὐτῆ: ὑποστάσεως καὶ οὐσίας, while
he is known to have taught the distinction between ὑπόστασις
and οὐσία. As a matter of fact, it is not in the Synodical
Letter, but in the anathemas originally appended to the creed,
that it is, not asserted that the Son is of the same, but, denied
that He is of a different οὐσία or ὑπόστασις. On the distinc-
tion between οὐτία and ὑτόστασις see Letters xxxviii., cxxv.,
and cexxxvi. and the De Sp. Saucto.§7. On the difficulty of
expressing the terms in Latin, cf. Letter ccxiv. As ὑπόστασις
was in 325 understood to be equivalent to οὐσία, and in 370 had
acquired a different connotation, it would be no more diffi-
calt for Basil than for the Church now, to assent to what is
called the Nicene position, while confessing three hypostases.
In Letter cxxy. Basil does indeed try to shew, but apparently
without success, that to condemn the statement that He is of a
different hypostasis is not equivalent to asserting Him to be
of the same hypostasis.

2 Placed in 372.

3 Two MSS. read Cesarius. 4 John vi. 54.

5 A various reading is ‘‘martyr.”? In Letter cxcvii. to S.
Ambrose, S. Basil, states that the same honour was paid to
S. Dionysius of Milan in his place of sepulture as to a martyr.
So Gregory Thaumaturgus was honoured at Neocesarea, and
Pena and Basil received like distinction soon after their

eath,


recipient, participating in it each time as
entire, is bound to believe that he properly
takes and receives it from the giver. And
even in the church, when the priest gives the
portion, the recipient takes it with complete
power over it, and so lifts it to his lips with
his own hand. It has the same validity
whether one portion or several portions are
received from the priest at the same time.’


LETTER XCIV.?


To Elias, Governor of the Province.


I roo have been very anxious to meet
your excellency, lest by my failure to do so
I might come off worse than my accusers;
but bodily sickness has prevented me, at-
tacking me even more seriously than usual,
and so I am perforce reduced to address you
by letter. When, not long ago, most ex-
cellent sir, I had the pleasure of meetme
your excellency, I was anxious to communi-
cate with your wisdom about all my affairs ;
and I was also anxious to address you on
behalf of the Churches, that no ground might
be left for future calumnies. But I restrained
myself, thinking it altogether superfluous
and importunate to add troubles outside his
own necessary business to a man charged
with so many responsibilities. At the same
time (for the truth shall be told) I did
shrink from being driven to wound your
soul by our mutual recriminations, when it
ought in pure devotion to God to reap
the perfect reward of piety. For really,
if I attract your attention to me, I shall
leave you but scant leisure for your public
duties; shall act something like a man over-
loading with additional luggage some boat-
men managing a new boat in very rough
water, when all the while he ought to
lessen the cargo and do his best to lighten
the craft. For this very reason, I think,
our great Emperor, after seeing how fully
occupied I am, leaves me to manage the
Churches by myself. Now I should like


1 The custom of the reservation of the Sacrament is, as is
well known, of great antiquity. cf. Justin Martyr, Aol. i. ὃς;
Tertull., De Orat. xix. and Ad Ux. 1i. 5; S..Cyprian, De Lap-
sis cxxxii.; Jerome, Lp. cxxv. Abuses of the practice soon
led to nrohibition. Soan Armenian Canon of the fourth cen-
tury (Canones Tsaact,in Mat, Script. Vet. Nov. Coll. x. 280)
and the Council of Saragossa, 2850; though in these cases there
seems an idea of surreptitious reservation. On the doctrine of
the English Church on this subject reference may be made to
the Report of a Committee of the Upper House of the Convo-
cation of Canterbury in 1885.

The Rubric of 1549 allowed reservation, and it does not
seem t? have been prohibited until 1641. Bishop A. P. Forbes
on Article xxviii. points out that in the Article reservation is
not forbidden, but declared not to be of Christ’s institution,
and consequently not binding on the Church. The distinction
will not be forgotten between reservation and worship of the
reserved Sacrament.

2 Placed in 372, at the departure of Valens,


180


those who are besieging your impartial ears
to be asked what harm the government
suffers from me? What depreciation is
suffered by any public interests, be they
small or great, by my administration of the
Churches? Still, possibly, it might be
urged that I have done damage to the
government «by erecting a magnificently
appointed church to God, and round ita
dwelling house, one liberally assigned to
the bishop, and others underneath, allotted
to the officers of the Church in order, the
use of both being open to you of the magis-
tracy and your escort. But to whom do
we do any harm by building a place of
entertainment for strangers, both for those
who are on a journey and for those who
require medical treatment on account of
sickness, and so establishing a means. of
giving these men the comfort they want,
physicians, doctors, means of conveyance,
and escort?’ All these men must learn
such occupations as are necessary to life and
have been found essential to a respectable
career; they must also have buildings suit-
able for their employments, all of which are
an honour to the place, and, as their reputa-
tion is credited to our governor, confer glory
on him. Not indeed that for this reason
you were unwillingly induced to accept the
responsibility of ruling us, for you alone are
sufficient by your high qualities to restore
our ruins, to people deserted districts and
turn wildernesses into towns. Would it be
better to harrass and annoy, or to honour
and reverence an associate in the discharge of
these duties? Do not think, most excellent
sir, that what I say is mere words. We
have already, in the meanwhile, begun
providing material. So much for our de-
tence, before our ruler. As to what is
to be said in answer to the charges of our
accusers, to a Christian and to a friend who
cares for my opinion, I must now say no
more; the subject is too long for a letter,
and cannot, besides, be safely committed to
writing. But lest, before we have an op-
portunity of meeting, you are driven by
the inducement of some men’s calumnies to
give up any of your good will towards me,
do as Alexander did. The story is, as you


remember, that, when one of his friends was]


being calumniated, he left one ear open to
the slanderer, and carefully closed the other
with his hand, with the object of showing
that he whose duty is to judge ought not to
be easily and wholly given over to the first


1 Among the honourable functions of the clergy was that of
acting as guides and escort, παραπέμποντες. cf. Letters xcviii.
and cexliii.


BASIL.


occupants of his attention, but should keep
half his hearing open for the defence of
the absent.’


LETTER XCV.?
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.


I HAD written some while since to your
reverence about our meeting one another
and other subjects, but I was disappointed
at my letter not reaching your excellency,
for after the blessed deacon Theophrastus
had taken charge of the letter, on my set-
ting out on an unavoidable journey, he did
not convey it to your reverence, because
he was seized by the sickness of which he
died. Hence it happened that I was so °
late in writing, that, the time being now so
exceedingly short, I did not look for there
being much use in this letter. The godly
bishop Meletius and Theodotus had strongly
urged me to visit them, representing that a
meeting would be a proof of affection, and
being wishful of remedying the troubles
which are at present a cause of anxiety.®
They had appointed, as a time for our meet-
ing, the middle of the approaching month of
June, and for the place, Phargamus, a spot
famous for martyr’s glory and for the large
number of people attending the synod there
every year. Directly I returned and heard
of the death of the blessed deacon, and that
my letter was lying useless at home, 1 felt
that I must not be idle, because thirty-three
days were still remaining up to the appointed
time, and so I hurriedly sent the letter to
the very reverend Eustathius, my fellow
minister, with the object of its being sent
on by him to your reverence and of get-
ting an answer without delay. If, then, it
is possible and agreeable to you to come,
I will come too. If not, I, God willing,
will pay the debt of meeting due from last
year: unless haply some hindrance for my
sins comes in the way again, in which case
I must put off my meeting with the bishops
to another time.


LETTER XCVI.*


To Sophronius, the master.®


Wuo ever loved his city, honouring wrh
filial love the place which gave him birth


1 The church and hospital, of which mention is here made,
were built inthe suburbs of Cesarea. Gregory of Nazianzus
calls it a new town. cf. Greg. Naz., Or. xx. and Theodoret,
Ecc. Hist. ἵν. το, and Sozomen, vi. 34. On Alexander’s ear,
cf. Letter xxiv. 2 Placed in 372.

3 Theodotus of Nicopolis was distressed at Basil’s being
in communion with Eustathius.

4 Placed in 372. 5 On the removal of Elias,


ERTTERS:


and nurture, as you do; praying for the
whole city together, and for every one in
it individually, and not merely praying but
confirming your prayers by your own
means? For this you are able to effect by
God’s help, and long, good man that you
are, may you be able so to do. Neverthe-
‘less in your time our city has enjoyed but
a brief dream of prosperity, in being com-
mitted to the charge of one the like of whom,
according to the students of our oldest
annals, never sat in the prefectorial chair.
But now the city has suddenly lost his
services, through the wickedness of men
who have found a ground of attack in his
very liberality and impartiality, and, with-
out the knowledge of your excellency, have
made up calumnies against him. There is
therefore universal depression among us at
the loss of a governor with unique capacity
for raising our dejected community, a true
guardian of justice, accessible to the
wronged, a terror to law breakers, of like
behaviour to rich and poor, and, what is
most important, one who has restored the
interests of Christians to their old place of
honour. That he was, of all men that I
know, the most incapable of being bribed,
and never did any one an unfair favour, I
have passed by as a small point in compari-
son with his other virtues. I am indeed
testifying to all this too late, like men who
sing dirges to console themselves when they
can get no practical relief. Yet, it is not
useless that his memory should remain in
your generous heart, and that you should
be grateful to him as a benefactor of your
native place. Should any of those who feel a
grudge against him, for not sacrificing justice
to their interests, attack him, it will be well
for you to defend and protect him. Thus
you will make it clear to all that you count
his interests yours, and think it quite a
sufficient reason for this your close associa-
tion with him that his record should be so
unimpeachable, and his administration so
remarkable in view of the time. For what
any other man would not be able to affect in
many years has been quickly accomplished
by him. It will be a great favour to me, and
a comfort under the circumstances, if you
will recommend him tothe Emperor, and dis-
pel the calumnious charges brought against
him. Believe me that I am speaking here
not for myself alone, but for the whole
community, and that it is our unanimous
prayer that he may reap some benefit from
your excellency’s aid.


181


LEETER. XCVII.’
To the Senate of Tyana.


Tue Lord, Who reveals hidden things,
and makes manifest the counsels of men’s
hearts, has given even to the lowly know-
ledge of devices apparently hard to be under-
stood. Nothing has escaped my notice, nor
has any single action been unknown. Never-
theless I neither see nor hear anything but
the peace of God and all that pertains to it.
Others may be great and powerful and
self-confident, but I am nothing and worth
nothing, and so I could never take upon my-
self so much as to think myself able to
manage matters without support. I know
perfectly well that I stand more in need of
the succour of each of the brethren than one
hand does of the other. Truly, from our
own bodily constitution, the Lord has taught
us the necessity of fellowship. When I
look to these my limbs and see that no one
of them is self-sufficient, how can I reckon
myself competent to discharge the duties
of life? One foot could not walk securely
without the support of the other; one eye
could not see well, were it not for the alliance
of the other and for its being able to look
at objects in conjunction with it. Hearing
is more exact when sound is received through
both channels, and the grasp is made firmer
by the fellowship of the fingers. Ina word,
of all that is done by nature and by the will,
I see nothing done without the concord of
fellow forces. Even prayer, when it is not
united prayer, loses its natural strength and
the Lord has told us that He will be in the
midst where two or three cail on Him in
concord. The Lord Himself undertook the
economy,* that by the blood of His cross
He might make peace between things
in earth and things in heaven. For all
these reasons then, I pray that I may for
my remaining days remain in peace; in
peace I ask that it may be my lot to fall
asleep. For peace’s sake there is no trouble
that I will not undertake, no act, no word
of humility, that I will shrink from; I will
reckon no length of journey, I will undergo
any inconvenience, if only I may be re-
warded by being able to make peace. If
I am followed by any one in this direction,
it is well, and my prayers are answered;


1 Placed in 372.

2 On the whole circumstances of the difficulties which arose
in consequence of the civil division of Cappadocia, and the
claim put forward in consequence by Anthimus, bp. of Tvan,
to exercise metropolitan jurisdiction, see the biographical
notice in the Prolegomena.

87,6. of the Incarnation. cf. note on p. 7, and on Thco-
doret, p. 72.


182


but if the result is different I shall not re-
cede from my determination. Every one
will receive the fruit of his own works in
the day of retribution.


LETTER XCVIII.'
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.


1. AFTER receiving the letter of your holi-
ness, in which you said you would not come,
I was most anxious to set out for Nicopolis,
but I have grown weaker in my wish and
have remembered all my infirmity. I be-
thought me, too, of the lack of seriousness
in the conduct of those who invited me.
They gave me a casual invitation by the
hands of our reverend brother Hellenius, the
surveyor of customs at Nazianzus, but they
never took the trouble to send a messenger
to remind me, or any one to escort me. As,
for my sins, I was an object of suspicion to
them, I shrank from sullying the brightness
of their meeting by my presence. In com-
pany with your excellency I do not shrink
from stripping for even serious trials of
strength; but apart from you I feel myself
hardly equal even to looking at every day
troubles. Since, then, my meeting with
them was intended to be about Church affairs,
I let the time of the festival go by, and put
off the meeting to a period of rest and free-
dom from distraction, and have decided to go
to Nicopolis to discuss the needs of the
Churches with the godly bishop Meletius, in
case he should decline to go to Samosata.
If he agrees, I shall hasten to meet him,
provided this is made clear to me by both of
you, by him in reply to me (for I have
written), aud by your reverence.

2. We were to have met the bishops of
Cappadocia Secunda, who, directly they
were ranked under another prefecture, sud-
denly got the idea that they were made for-
eigners and strangers to me. They ignored
me, as though they had never been under
my jurisdiction, and had nothing to do with
me. I was expecting too a second meet-
ing with the reverend bishop Eustathius,
which actually took place. For on account
of the cry raised by many against him that
he was injuring the faith, I met him, and
found, by God’s grace, that he was heartily
following all orthodoxy. By the fault of the
very men who ought to have conveyed my
letter, that of the bishop was not trans-
mitted to your excellency, and, harassed as I


1 Placed in 372.
3 On a proposed meeting of bishops, with an allusion to the
consecration of the younger Gregory,


BASIL.


was by a multitude of cares, it escaped my
memory. ‘

I, too, was anxious that our brother Greg-
ory ' should have the government of a Church
commensurate with his abilities; and that
would have been the whole Church under the
sun gathered into one place. But, as this is
impossible, let him be a bishop, not deriving
dignity from his see, but conferring dignity
on his see by himself. For it is the part of
a really great man not only to be sufficient
for great things, but by his own influence to
make small things great.

But what is to be done to Palmatius,?
who, after so many exhortations of the
brethren, still helps Maximus in his persecu-
tions? Even now they do not hesitate to
write to him. They are prevented from
coming themselves by bodily weakness and
their own occupations. Believe me, very
godly Father, our own affairs are much in
need of your presence, and yet once more
you must put your honourable old age in
motion, that you may give your support to
Cappadocia, which is now tottering and in
danger of falling.


LETTER XCIX.*


To Count Terentius.*


I HAVE had every desire and have really
done my best to obey, if only in part, the
imperial order and the friendly letter of your
excellency. Iam sure that your every word
and every thought are full of good intentions
and right sentiments. But I have not been
permitted to show my ready concurrence by
practical action. The truest cause is my
sins, which always rise before me and always
hamper my steps. Then, again, there is the
alienation of the bishop who had been ap-
pointed to codperate with me, why, I know


1Tillemont supposes the reference to be to Gregory of Nyssa.
Maran, however (Vit. Bas. xxiv.), regards: this as an error,
partly caused by the introduction into the text of the word
ἐμόν, Which he has eliminated; and he points out that Gregory
of Nyssa, however unwilling to accept consecration, never ob-
jected after it had taxen place, and was indeed sent to Nazian-
zus to console the younger Gregorv of that place in his distress
under like circumstances. Moreover, Gregory of Nyssa was
consecrated in the ordinary manner on the demand of the
people and clergy with the assent of the bishops of the prov-
ince. (cf. Letter ccxxv.) Gregory the younger, however,
was consecrated to Sasima without these formalities.

2 Maran (Vit. Bas. xxiv.) notes that he knows nothing
about Palmatius, and supposes that by ‘ persecutions” are
meant not persecutions in the ecclesiastical sense, but severi-
ties in the exaction of tribute. In Letter cxlvii. Basil calls
Maximus ‘‘a very good man,” praise which he is not likely to
have given to a persecutor. Maximus succeeded Elias, and
probably inaugurated a new régime of strict exaction.

3 Placed in 372.

4cf. Letter ccxiv. On Terentius vide Amm. Marcellinus,
XXvil. 12 and xxxi. He was an orthodox Christian, though in
favour with Valens. In 372 he was in command of twelve
legions in Georgia, and Basil communicates with him about
providing bishops for the Armenian Church. According to
some manuscripts of Letter cv., g.v., his three daughters were
deaconesses.


LETTERS.


not; but my right reverend brother Theo-
dotus, who promised from the beginning
to act with me, had cordially invited’ me
from Getasa to Nicopolis.2, When however
he saw me in the town, he was so shocked at
me, and so afraid of my sins, that he could
not bear to take me either to morning or
evening prayer. In this he acted quite
justly so far as my deserts go, and quite as
befits my course of life, but not in a manner
likely to promote the interests of the
Churches. His alleged reason was that I
had admitted the very reverend brother
Eustathius to communion. What I have
done is as follows. When invited to a meet-
ing held by our brother Theodotus, and
wishful, for love’s sake, to obey the sum-
mons, that I might not make the gathering
fruitless and vain, I was anxious to hold
communication with. the aforementioned
brother Eustathius. I put before him the
accusations concerning the faith, advanced
against him by our brother Theodotus, and
I asked him, if he followed the right faith, to
make it plain to me, that I might communi-
cate with him; if he were of another mind,
he must know plainly that I should be sepa-
rated from him. We had much conversa-
tion on the subject, and all that day was
spent in its examination ; when evening came
on we separated without arriving at. any
definite conclusion. On the morrow, we had
another sitting in the morning and discussed
the same points, with the addition of our
brother Paemenius, the presbyter of Sebasteia,
who vehemently pressed the argument
against me. Point by point I cleared up the
questions on which he seemed to be accusing
me, and brought them to agree to my propo-
sitions. The result was, that, by the grace
of the Lord, we were found to be in mutual
agreement, even on the most minute particu-
lars. So about the ninth hour, after thank-
ing God for granting us to think and say the
same thing, we rose up to go to prayer. In
addition to this I ought to have got some
written statement from him, so that his
assent might be made known to his oppo-
nents and the proof of his opinion might be
sufficient for the rest. But I was myself
anxious, with the desire for great exactitude,
to meet my brother Theodotus, to get a
written statement of the faith from him,
and to propose it to Eustathius ; that so both
objects might be obtained at once, the con-
fession of the right faith by Eustathius and
the complete satisfaction of Theodotus and


1 καταγαγών. So six MSS., but the Ben. Ed.seem rightly
to point out that the invitation never resulted in actual ‘‘ con-
ducting.”

2 7.6. The Armenian Nicopolis.


183


his friends, and they would have no ground
for objection after the acceptance of their own
propositions. But Theodotus, before learn-
ing why we were met and what had been the
result of our intercourse, decided not to
allow us to take part in the meeting. So
midway on our journey we set out back
again, disappointed that our eflorts for the
peace of the Churches had been counter-
acted.

3. After this, when I was compelled to
undertake a journey into Armenia, knowing
the man’s character, and with the view both
of making my own defence before a com-
petent witness, for what had taken place and
of satisfying nim, I travelled to Getasa, into
the territory of the very godly bishop Mele-
tius, the aforementioned Theodotus being
with me; and while there, on being ac-
cused by him of my communication with
Eustathius, I told him that the result of our
intercourse was my finding Eustathius to be
in all things in agreement with myself.
Then he persisted that Eustathius, after
leaving me, had denied this and asseverated
to his own disciples that he had never come
to any agreement with me about the faith.
I, therefore, combated this statement; and
see, O most excellent man, if the answer I
made was not most fair and most complete.
I am convinced, I said, judging from the
character of Eustathius, that he cannot thus
lightly be turning from one direction to
another, now confessing now denying what
he said; that a man, shunning a lie, even in
any little matter, as an awful sin, is not
likely to choose to run counter to the truth in
matters of such vast importance and so gen-
erally notorious: but if what is reported
among you turns out to be true, he must be
confronted with a written statement contain-
ing the complete exposition of the right
faith; then, if I find him ready to agree in
writing, I shall continue in communion with
him; but, if I find that he shrinks from the
test, I shall renounce all intercourse with
him. The bishop Meletius agreed to these
arguments, and the brother Diodorus the
presbyter, who was present, and then the
right reverend brother Theodotus, assented,
and invited me to go to Nicopolis, both to
visit the Church there, and to keep him com-
pany as far as Satala. But he left me at
Getasa, and, when I reached Nicopolis, for-
getting all that he heard from me, and the
agreement he had made with me, dismissed
me, disgraced by the insults and dishonours
which I have mentioned.

4. How, then, right honourable sir, was it
possible for me to perform any of the in-


184
junctions laid on me, and to provide bishops
for Armenia? How could I act, when the
sharer of my responsibilities was thus dis-
posed towards me, — the very man by whose
aid I was expecting to be able to find suitable
persons, because of his having in his district
reverend and learned men, skilled in speech,
and acquainted with the other peculiarities
of the nation? I know their names, but I
shall refrain from mentioning them, lest
there arise any hindrance to the interests of
Armenia being served at some future time.

Now, after getting as far as Satala in such
a state of health, I seemed to settle the rest
by the grace of God. I made peace between
the Armenian bishops, and made them a
suitable address, urging them to put away
their customary indifference, and resume
their. ancient zeal. in the Lord’s cause.
Moreover, I delivered them rules as to how
it behoved them to give heed to iniquities
generally practised in Armenia. I further
accepted a decision of the Church of Satala,
asking that a bishop might be given them
through me. I was also careful to inquire
into the calumnies promulgated against our
brother Cyril, the Armenian bishop, and by
God’s grace I have found them to be started
by the lying slanders of his enemies. This
they confessed to me. And I seemed to
some extent to reconcile the people to him,
so that they avoid communion with him no
more. Small achievements these, maybe,
and not worth much, but in consequence of
the mutual discord caused by the wiles of
the devil, it was impossible for me to effect
more. Even this much I ought not to have
said, so as not to seem to be publishing my
own disgrace. But as I could not plead my
cause before your excellency in any other
way, I was under the necessity of telling you
the entire truth.


ΤΕ “Ce
To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.


WueEN I saw your affectionate letter, in
the country bordering on Armenia, it was
like a lighted torch held up at a distance to
mariners at sea, especially if the sea happen
to be agitated by the wind. Your reverence’s
letter was of itself a pleasant one, and full of
comfort; but its natural charm was very
much enhanced by the time of its arrival, a
time so painful to me, that I hardly know
how to describe it, after once making up my
mind to forget its troubles. However, my
deacon will give you a full account. My


1 Placed in 372.


BASIL.


bodily strength completely failed me, so that
I was not even able to bear the slightest
movement without pain. Nevertheless I
do pray that, by the aid of your prayers, my
own longing may be fulfilled; although my
journey has caused me great difficulties, in
consequence of the affairs of my own Church
having been neglected through its occupying
sucha long time. Butif, while I yet live,
God grants me to see your reverence in my
Church, then truly I shall have good hope,
even for the future, that I am not wholly ex-
cluded from the gifts of God. If it be possi-
ble, I beg that this meeting between us may
take place at the Synod which we hold every
year, in memory of the blessed martyr
Eupsychius,’ now about to be held on the
7th of September. I am compassed with
anxieties which demand your help and sym-
pathy, both in the matter of the appointment
of bishops and in the consideration of the
trouble caused me by the simplicity of Greg-
ory of Nyssa,” who is summoning a Synod
at Ancyra and leaving nothing undone to
counteract me.


LETTER <i>


Consolaiory.,


TuIs is my first letter to you, and I could
have prayed that its subject were a brighter
one. Had it been so, things would have
fallen out as I desire, for it is my wish that
the life of all those who are purposed to live
in true religion should be happily spent.
But the Lord, Who ordains our course in
accordance with His ineflable wisdom, has
arranged that all these things should come
about for the advantage of our souls, whereby
He has, on the one hand, made your life sor-
rowful, and on the other, roused the sympathy
of one who, like myself, is united to you in
godly love. Therefore on my learning from
my brothers what has befallen you it has
seemed to me that I could not but give you
such comfort as I can. Had it indeed been
possible to me to travel to the place in which
you are now living I would have made
every effort to do so. But my bad health
and the present business which occupies me
have caused this very journey, which I have


1 cf. Letters clxxvi. and cclii. Eupsychius suffered for the
part he took in demolishing the Temple of Fortune at Ce-
sarea. cf. Sozomen, Ecc. Hist.v. 11. An Eupsychius appears
in the Bollandist acts under April oth. Vide Prolegomena.,

2 The Ben. note, in answer to the sugyested unlikelihood
of Basil’s being plotted against by his brother, calls attention
to the fact that this opposition was due not to want of affection
but to want of tact, and compares Letter lviii.on Gregory’s
foolish falsehood about their uncle.

3 Placed in 372.

4 To the title has been added * to the wife of Arinthzus,”
but no manuscript known to the Ben. Ed. contained it.


LETTERS.


185


undertaken, to be injurious to the interests
of my Church. I have, therefore, deter-
mined to address your excellency in writing,
to remind you that these afflictions are not
sent by the Lord, Who rules us, to the ser-
vants of God to no purpose, but as a test of
the genuineness of our love to the divine
Creator. Just as athletes win crowns by
their struggles in the arena, so are Christians
brought to perfection by the trial of their
temptations, if only we learn to accept what
is sent us by the Lord with becoming
patience, with all thanksgiving. All things
are ordained by the Lord’s love. We must
not accept anything that befalls us as griev-
ous, even if, for the present, it affects our
weakness. We are ignorant, peradventure,
of the reasons why each thing that happens
to us is sent to us as a blessing by the Lord;
but we ought to be convinced that all that
happens to us is for our good, either for the
reward of our patience, or for the soul which
we have received, lest, by lingering too long
in this life, it be filled with the wickedness
to be found in this world. If the hope of
Christians is limited to this life, it might
rightly have been reckoned a bitter lot to be
prematurely parted from the body; but if, to
them that love God, the sundering of the
soul from these bodily fetters is the begin-
ning of our real life, why do we grieve
like them which have no hope?’ Be com-
forted then, and do not fall under your
troubles, but show that you are superior to
them and can rise above them.


LETTER Cil?
To the citizens of Satala.*


Movep by your importunity and that of
all your people, I have undertaken the
charge of your Church, and have promised
before the Lord that I will be wanting to
you in nothing which is within my power.
So I have been compelled, as it is written,
to touch as it were the apple of my eye.‘
Thus the high honour in which I hold you
has suffered me to remember neither rela-
tionship, nor the intimacy which I have had
from my boyhood with the person in ques-
tion, as making a stronger demand on me
than your request. I have forgotten all the
private considerations which made him near
and dear to me, making no account of the
sighs which will be heaved by all my people
on being deprived of his rule, none of the
tears of all his kindred; nor have I taken to

A Thess. iv. 12. 2 Placed in 372.


3 On the appointment of a bishop for that see in the North
East of Armenia Minor, ¢ cf, Zech. ii. 8.


heart the affliction of his aged mother, who
is supported by his aid alone. All these
considerations, great and many as they are, 1
have put aside, keeping only in view the one
object of giving your Church the blessing of
the rule of such a man, and of aiding her,
now distressed as she is, at being so long
without a head, and needing great and
powerful support to be enabled to rise again.
So much for what concerns myself. Now,
on the other hand, I ask you not to fall short
of the hope which I have entertained and of
the promises which I have made him, that I
have sent him to close friends. I ask every
one of you to try to surpass the rest in love
and affection to him. I entreat you to show
this laudable rivalry, and *to comfort his
heart by the greatness of your attentions to
him, that he may forget his own home, for-
get his kinsfolk, and forget a people so de-
pendent on his rule, like a child weaned
from his mother’s breast.

I have despatched Nicias beforehand to ex-
plain everything to your excellencies, and
that you may fix a day to keep the feast and
give thanks to the Lord, Who has granted
the fulfilment of your prayer.’


LETIOR CYT
To the people of Satala.


Tue Lord has answered the prayer of
His people and has given them, by my hum-
ble instrumentality, a shepherd worthy of
the name; not one making traffic of the
word, as many do, but competent to give
full satisfaction to you, who love orthodoxy
of doctrine, and have accepted a life agree-
able to the Lord’s commands, in the name
of the Lord, Who has filled him with His
own spiritual graces.


LETTER (C12
To the prefect Modestus.*


MERELY to write to so great a man, even
though there be no other reason, must be es-
teemed a great honour. For communication
with personages of high distinction confers
glory upon all to whom it is permitted. My
supplication, however, is one which I am
driven by necessity to make to your excel-
lency, in my great distress at the condition
of my whole country. Bear with me, I beg
you, kindly and in accordance with your own
character, and reach a helping hand to my
"4 The relative referred to is Poemenius. — cf. Letter cxxii.


2 Of the same date as the preceding.
8 Placed in 372. 4 On the rating of the clergy.


186


BASIL.


country, now beaten to the knee. The im-
mediate object of my entreaty is as follows.
By the old census, the clergy of God, pres-
byters and deacons,’ were left exempt. The
recent registrars, however, without any
authority from your lordship, have enrolled
them, except that in some cases a few were
granted immunity on the score of age. 1
ask, then, that you will leave us this memo-
rial of your beneficence, to preserve through
all coming time your good fame; that in ac-
cordance with the old law the clergy be ex-
empt from contribution. I do not ask the
remission to be conceded personally and in-
dividually to those who are now included,
in which case the grace will pass to their
successors, who. may not always be worthy
of the sacred ministry. I would suggest that
some general concession be made to the
clergy, according to the form in the open
register, so that the exemption may be given
in each place to ministers by the rulers of the
Church. This boon is sure to bring undy-
ing glory to your excellency for your good
deeds, and will cause many to pray for the
imperial house. It will also really be profit-
able to the government, if we afford the re-
lief of exemption, not generally to all the
clergy, but to those who from time to time
are in distress. This, as any one who
chooses may know, is the course we actually
pursue when we are at liberty. :


LET PER Cy.


To the deaconesses, the daughters of Count
Terentius.”


On coming to Samosata I expected to
have the pleasure of meeting your excel-
lencies, and when I was disappointed I
could not easily bear it. When, I said, will
it be possible for me to be in your neigh-
bourhood again? When will it be agreeable
to you to come into mine? All this, how-
ever, must be left to the Lord’s will. As to
the present, when I found that my son So-
phronius was setting out to you, I gladly de-
livered him this letter, to convey you my
salutation, and to tell you how, by God’s
grace, I do not cease to remember you, and
to thank the Lord on your behalf, in that
you are goodly scions of a goodly stock,
fruitful in good works, and verily like lilies
among thorns. Surrounded as you are by


1 τοῦς τοῦ θεοῦ ἱερωμένους, πρεσβυτέρους Kat διακόνους. The
Ben. note points out that the words priests and deacons prob-
ably crept into the MSS,, in all of which it is found, from the
margin, inasmuch as by ἱερωμένους and cognate words Basil
means the whole clergy. cf, Letter liv. and note on p. 157.

2 Placed in 372. 3 cf, Letter xcix. and note.


the terrible perversity of them that are cor-
rupting the word of truth, you do not give in
to their wiles; you have not abandoned the
apostolic proclamation of faith, you have not
gone over to the successful novelty of the
day. Is not this cause of deep thankfulness
to God? Shall not this rightly bring you
great renown? You have professed your
faith in Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Do
not abandon this deposit; the Father —
origin of all; the Son — Only begotten, be-
gotten of Him, very God, Perfect of Perfect,
living image, shewing the whole Father in
Himself; the Holy Ghost, having His sub-
sistence of God, the fount of holiness, power
that gives life, grace that maketh perfect,
through Whom man is adopted, and the
mortal made immortal, conjoined with
Father and Son in all things in glory and
eternity, in power and kingdom, in sover-
eignty and godhead; as is testified by the
tradition of the baptism of salvation.

But all who maintain that either Son or
Spirit is a creature, or absolutely reduce the
Spirit to ministerial and servile rank, are far
removed from the truth. Flee their com-
munion. Turn away from their teaching.
They are destructive to souls. If ever the
Lord grant us to meet, I will discourse to
you further concerning the faith, to the end
that you may perceive at once the power of
the truth and the rottenness of heresy by
Scriptural proof.


LETTER, ΥΩ:


To a soldier.


I HAVE many reasons for thanking God-
for mercies vouchsafed to me in my journey,
but I count no blessing greater than the
knowledge of your excellency, which has
been permitted me by our good Lord’s
mercy. I have learnt to know one who
proves that even in a soldier’s life it is possi-
ble to preserve the perfection of love to
God,” and that we must mark a Christian
not by the style of his dress, but by the dis-
position of his soul. It was a great delight
to me to meet you; and now, whenever I
remember you, I feel very glad. Play the
man; be strong; strive to nourish and mul-
tiply love to God, that there may be given
you by Him yet greater boons of blessing.
I need no further proof that you remember
me ; I have evidence in what you have done.


1 Placed in 372.

2 Among others, conspicuous instances of the statement in
the text are Cornelius, St. Martin, John de Joinville, Peter du
Terreil, Sieur de Bayard, Henry Havelock, and Charles
Gordon.


LETTERS.


LETTER CVII.'
To the Widow Jutitta.


I was grieved to find on reading your
ladyship’s letter that you are involved in the
same difficulties. What is to be done to
men who show such a shifty character, say-
ing now one thing now another and never
abiding in the same pledges? If, after the
promises made in my presence, and in that
of the ex-prefect, he now tries to shorten
the time of grace as though nothing had
been said, he does seem to have lost, as far
as 1 am concerned, all sense of shame.
Nevertheless I wrote to him, rebuking him,
and reminding him of his promises. I wrote
also to Helladius, who is of the household of
the prefect, that information might be given
through him about your affairs. I hesitated
myself to make so free with an officer of such
importance, on account of my never having
yet written to him about my own private
affairs and my fearing some adverse decision
from him, great men, as you know, being
easily annoyed about such matters. If, how-
ever, any good is to be done in the matter,
it will be through Helladius, an excellent
man, well disposed towards me, fearing
God, and having perfectly free access to the
prefect. The Holy One is able to deliver
you from all affliction, if only truly and sin-
cerely we fix all our hope on Him.


LETTER ‘CVilb?
To the guardian of the heirs of Julitta.


I am very much astonished to hear that,
after the kind promises which you made and
which were only such as might be expected
from your generous character, you have now
forgotten them and are putting violent and
stern pressure on our sister. What to think,
under the circumstances, I really do not
know. I know from many who have expe-
rienced your liberality, and bear testimony to
it, how great it is; and I remember the
promises which you made before me and the
ex-prefect. You said that you were nam-
ing a shorter time in writing, but that you
would grant a longer term of grace, from
your wish to meet the necessities of the case,
and do a favour to the widow, who is now
compelled to pay out of her substance such a
large sum of money at once. What is the
cause of this change I cannot imagine. How-
ever, whatever it is, I beg you to be mindful


4’ Placed in 372. ‘ ἢ
2 On the pressure put upon her by the guardian of her heirs.
᾿ς 8 Placed in 372.


187


of your own generous character, and to look
to the Lord Who requites good deeds. I
beg you to grant the time of remission,
which you promised at the outset, that they
may be able to sell their property and dis-
charge the debt. I perfectly well remember
that you promised, if you received the sum
agreed on, to restore to the widow all the
stipulated documents, as well those which
had been executed before the magistrates as
the private papers. I do beg you then,
honour me and win great blessing for your-
self from the Lord. Remember your own
promises, recognizing that you are human
and must yourself look for that time when
you will need God’s help. Do not shut
yourself off from that help by your present
severity ; but, by showing all kindness and
clemency to the afflicted, attract God’s pity
to yourself.


LETIER. Cl
To the Count Helladius.


I sHRINK from troubling your good nature,
on account of the greatness of your influence,
for fear of seeming to make an unwarrant-
able use of your friendship; however, the
necessity of the case prevents my holding
my peace. Our sister, who is a relative of
mine, and now in the sorrowful position of
a widow, has to look after the aflairs of her
orphan boy. On seeing her above measure
oppressed by intolerable responsibilities, I
felt great compassion for her, and, feeling
deeply on the subject, I have hastened to in-
voke your aid, in order that you may, if pos-
sible, deign to support the messenger whom
she has sent, to the end that when she has
paid what she promised in person in my
presence, she may be freed from any further
pressure. She had agreed that she should
be relieved from the interest on payment of
the capital. Now, however, those who are
looking after the affairs of her heirs are try-
ing to exact the payment of the interest as
well as that of the capital. The Lord, you
know, makes the care of widows and orphans
His own, and so do you strive to use your
best endeavours in this matter, in the hope
of the recompense which God Himself will
give you. I cannot help thinking that,
when our admirable and kindly prefect has
heard of the discharge of the capital, he will
feel for this afflicted and unhappy house now
stricken to the knee, and no longer able to
cope with the injuries inflicted upon it.
Pardon, then, the necessity which compels
me to intrude upon you; and give your help


1 Of the same date as the preceding,


188


BASIL.


in this matter, in proportion to the power
which Christ has given you, good and true
man as you are, and using your talents for
the best.


LETTER | CX."
To the prefect Modestus?


In kindly condescending to come down to
me you give me great honour and allow me
great freedom; and these in like, aye and in
greater, measure, 1 pray that your lordship
may receive from our good Master during
the whole of.your life. I have long wanted
to write to you and to receive honour at
your hands, but respect for your great dignity
has restrained me, and 1 have been careful
lest 1 should ever seem to abuse the liberty
conceded to me. Now, however, I am
forced to take courage, not only by the fact
of my having received permission from your
incomparable excellency to write, but also
by the necessity of the distressed. If, then,
prayers of even the small are of any avail
with the great, be moved, most excellent
sir, of your good will to grant relief to a
rural population now in pitiable case, and
give orders that the tax of iron, paid by the
inhabitants of iron-producing Taurus, may
be made such as it is possible to pay. Grant
this, lest they be crushed once for all, in-
stead of being of lasting service to the state.
Iam sure that your admirable benevolence
will see that this is done.


LETTER CXI.?
To Modestus, the prefect.


UnpDER any ordinary circumstances I
should have lacked courage to intrude upon
your excellency, for I know how to gauge
my own importance and to recognise digni-
ties. But now that I have seen a friend in a
distressing position at having been sum-
moned before you, I have ventured to give
him this letter. I hope that by using it, as
a kind of propitiatory symbol, he may meet
with merciful consideration. Truly, although
I am of no account, moderation. itself may
be able to conciliate the most merciful of
prefects, and to win pardon for me. Thus
if my friend has done no wrong, he may be
saved by the mere force of truth; if he has
erred, he may be forgiven through my en-
treaty.

How we are situated here no one knows


1 Placed in 372.
2 On the tribute of iron paid in Mount Taurus,
8 Placed in 372.


better than yourself, for you discern the
weak parts in each man and rule all with
your admirable forethought.


LETTER?
To Andronicus, a general.


1. Dip but my health allow of my being
able to undertake a journey without difh-
culty, and of putting up with the inclemency of
the winter, I should, instead of writing, have
travelled to your excellency in person, and
this for two reasons. First to pay my old
debt, for I know that I promised to come to
Sebastia and to have the pleasure of seeing
your excellency; I did indeed come, but I
failed to meet you because I arrived a little
later than your lordship; secondly, to be
my own ambassador, because I have hith-
erto shrunk from sending, from the idea that
I am too insignificant to win such a boon,
and at the same time reckoning that no one
by merely writing would be so likely to per-
suade any one of public or private rank, in
behalf of any one, as by a personal inter-
view, in which one might clear up some
points in the charges, as to others make
entreaty, and for others implore pardon;
none of which ends can be easily achieved
by a letter. Now against all this I can only
set one thing, your most excellent self; and
because it will suffice to tell you my mind in
the matter, and all that is wanting you will
add of yourself, I have ventured to write as
I do.

2. But you see how from my hesitation,
and because I put off explaining the reasons
of my pleading, I write in roundabout
phrase. This man Domitianus has been an
intimate friend of my own and of my
parents from the beginning, and is like a
brother to me. Why should I not speak the
truth? When I learnt the reasons for his
being in his present troubles, 1 said that he
had only got what he deserved. For I hoped
that no one who has ever committed any
offence be it small or great, will escape
punishment. But when I saw him living a
life of insecurity and disgrace, and felt that
his only hope depends on your decision, I
thought that he had been punished enough ;
and so I implore you to be magnanimous
and humane in the view you take of his
case. ‘To have one’s opponents under one’s
power is right and proper for a man of spirit
and authority; but to be kind and gentle to

1 Placed in 372.


2 Asking for the merciful consideration of Domitianus, a
friend of Basil.


LEPTERS.


189


the fallen is the mark of the man super-
eminent in greatness of soul, and in inclem-
ΕΠ. § So,. if, you ΨΠ|;. ἴεν is) πᾶν your
power to exhibit your magnanimity in the
case of the same man, both in punishing
him and in saving him. Let the fear Domi-
tian has of what he suspects, and of what he
knows he deserves to suffer, be the extent of
his chastisement. I entreat you to add noth-
ing to his punishment, for consider this:
many in former times, of whom no record
has reached us, have had those who wronged
them in their power. But those who sur-
passed their fellows in philosophy did not
persist in their wrath, and of these the
memory has been handed down, immortal
through all time. Let this glory be added to
what history will say of you. Grant to us,
who desire to celebrate your praises, to be
able to go beyond the instances of kind-
nesses sung of in days of old. In this
manner Croesus, it is said, ceased from his
wrath against the slayer of his son, when he
gave himself up for punishment,’ and the
great Cyrus was friendly to this very Cresus
after his victory.” We shall number you
with these and shall proclaim this your glory,
with all our power, unless we be counted too
poor heralds of so great a man.

3. Yet another plea that I ought to urge
is this, that we do not chastise transgressors
for what is past and gone, (for what means
can be devised for undoing the past?) but
either that they may be reformed for the
future, or may be an example of good be-
haviour to others. Now, no one could say
that either of these points is lacking in the
present case; for Domitian will remember
what has happened till the day of his death ;
and 1 think that all the rest, with his ex-
ample before them, are dead with alarm.
Under these circumstances any addition
which we make to his punishment will only
look like a satisfaction of our own anger.
This I should say is far from being true in
your case. I could not indeed be induced to
speak of such a thing did I not see that a
greater blessing comes to him that gives,
than to him that receives. Nor will your
magnanimity be known only to a few. All
Cappadocia is looking to see what is to be
done, and I pray that they may be able to
number this among the rest of your good
deeds. I shrink from concluding my letter
for fear any omission may be to my hurt.
But one thing I will add. Domitian has
letters from many, who plead for him, but
he thinks mine the most important of all,


1 Herod. i. 45. 2 Herod. i. 8S.


because he has learnt, from whom I know
not, that I have influence with your ex-
cellency. Do not let the hopes he has
placed in me be blasted; do not let me
lose my credit among my people here; be
entreated, illustrious sir, and grant my boon.
You have viewed human life as clearly as
ever philosopher viewed it, and you know
how goodly is the treasure laid up for all
those who give their help to the needy.


LETTER, CXL


To the presbyters of Tarsus.”


On meeting this man, I heartily thanked
God that by means of his visit He had com-
forted me in many afflictions and had through
him shewn me clearly your love. I seem to
see in one man’s disposition the zeal of all
of you for the truth. He will tell you of our
discourses with one another. What you
ought to learn directly from me is as fol-
lows.

We live in days when the overthrow of
the Churches seems imminent ; of this I have
long been cognisant. There is no edification
of the Church; no correction of error; no
sympathy for the weak; no single defence of
sound brethren; no remedy is found either
to heal the disease which has already seized
us, or as a preventive against that which we
expect. Altogether the state of the Church
(if I may use a plain figure though it may
seem too humble an one) is like an old coat,
which is always being torn and can never be
restored to its original strength. At such a
time, then, there is need of great eflort and
diligence that the Churches may in some way
be benefited. It is an advantage that parts
hitherto severed should be united. Union
would be effected if we were willing to
accommodate ourselves to the weaker, where
we can do so without injury to souls; since,
then, many mouths are open against the
Holy Ghost, and many tongues whetted to
blasphemy against Him, we implore you, as
far as in you lies, to reduce the blasphemers
to a small number, and to receive into com-
munion all who do not assert the Holy Ghost
to be a creature, that the blasphemers may
be left alone, and may either be ashamed and
return to the truth, or, if they abide in their
error, may cease to have any importance
from the smallness of their numbers. Let
us then seek no more than this, but propose
to all thé brethren, who are willing to join


1 Placed in 372
2 That the Nicene Creed alone is to be required of the
brethren.


190


BASIL;


us, the Nicene Creed. If they assent to that,
let us further require that the Holy Ghost
ought not to be called a creature, nor any
of those who say so be received into com-
munion. I do not think that we ought to
insist upon anything beyond this. For I am
convinced that by longer conimunication and
mutual experience without strife, if anything
more requires to be added by way of ex-
planation, the Lord Who worketh all things
together for good for them that love Him,’
will grant it.


LETTER CXIV.?


Zo Cyriacus, at Tarsus.*


I NEED hardly tell the sons of peace how
great is the blessing of peace. But now this
blessing, great, marvellous, and worthy as it
is of being most strenuously sought by all
that love the Lord, is in peril of being re-
duced to the bare name, because iniquity
abounds, and the love of most men has waxed
cold.* I think then that the one great end
of all who are really and truly serving the
Lord ought to be to bring back to union the
Churches now ‘‘at sundry times and in
divers manners ᾿ ἢ divided from one another.
In attempting myself to effect this, I cannot
fairly be blamed as a busybody, for nothing
is so characteristically Christian as the being
a peacemaker, and for this reason our Lord
has promised us peacemakers a very high
reward.

When, therefore, I had met the brethren,
and learnt how great was their brotherly
love, their regard for you, and yet more their
love for Christ, and their exactitude and
firmness in all that concerns the faith, and
moreover their earnestness in compassing
two ends, the not being separated from your
love, and the not abandoning their sound
faith, I approved of their good disposition ;
and I now write to your reverence beseech-
ing you with all love to retain them in true
union, and associated with you in all your
anxiety for the Church. I have moreover
pledged myself to them for your orthodoxy,
and that you too by God’s grace are enrolled
to fight with all vigour for the truth, what-
ever you may have to suffer for the true
doctrine. My own opinion is that the fol-
lowing conditions are such as will not run
counter to your own feeling and will be
quite sufficient to satisfy the above mentioned


1 Rom. viii. 28.
2 Placed in 372.
3 Like the preceding Letter, on the sufficiency of the Nicene


Creed.
4 cf. Matt. xxiv. 12, 5 cf, Heb. i. 1.


brethren; namely, that you should confess
the faith put forth by our Fathers once
assembled at Nicza, that you should not
omit any one of its propositions, but bear in
mind that the three hundred and eighteen
who met together without strife did not
speak without the operation of the Holy
Ghost, and not to add to that creed the state-
ment that the Holy Ghost is a creature, nor
hold communion with those who so say, to
the end that the Church of God may be pure
and without any evil admixture of any tare.
If this full assurance is given them by your
good feeling, they are prepared to offer
proper submission to you. And I myself
promise for the brethren that they will offer
no opposition, but will show themselves
entirely subordinate, if only your excellency
shall have readily granted this one thing
which they ask for.


LETTER, | CV?


To the heretic Simplicia?


WE often ill advisedly hate our superiors
and love our inferiors. 50 19 for my part, hold
my tongue, and keep silence about the disgrace
of the insults offered me. I wait for the Judge
above, Who knows how to punish all wicked-
ness in the end, even though a man pour out
gold like sand; let him trample on the right,
he does but hurt his own soul. God always
asks for sacrifice, not, I think, because He
needs it, but because He accepts a pious and
right mind as a precious sacrifice. But
when a man by his transgressions tramples
on himself God reckons his prayers impure.
Bethink thyself, then, of the last day, and
pray do not try to teach me. I know more
than you do, and am not so choked with
thorns within. I do not mind _ tenfold
wickedness with a few good qualities. You
have stirred up against me lizards and toads,”


1 Placed in 372.

2The Ben. Ed. note that in the imperial codex No. Ixvii.
appears an argument of this letter wanting in the editions of
St. Basil. It is as follows: ‘ Letter of the same to Simplicia
about her eunuchs. She was a heretic. The blessed Basil
being ill and entering a bath to bathe, Simplicia told her
eunuchs and maids to throw his towels out. Straightway the
just judgment of God slew some of them, and Simplicia sent
money to the blessed Basil to make amends for the injury.
Basil refused to receive it,and wrote this Jetter.’”? This extraor-
dinary preface seems to have been written oe, some anno-
tator ignorant of the circumstances, which may be learnt from
Greg. Naz. Letter xxxviii. 1 appears that a certain Cappa-
docian church, long without a bishop, had elected a slave of
Simplicia, a lady wealthy and munificent, but of suspected
orthodoxy. Basil and Gregory injudiciously ordained. the
reluctant slave without waiting for his mistress’s consent.
The angry lady wrote in indignation, and threatened him with
the vengeance of her slaves and eunuchs. After Basil’s death
she returned to the charge, and pressed Gregory to get the
ordination annulled. cf. Maran, Vit. Bas. chap. xxv.

3 Presumably the slaves and eunuchs mentioned below. If
the letter is genuine it is wholly unworthy of the Archbishop
of Cesarea.


LET FERS.


IOI


beasts, it is true, of Spring time, but never-
theless unclean. But a bird will come from
above who will devour them. The account
I have to render is not according to your
ideas, but as God thinks fit to judge. If
witnesses are wanted, there will not stand
before the Judge slaves; nor yet a disgrace-
ful and detestable set of eunuchs; neither
woman nor man, lustful, envious, ill-bribed,
passionate, effeminate, slaves of the belly, mad
for gold, ruthless, grumbling about their din-
ner, inconstant, stingy, greedy, insatiable,
savage, jealous. What more need I say?
At their very birth they were condemned to
the knife.e How can their mind be right
when their feet are awry? They are chaste
because of the knife, and it is no credit to
them. ‘They are lecherous to no purpose, of
their own natural vileness. These are not
the witnesses who shall stand in the judg-
ment, but rather the eyes of the just and the
eyesight of the perfect, of all who are then
to see with their eyes what they now see
with their understanding.


LETTER CXVI.'


To Firminius.?


You write seldom, and your letters are
short, either because you shrink from writ-
ing or from avoiding the satiety that comes
from excess; or perhaps to train yourself to
curt speech. I, indeed, am never satisfied,
and however abundant be your communica-
tion, it is less than my'desire, because I wish
to know every detail about you. How are
you as to health? How as to ascetic disci-
pline? Do you persevere in your original
purpose? Or have you formed some new
plan, changing your mind according to cir-
cumstances? Had you remained the same,
I should not have wanted a great number of
letters. I should have been quite satisfied
with ‘*I am quite well and I hope you are
quite well.” But I hear what I am ashamed
to say, that you have deserted the ranks of
your blessed forefathers, and deserted to
your paternal grandfather, and are anxious
to be rather a Brettanius than a Firminius.
I am very anxious to hear about this, and to
learn the reasons which have induced you to
take to this kind of 116. You have yourself
been silent; ashamed, I suppose, of your
intentions, and therefore I must implore you


1 Placed in 372. ; »
2 A young soldier whom Basil would win from the army to
ascetic life.


not to entertain any project, which can be
associated with shame. If any such idea has
entered into your mind, put it from’ you,
come to yourself again, bid a long farewell
to soldiering and arms and the toils of the
camp. Return home thinking it, as your
forefathers thought before you, quite enough
for ease of life and all possible distinction
to hold a high place in your city. This, I
am sure, you wall be able to achieve with-
out difficulty, when I consider your natural
gifts and the small number of your rivals.
If, then, this was not your original intention,
or if after forming it you have rejected it,
let me know at once. If, on the other hand,
which God forbid, you remain in the same
mind, let the trouble come self announced.
I do not want a letter.


LETTER CXVII.


Without address)


For many reasons I know that I am a
debtor to your reverence, and now the anxiety
in which I find myself necessarily puts me
in the way of services of this kind, although
my advisers are mere chance comers, and
not like yourself joined to me by many and
different ties. There is no need to bring the
past under review. I may say that I was
the cause of my own difficulties, by deter-
mining to leave that good discipline which
alone leads to salvation. The result was
that in this trouble I soon fell into tempta-
tion. What happened has seemed worthy
of mention, so that I may not again fall into
similar distress. As to the future, I wish to
give full assurance to your reverence, that,
by God’s grace, all will go well, since the
proceeding is lawful, and there is no difh-
culty about it, as many of my friends about the
court are ready to help me. I shall therefore
have a petition drawn up, similar to the
form presented to the Vicar; and, if no
delay intervene, I shall promptly get my
discharge, and shall be sure to give you
relief by sending you the formal document.
I feel sure that in this my own convic-
tions have more force than the imperial
orders. If I shew this fixed and firm in the
highest life, by God’s aid the keeping of my
chastity will be inviolable and sure. I have
been pleased to see the brother entrusted to
me by you, and hold him among my intimate
friends. I trust he may prove worthy of
God and of your good word.


1 Answer of Firminius to the preceding.


192


BASIL.


LETTER CXVIII.'
* Zo Jovinus, Bishop of Perrha.’


You owe me a good turn. For I lent
you a kindness, which I ought to get back
with interest ;— a kind of interest, this, which
our Lord does not refuse. Pay me, then,
my friend, by paying me a visit. So much
for the capital; what of the increment? It is
the fact of the visit being paid by you, who
are a man as much superior to me, as fathers
are better than children.


LETTER CXIX.
To Lustathius, Bishop of Sebasteia.*


I appREss you by the very honourable
and reverend brother Petrus, beseeching you
now and ever to pray for me, that I may be
changed from ways dangerous and to be
shunned, and may be made one day worthy
of the name of Christ. Though I say no-
thing, you will converse together about my
affairs, and he will give you an exact account
of what has taken place. But you admit,
without due examination, the vile suspicions
against me which will probably be raised by
men who have insulted me, in violation of
the fear of God and the regard of men. Iam
ashamed to tell you what treatment I have
received from the illustrious Basilius, whom
I had accepted at the hands of your rever-
ence as a protection for my life. But, when
you have heard what our brother has to say,
you will know every detail. I do not thus
speak to avenge myself upon him, for I pray
that it may not be put to his account by the
Lord, but in order that your affection to me
may remain firm, and because I am afraid
lest it be shaken by the monstrous slanders
which these men are pretty sure to make up
in defence of their fall. Whatever be the
charges they adduce, I hope your intelligence
will put these enquiries to them. Have they
formally accused me? Have they sought for
any correction of the error which they bring
against me? Have they made their griev-
ance against me plain? As matters are, by
their ignoble flight they have made it evi-
dent that under the cheerfulness of their
countenance, and their counterfeit expres-
sions of affection, they are all the while
hiding in their heart an immense depth of
guile and of gall. In all this, whether I


1 Placed at the end of 372 or the beginning of 373.

2 The MSS. vary between Jovinus and Jobinus. cf. Theod-
Crete. Fist, ἅν. τὰ.

8 Placed in the end of 372 or beginning of 373.

4On the misconduct of Basilius and Sophronius, two dis-
ciples of Eustathius.


narrate it or not, your intelligence knows
perfectly well what sorrow they have caused
me, and what laughter to those who, always
expressing their abomination for the pious
life. in this wretched city, affirm that the
pretence of virtue is practised as a mere
trick to get credit, a mere assumption to de-
ceive. So in these days no mode of life is now
so suspected of vice by people here as the pro-
fession of asceticism. Your intelligence will
consider what is the best cure for all this.

As to the charges patched up against me
by Sophronius, far from being a prelude of
blessings, they are a beginning of division
and separation, and are likely to lead to even
my love growing cold. I implore that by
your merciful kindness he may be withheld
from his injurious efforts, and that your
affection may strive rather to tighten the
bonds of what is falling asunder, and not
to increase separation by joining with those
who are eager for dissent.


LETTER CxXxX.!
To Meletius, bishop of Antioch?


I HAVE received a letter from the very God-
beloved bishop Eusebius, in which he enjoins
that a second letter be written to the West-
erns about certain Church matters. He has
expressed a wish that the letter should be
drawn up by me, and signed by all those
who are in communion. Having no means
of writing a letter about these wishes of his,
I have sent on his minute to your holiness,
in order that, when you have read it and can
give heed to the information given by the
very dear brother Sanctissimus, our fellow
presbyter, you may yourself be so good as
to indite a letter on these points as seems
best to you. We are prepared to agree to
it and to lose no time in having it conveyed
to those in communion with us, so that,
when all have signed it may be carried by
the messenger, who is on the point of start-
ing on his journey to visit the bishops of the
West. Give orders for the decision of your
holiness to be communicated to me as
quickly as possible, that I may not be igno-
rant of your intentions. i

As to the intrigue which is now being
devised, or has already been devised against


1 Placed in 373. ; }

2 Basil keeps up his support of the claims of Meletius, now
in exile in Armenia, to be recognised as Catholic bishop of
Antioch, and complains of the irregular ordination of Faustus
as bishop of an Armenian see by Basil’s opponent, Anthimus
of Tyana. Sanctissimus, the bearer of the letter, is supposed
by Tillemont (vol. ix. p. 219) to be a Western on account of
his Latin name. Maran (Vit. Bas. 26) points out that Orien-
tals not infrequently bore Latin names, and supposes him to
be a presbyter of Antioch.


LETTERS.


193


me, in Antioch, the same brother will convey
intimation to your holiness, unless indeed
the report of what has been done does not
anticipate him and make the position clear.
There is ground for hope that the threats
are coming to an end.

I wish your reverence to know that our
brother Anthimus has ordained Faustus,
who is living with the pope’ as bishop,
without having received the votes, and in
place of our right reverend brother Cyril.
Thus he has filled Armenia with schisms.
I have thought it right to tell your reverence
this, lest they should le against me, and I
be responsible for these disorderly proceed-
ings. You will of course deem it right to
make this known to the rest. I think such
irregularity will distress many.


LETTER CXXiI.’
To Theodotus, bishop of Nicopolis.®


THE winter is severe and protracted, so
that it is difficult for me even to have the
solace of letters. For this reason I have
written seldom to your reverence and
seldom heard from you, but now my beloved
brother Sanctissimus, the co-presbyter, has
undertaken a journey as far as your city.
By him I salute your lordship, and ask you
to pray for me, and to give ear to Sanctissi-
mus, that from him you may learn in what
situation the Churches are placed, and may
give all possible heed to the points put
before you. You must know that Faustus
came with letters for me, from the pope,
requesting that he might be ordained bishop.
When however I asked him for some testi-
monial from yourself, and the rest of the
bishops, he made light of me and _ betook
himself to Anthimus. He came back,
ordained by Anthimus, without any com-
munication having been made to me on
the subject.


LETTER CXXII.*
To Pemenius,’ bishop of Satala.


WHEN the Armenians returned by your
way you no doubt asked for a letter from
them, and you learnt why I had not given


1 The title was not even at this time confined to bishops,
and whotiis papa is is quite uncertain. The title is not gen.
erally limited to the bishop of Rome until the cighth century.
So late as 680 Cyrus is called pope of Alexandria at the Sixth
Council. (Mansi xi. 214.) It was not till 1073 that Gregory
VII. asserted an exclusive right to the name. (Gieseler,
vol. 1, 2, 405.)

2 Of the same date as the preceding.

3 On the same subject. 4 Placed in 373.

5 On the same subject as the preceding. cf. Letters cii.,
CCXXVii., CCxxviii., ccCxxix., and cxxx.


the letter to them. If they spoke as truth
lovers should, you forgave me on the spot;
if they kept anything back (which I do not
suppose), at all events hear it from me.

The most illustrious Anthimus, who long
ago made peace with me, when he found an
opportunity of satisfying his own vain glori-
ousness, and of causing me some vexation,
consecrated Faustus, by his own authority
and with his own hand, without waiting for
any election from you, and ridiculing my
punctiliousness in such matters. Inasmuch,
then, as he has confounded ancient order
and has made light of you, for whose elec-
tion I was waiting, and has acted in a man-
ner, as I view it, displeasing to God, for
these reasons I felt pained with them, and
gave no letter for any of the Armenians, not
even for your reverence. Faustus I would
not even receive into communion, thereby
plainly testifying that, unless he brought me
a letter from you, I should be permanently
alienated from him, and should influence
those of the same mind with me to treat
him in the same manner. If there is any
remedy for these things, be sure to write to
me yourself, giving your testimony to him,
if you see that his life is good; and exhort
the rest. If on the other hand the mischief
is incurable, let me perfectly understand it
to be so, that I may no longer take them
into account; although really, as they have’
proved, they have agreed, for the future, to
transfer their communion to Anthimus, in
contempt of me and of my Church, as
though my friendship were no longer worth
having.


LETTER CXXIILI!


To Urbicius, the monk.


You were to have come to see me (and
the blessing was drawing near) to cool me,
aflame in my temptations, with the tip of
your finger. What then? My sins stood in
the way and hindered your start, so that I am
sick without a remedy. Just as when the
waves are round us, one sinks and another
rises, and another looms black and dreadful,
so of my troubles: some have ceased, some
are with me, some are before me. As is
generally the case, the one remedy for these
troubles is to yield to the crisis and withdraw
from my persecutors. Yet come to me, to
console, to advise, or even to travel with me;
in any case you will make me better for the
mere sight of you. Above all, pray, and
pray again, that my reason be not whelmed


1 Written in 373. 2 cf, Letter cclxil.


194


by the waves of my troubles; pray that all
through I may keep a heart pleasing to God,
that I be not numbered with the wicked
servants, who thank a master when he gives
them good, and refuse to submit when he
.chastises them by adversity; but let me reap
benefit from my very trials, trusting most in
God when I need Him most.


LETTER CXXIV?2
To Theodorus.


Ir is sometimes said that slaves to the
passion of love, when by some inevitable
necessity they are separated from the object
of their desire, are able to stay the violence
of their passion by indulging the sense of
sight, if haply they can look at the picture
of the beloved object. Whether this be
true or not I cannot say; but what has be-
fallen me in your case, my friend, is not very
different. I have felt a disposition towards
your godly and guileless soul, somewhat, if
I may so say, of the nature of love; but the
gratification of my desire, like that of all
other blessings, is made difficult to me by the
opposition of my sins. However, I have
seemed to sce a very good likeness of you in
the presence of my very reverend brothers.
And if it had been my lot to fall in with
you when far away from them, I should have
fancied that I saw them in you. For the
measure of love in each of you is so great,
that in both of you there is a plain contest
for the superiority. I have thanked God for
this. If any longer life be left me, I pray
that my life may be made sweet through
you, just as now [ look on life as a wretched
thing to be avoided, because I am separated
from the companionship of those I love best.
For, in my judgment, there is nothing in
which one can be cheerful when cut off from
those who truly love us.


LE LIER ΟΥ̓Χ"


A transcript of the faith as dictated by Saint
Basil, and subscribed by Eustathius, bishop
of Sebasteia.*


1. BoTH men whose minds have been
preoccupied by a heterodox creed and now
wish to change over to the congregation of
the orthodox, and also those who are now
for the first time desirous of being instructed

1 Placed in 373. 2 Placed in 373.

3 On Basil’s relations with Eustathius of Sebasteia (Siwas
in Armenia Minor), the Vicar of Bray of the Arian controver-
sies, who probably subscribed more creeds than any other


prominent bishop of his age, see Letters cxxx. and ccxliv.,
and p. 171, ἢ.


BASIL.


in the doctrine of truth, must be taught the
creed drawn up by the blessed fathers in the
Council which met at Nicwa. The same
training would also be exceedingly useful in
the case of all who are under suspicion of
being in a state of hostility to sound doc-
trine, and who by ingenious and plausible
excuses keep the depravity of their senti-
ments out of view. For these too this creed
is all that is need€d. They will either get
cured of their concealed unsoundness, or, by
continuing to keep it concealed, will them-
selves bear the load of the sentence due to
their dishonesty, and will provide us with
an easy defence in the day of judgment,
when the Lord will lift the cover from the
hidden things of darkness, and ‘‘make
manifest the counsels of the hearts.” ὁ It is
therefore desirable to receive them with the
confession not only that they believe in the
words put forth by our fathers at Nicea, but
also according to the sound meaning ex-
pressed by those words. For there are men
who even in this creed pervert the word or
truth, and wrest the meaning of the words
in it to suit their own notions. So Marcel-
lus, when expressing impious sentiments
concerning the hypostasis of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and describing Him as being
Logos and nothing more,” had the hardihood
to profess to find a pretext for his principles
in that creed by affixing an improper sense
upon the Homoousion. Some, moreover, of
the impious following of the Libyan Sabel-
lius, who understand hypostasis and sub-
stance to be identical, derive ground for the
establishment of their blasphemy from the
same source, because of its having been
written in the creed ‘‘if any one says that
the Son is of a different substance or hypos-
tasis, the Catholic and Apostolic Church
anathematizes him.” But they did not there
state hypostasis and substance to be identi-
cal. Had the words expressed one and the
same meaning, what need of both? It is on
the contrary clear that while by some it was
denied that the Son was of the same sub-
stance with the Father, and some asserted
that He was not of the substance and was of
some other hypostasis, they thus condemned
both opinions as outside that held by the
Church. When they set forth their own
view, they declared the Son to be of the
substance of the Father, but they did not
add the words ‘‘of the hypostasis.’’ The

11 Cor. i. 5.

2 Marcellus of Ancyra (Angora) was represented to teach
that the Son had no real personality, but was only the outward
manifestation (Πορφορικὸς Λόγος) of the Father, but he could
always defend himself on the ground that he was in com.


munion with Julius and Athanasius, popes of Rome and
Alexandria. cf. Jer., De Vir. Zi. chap. 1xxxvl.


LETTERS.


former clause stands for the condemnation
of the faulty view; the latter plainly states
the dogma of salvation. We are therefore
bound to confess the Son to be of one sub-
stance with the Father, as it is written; but
the Father to exist in His own proper. hy-
postasis, the Son in His, and the Holy Ghost
in His, as they themselves have clearly
delivered the doctrine. They indeed clearly
and satisfactorily declared in the words
Light of Light, that the Light which begat
and the Light which was begotten, are dis-
tinct, and yet Light and Light; so that the
definition of the Substance is one and the
same.’ I will now subjoin the actual creed
as it was drawn up at Nicea.’

2. πιστεύομεν εἰς ἕνα Θεὸν Πατέρα παντοκράτορα,
πάντων ὁρατῶν τε καὶ ἀοράτων ποιητήν > [ποιητὴν οὐρανοῦ
καὶ γῆς ὁρατῶν τε πάντων καὶ ἀοράτων "]

καὶ εἰς ἕνα Κύριον Τησοῦν Χριστόν, τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ
[τὸν μονογενῇ] γεννηθέντα ἐκ Tov Πατρὸς μονογενῆ. [τὸν
ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς γεννηθέντα πρὸ πάντων τών αἰώνων.

τουτέστιν ἐκ τῆς οὐσίας τοῦ Πατρός, Θεὸν ἐκ Θεοῦ
[omit],? Φῶς ἐκ Φῶτος, Θεὸν ἀληθινὸν ἐκ Θεοῦ ἀληθινοῦ,
γεννηθέντα ov ποιηθέντα, ὁμοούσιον τῷ Ἰΐατρι, δ ov τὰ
πάντα ἐγένετο, τά τε ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ καὶ τὰ ἐν τῇ γῇ
[omit].

τὸν dv’ ἡμᾶς τοὺς ἀνθρωποὺς καὶ διὰ τὴν ἡμέτεραν
σωτηρίαν, κατελθόντα [ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν] καὶ σαρκωθέντα.
[ἐκ πνεύματος ἁγίου καὶ Μαρίας τῆς παρθένου.

καὶ ἐνανθρωπήσαντα [σταυρωθέντα τε ὑπὲρ ημῶν ἐπὶ
Ποντίου IliAdrov, καὶ], παθόντα [καὶ ταφέντα], καί ἀνα-
στάντα τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρα [κατὰ τὰς γραφὰς καὶ], ἀνελθόντα
εἰς τοὺς οὐρανοὺς. [καὶ καθεζόμενον ἐκ δεξιῶν τοῦ
Πατρός.

καί πάλιν ἐρχόμενον [μετὰ δόξης] κρῖναι ζῶντας καὶ
νεκρούς - [οὗ τῆς βασιλείας οὐκ ἔσται τέλος "]

καὶ εἰς τὸ Πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον. [τὸ Κύριον καὶ τὸ ζωοποιὸν
τὸ ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς ἐκπορευόμενον, τὸ σὺν Πατρὶ καὶ Ὑἱῷ
συμπροσκυνούμενον καὶ συνδοξαζόμενον, τὸ λαλῆσαν dia
τῶν προφητῶν" εἰς μίαν ἁγίαν καθολικὴν καὶ ἀποστολικὴν
ἐκκλησίαν, ὁμολογοῦμεν ἕν βάπτισμα εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν,
᾿ προσδοκῶμεν ἀνάστασιν νεκρῶν, καὶ ζωὴν τοῦ μέλλοντος
αἰῶνος. ᾿Αμὴν.]

τοῦς δὲ λέγοντας, ἦν ποτε ὅτε οὐκ ἦν, καὶ πρὶν γεννη-
θῆναι οὐκ ἦν, καὶ ὅτε ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων ἐγένετο, ἢ ἐξ ἑτέρας
ὑποστάσεως ἢ οὐσίας φάσκοντας εἷναι, ἢ κτιστὸν ἢ τρεπτὸν
ἢ ἀλλοιωτὸν τὸν Ὑἱὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ, τουτοὺς ἀναθεματίζει ἡ
καθολικὴ καὶ ἀποστολικὴ ἐκκλησια. [Omit all the An-
athemas. |

3. Here then all points but one-are satis-
factorily and exactly defined, some for the


1cf. Letters xxxviii. and xcii. Basil is anxious to show
that his own view is identical with the Nicene, and does not
admit a development and variation in the meaning of the word
hypostasis ; but on comparing sucha passage as that in Athan.
c. Afros, ‘‘hypostasis is substance, and means nothing else
but very being” (ἡ δὲ ὑπόστασις οὐσία ἐστὶ καὶ οὐδὲν ἀλλὸ
σημαινόμενον ἔχει ἢ αὐτὸ τὸ ὃν) with St. Basil’s words in the
text it appears plain that hypostasis is not used throughout in
the same sense. An erroneous sense of ‘three hypostases’”’
was understood to be condemned at Nicza, though Athana-
sius, e.g. ‘Jn tliud omnia,” etc., Schaff and Wace’s ed., p. go,
does himself use the phrase, writing probably about ten years
after Nicea; but he more commonly treats ουσία and ὑπόστασις
as identical. See specially the Zomus ad Anttochenos of A.D.
362 on the possible use of either ‘‘ three hypostases ” or ‘one
hypostasis.” cf. also n. on p. 179.

2 [ give the creed in the original Greek. The passages in
brackets indicate the alterations of the Constantinopolitan re-
vision according to the text of Chalcedon.

3 Deum de Deo”? is inserted in the Sarum Breviary.


195


correction of what had been corrupted, some
as a precaution against errors expected to
arise. The doctrine of the Spirit, however,
is merely mentioned, as needing no elabora-
tion, because at the time of the Council
no question was mooted, and the opinion
on this subject in the hearts of the faithful
was exposed to no attack. Little by little,
however, the growing poison-germs of im-
piety, first sown by Arius, the champion of
the heresy, and then by those who succeeded
to his inheritance of mischief, were nurtured
to the plague of the Church, and the regular
development of the impiety issued in blas-
phemy against the Holy Ghost. Under
these circumstances we are under the neces-
sity of putting before the men who have no
pity for themselves, and shut their eyes to
the inevitable threat directed by our Lord
against blasphemers of the Holy Ghost, their
bounden duty. They must anathematize all
who call the Holy Ghost a creature, and all
who so think ; all who do not confess that He
is holy by nature, as the Father is holy by
nature, and the Son is holy by nature, and
refuse Him His place in the blessed divine
nature. Our not separating Him from
Father and Son is a proof of our right mind,
for we are bound to be baptized in the terms
we have received and to profess belief in the
terms in which weare baptized, and as we have
professed belief in, so to give giory to Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; and to hold aloof
from the communion of all who call Him
creature, as from open blasphemers. One
point must be regarded as settled; and the
remark is necessary because of our slander-
ers; we do not speak of the Holy Ghost as
unbegotten, for we recognise one Unbegotten
and one Origin of all things,’ the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ: nor do we speak of the
Holy Ghost as begotten, for by the tradition
of the faith we have been taught one Only-
begotten: the Spirit of truth we have been
taught to proceed from the Father, and we
confess Him to be of God without creation.
We are also bound to anathematize all who
speak of the Holy Ghost as ministerial,” in-
asmuch as by this term they degrade Him to
the rank of a creature. For that the minis-
tering spirits are creatures we are told by
Scripture in the words ‘ they are all minis-
tering spirits sent forth to minister.” * But


1cf, pp. 27 and 30, notes.

2cf. De Sp. S. ὃ 25, p. 17. On those who described the
Spirit as merely a ministering spirit, v‘de Athan., Ad Serap. i.
(λεγόντων αὐτὸ μὴ μόνον KTigua, ἀλλὰ Kal τῶν λειτουργικῶν
πνευμάτων ἕν αὐτὸ εἶναι). This new party arose in the Delta
about 362, and was first known as ‘ Tropici.’”? They were
condemned at the synod held at Alexandria on the return of
Athanasius from his third exile. Its Synodical Letter is the
Tomus ad Antiochenos. 3Heb. i. 14.


196


BASIL.


because of men who make universal confu-
sion, and do not keep the doctrine of the
Gospels, it is necessary to add yet this fur-
ther, that they are to be shunned, as plainly
hostile to true religion, who invert the order
left us by the Lord, and put the Son before
the Father, and the Holy Spirit before the
Son. For we must keep unaltered and in-
violable that order which we have received
from the very words of the Lord, ‘‘Go ye
therefore and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”’ ?

I, Eustathius, bishop, have read to thee,
Basil, and understood; and I assent to what
is written above. I have signed in the pres-
ence of our Fronto, Severus, the chorepis-
copus, and several other clerics.


LETTER CXXVI?


To Atarbius.’


On arriving at Nicopolis in the double
hope of settling the disturbances which had
arisen, and applying a remedy, as far as
possible, to measures taken in a disorderly
manner and in violation of the law of the
Church, I was exceedingly disappointed at
failing to meet you. I heard that you had
hurriedly withdrawn, and actually from the
very synod which was being held by you.
I am, therefore, under the necessity of having
recourse to writing, and by this letter I bid
you present yourself before me, that you may
in person apply some remedy to the pain
which I felt, even unto death, on hearing
that you had ventured on action, in the very
middle of the church, of the like of which I
hitherto have never heard. All this, although
painful and serious, is endurable, as having
happened to a man who has committed the
punishment due for his sufferings to God, and
is wholly devoted to peace and to prevent-
ing harm falling from any fault of his on
God’s people. Since, however, some hon-
ourable brethren, worthy of all credit, have
told me that you have introduced certain
innovations into the faith, and have spoken
against sound doctrine, I am under the cir-
cumstances the more agitated, and above
measute anxious, lest, in addition to the
countless wounds which have been inflicted
on the Church by traitors to the truth of the
Gospel, yet a further calamity should spring
up in the renewal of the ancient heresy of
Sabellius, the enemy of the Church; for to
this the brethren have reported your utter-


1 Matt. xxviii. 14.


2 Placed in 373.
8 Bishop of Neocasarea.


Vide Letter \xv.


ances to be akin. I have, therefore, written
to charge you not to shrink from undertaking
a short journey to come to me, and, by giving
me full assurance in the matter, at once to al-
leviate my pangs, and to solace the Churches
of God, which are now pained to a grave,
nay an unendurable extent, at your actions
and your reported words.


LETTER CXXVII.}
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.’


Our merciful God, Who makes comfort
match trouble, and consoles the lowly, lest
they be drowned unawares in exceeding
grief, has sent a consolation, equivalent to
the troubles I have suffered in Nicopolis, in
seasonably bringing me the God-beloved
bishop Jobinus. He must tell you himself
how very opportune his visit was. I
shrink from a long letter, and will hold my
peace. And Iam the more inclined to si-
lence, lest I seem as it were to put a mark on
men, who have turned round and begun to
show regard to me, by mentioning their fall.

God grant that you may come to see mein
my own home, so that I may embrace your
reverence and tell you everything in detail.
For we often find some comfort in telling
what is painful in actual experience. How-
ever, for all that the very godly bishop has
done, fully as far as regards his affection for
me, and preéminently and stoutly as regards
the exact observance of the canons, com-
mend him. Moreover, thank God that your
pupils everywhere exhibit your reverence’s
character.

LETTER CXXVIII.®


To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.'


1. HiruertTo [ have been unable to give
any adequate and practical proof of my
earnest desire to pacify the Churches of the
Lord. Butin my heart I affirm that I have
so great a longing, that I would gladly give
up even my life, if thereby the flame of
hatred, kindled by the evil one, could be put
out. If it was not for the sake of this long-
ing for peace that I consented to come to
Colonia,® may my life be unblessed by peace.
The peace I seek is the true peace, left us
by the Lord Himself; and what I have asked
that I may have for my assurance belongs to
one who desires nothing but the true peace,

1 Placed in 373.

2 On Basil’s difficulties while at Nicopolis, with a request
for the sympathy of Eusebius.

3 Placed in 373.

4 On the difficulty of reconciliation with Eustathius.


5 Maran supposes this to be the place referred to in Letter
ccxliv. 2.


LETTERS.


197


although some perversely interpret the truth
into another sense. Let them use their
tongues as they will, but assuredly they will
one day be sorry for their words.

2. Now I beseech your holiness to remem-
ber the original propositions, and not to be
led away by receiving answers that do not fit
_ the questions, nor yet to give practical weight
to the quibbles of men who, without any
power of argument, very cleverly pervert the
truth, from their own ideas alone. I set out
propositions which were perfectly simple,
clear and easy to remember; do we decline
to receive into communion those who refuse
to accept the Nicene Creed? Do we refuse to
have part or lot with those who have the
hardihood to assert that the Holy Ghost is a
creature? He, however,’ instead of answer-
ing my questions word for word, has con-
cocted the statement which you have sent
me: — and this not from simplemindedness,
as might be imagined, nor yet from his ina-
bility to see the consequences. What he
reckons is that, by repudiating my preposi-
tion, he will expose his true character to the
people; while, if he agrees to it, he will
depart from that véa medta which has
hitherto seemed to him preferable to any
other position. Let him not try to beguile
me, nor, with the rest, deceive your intelli-
gence. Let him send a concise answer to
my question, whether he accepts or repudi-
ates communion with the enemies of the
faith. If you get him to do this and send me
such a distinct answer as I pray for, I own
myself in error in all that has gone before; I
take all the blame upon myself; then ask from
me a proof of humility. But, if nothing of
the kind come to pass, pardon me, most God-
beloved father, in my inability to approach
God’s altar with hypocrisy. Were it not for
this dread, why should I separate myself
from Euippius, so learned a man, so advanced
in age, and bound to me by so many ties of
affection? If, however, in this case I acted
rightly, it would, I am sure, be absurd to
appear united with those who maintain the
same views as Euippius, through the media-
tion of these amiable and charming persons.

3. Notthat I think it is absolutely our
duty to cut ourselves off from those who do
not receive the faith, but rather to have re-
gard to them in accordance with the old law
of love, and to write to them with one con-
sent, giving them all exhortation with pity,
and to propose to them the faith of the
_ fathers, and invite them to union. If we
' succeed we should be united in communion


17,6. Eustathius.


with them; if we fail we must be content
with one another and purge our conduct of
this uncertain spirit, restoring the evangeli-
cal and simple conversation followed by
those who accepted the Word from the be-
ginning.) “6 Dhep stoi said, ** were of ‘one
heart and of one soul.”* If they obey you,
this will be best; if not, recognise the real
authors of the war, and, for the future do not
write me any more letters about reconcilia-
tion.


LETTER) 230x137
To Meletius Bishop of Antioch.®


1. I KNEw that the charge which had lately
sprung up against the loquacious Apolilina-
rius would sound strange in the ears of your
excellency. I did not know myself, till now,
that he was accused; at the present time,
however, the Sebastenes, after search in some
quarter or another, have brought these things
forward, and they are carrying about a docu-
ment for which they are specially trying to
condemn me on the ground that I hold the
same sentiments. It contains the following
phrases. ὁ Wherefore it is everywhere ne-
cessary to understand the first identity in con-
junction with, or rather in union with, the
second, and to say that the second and the
third are the same. For what the Father is
firstly, the Son is secondly, and the Spirit
thirdly. And, again, what the Spirit is
firstly, the Son is secondly, in so far as the
Spirit is the Lord; and the Fathex thirdly,
in so far as the Spirit is God. And, to ex-
press the ineffable with greatest force, the
Father is Son in a paternal sense, and the
Son Father ina filial sense, and so in the
case of the Spirit, in so far as the Trinity is
one God.” This is what is being bruited
about. I never can believe it to have been
invented by those through whom it has been
published, although, after their slanders
against me, I can regard nothing as beyond
their audacity. For writing to some of their
party, they advanced their false accusation
against me, and then added the words 1
have quoted, describing them as the work of
heretics, but saying nothing-as to the author
of the document, in order that it might vul-
garly be supposed to have come from my
pen. Nevertheless, in my opinion, their in-
telligence would not have gone far enough
in putting the phrases together. On this
account, in order to repudiate the growing


1 Acts iv. 32. 2 Placed in 373.
3 A refutation of 2 a charge that he was the author of an
Apollinarian document,


198


BASIL.


blasphemy against myself, and shew to all
the world that I have nothing in common
with those who make such statements, I
have been compelled to mention Apollina-
rius as approximating to the impiety of Sa-
bellius. Of this subject I will say no more.

2. I have received a message from the
court that, after the first impulse of the Em-
peror, to which he was impelled by my ca-
lumniators, a second decree has been passed,
that Iam not to be delivered to my accusers,
nor given over to their will, as was ordered
at the beginning; but that there has been in
the meanwhile some delay. If then this
obtains, or any gentler measure is determined
on, I will let you know. If the former pre-
vails, it shall not be so, without your know-
ledge.

3. Our brother Sanctissimus has cer-
tainly been with you a long time, and you
have learnt the objects he has in view. If,
then, the letter to the Westerns seems to you
to contain at all what is requisite, be so good
as to have it written out and conveyed to me,
that I may get it signed by those who think
with us, and may keep the subscription ready,
and written out on a separate paper, which
we can fasten on to the letter which is being
carried about by our brother and fellow pres-
byter. As I did not find in the minute any-
thing conclusive, I was ina difficulty on what
point to write to the Westerns. Necessary
points are anticipated, and it is useless to
write what is superfluous, and on such points
would it not be ridiculous to show feeling?
One subject, however, did appear to me to
be hitherto untouched, and to suggest a rea-
son for writing, and that was an exhortation
to them not indiscriminately to accept the
communion of men coming from the East ;
but, after once choosing one side, to receive
the rest on the testimony of their fellows, and
not to assent to every one writing a form of
creed on the pretext of orthodoxy. If they do
so, they will be found in communion with men
at war with one another, who often put forward
the same formule, and yet battle vehemently
against one another, as those who are most
widely separated. To the end, then, that the
heresy may not be the more widely kindled,
while those who are at variance with one
another mutually object to their own formu-
le, they ought to be exhorted to make a dis-
tinction between the acts of communion
which are brought them by chance comers,
and those which are duly drawn up accord-
ing to the rule of the Church.’


1 The Ben. note adduces this letter and Let/er ccxxiv. as
shewing two kinds of communion, (1) Personal in the
Eucharist and prayer, and (2) by letter,


LETTER CXXX.'
To Theodotus bishop of Nicopols.


1. You have very rightly and properly
blamed me, right honourable and well be-
loved brother, in that ever since I departed
from your reverence, conveving to Eustathius
those propositions about the faith, I have told
you neither much nor little about his busi-
ness. This neglect is really not due to any
contempt on my part for the way in which
he has treated me, but simply to the fact that
the story is now published abroad in all
men’s ears, and nobody needs any instruc-
tions from me in order to learn what his in-
tentions are. For this he has had good heed,
as though he were really afraid that he
would have few witnesses of his opinion,
and has sent to the ends of the earth the
letter which he has written against me.
He has therefore severed himself from com-
munion with me. He did not consent to
meet me at the appointed spot, and did not
bring his disciples, as he had _ promised.
On the contrary, he publicly stigmatized me
in the public synods, with the Cilician The-
ophilus,® by the open and undisguised slander
of sowing in the souls of the people doctrines
at variance with his own teaching. This
was quite enough to break up all union
between us. Afterwards he came to Ci-
licia, and, on meeting with a certain Gela-
sius, Showed him the creed which only an
Arian, or a thorough disciple of Arius, could
subscribe. Then, indeed, I was yet more
confirmed in my alienation from him. I felt
that the Ethiopian will never change his skin,
nor the leopard his spots,’ nor a man nurtured
in doctrines of perversity ever be able to rub
off the stain of his heresy.

2. In addition to all this he has had the
impudence to write against me, or rather to
compose long discourses full of all kinds of
abuse and calumny. To these, up to this
time, I have answered nothing, taught
as we are by the Apostle, not to avenge
ourselves, but to give place unto wrath.*
Moreover, at the thought of the depth
of the hypocrisy with which he has all
along approached me, I have, in a way, be-
come speechless with amazement. But, if
all this had never happened, who would not
feel horror and detestation of the fellow at
this fresh piece of audacity? Now, as I hear,
if the report is really true and not a slander-
ous invention, he has ventured to re-ordain


1 Placed in 373.

2 Bishop of Castabala, whither he was translated from
Eleutheropolis. cf. Letters ccxliv. and ccxlv.

5 of. Jer. xiii. 23, 4 Rom. xii. 19.


LETTERS,


199


certain men; a proceeding on which so far
no heretic has ventured. How then can 1
quietly endure such treatment? How
can I look upon the errors of the man as
curable? Beware, then, of being led away
by les; do not be moved by the suspi-
cions of men who are prone to look at
everything in a bad light, as though I were
making little of such things. For, be sure,
my very dear and honourable friend, that I
have never at any time been so grieved as I
am now, on hearing of this confusion of the
laws of the Church. Pray only that the
Lord grant me to take no step in anger, but
to maintain charity, which behaveth itself
not unseemly and is not puffed up.’ Only
look how men without charity have been
lifted up beyond all human bounds and con-
duct themselves in an unseemly manner,
daring deeds which have no precedent in all
the past.”


LETTER CXXxX!I.?


To Olympius.


1. TRULY unexpected tidings make both
ears tingle. ‘This is my case. These com-
positions against me, which are being carried
about, have fallen upon ears by this time
pretty well seasoned, on account of my
having formerly received the letter, ap-
propriate enough to my sins, but which
I should never have expected to be writ-
ten by those who sent it. Nevertheless
what followed did seem to me so extraordi-
narily cruel as to blot out all that had gone
before. How could I fail to be driven al-
most out of my senses when I read the letter
addressed to the reverend brother Dazinas,
full of outrageous insults and calumnies and
of attacks against me, as though I had been
convicted of much pernicious designs against
the Church? Moreover proofs were forth-
with offered of the truth of the calumnies
against me, from the document of whose
authorship I am ignorant. Parts I recog-
nise, I own, as having been written by
Apollinarius of Laodicea. These I had
purposely not even ever read, but I had
heard of them from the report of others.
Other portions I found included, which I
had never either read or heard of from any
one else; of the truth of this there is a faith-

2 There is no other mention in Basil’s letters of Eustathius
being guilty of re-ordination. The Ben. note, however, states
that Basil is not accurate in saying that there was no heretical
precedent for such proceedings. The Arians are charged
with it in the Book of the Prayers of Faustus and Marcelli-


nus, Bro, ‘Patr. v. 655. cf. also the letter of Constantius to
the Ethiopians against Frumentius. Athan., Afol. ad Const.


§ 31.
3 Placed in 373. 4 cf, Letters xii. and xiii.


ful witness in heaven. How then can men
who shun lies, who have learnt that love is
the fulfilling of the law, who profess to bear
the burdens of the weak, have consented .to
bring these calumnies against me and to con-
demn me out of other men’s writings? I
have often asked myself this question, but I
cannot imagine the reason, unless it be, as
I have said from the beginning, that my pain
in all this is a part of the punishment which is
due to my sins.

2. First of all I sorrowed in soul that
truths were lessened by the sons of men; in
the second place I feared for my own self,
lest in addition to my other sins, 1 should
become a misanthrope, believing no truth
and honour to be left in any man; if indeed
those whom I have most greatly trusted
are proved to be so disposed both to me and
to the truth. Be sure then, my brother, and
every one who is a friend of the truth, that
the composition is not mine; I do not ap-
prove of it, for it is not drawn up according
to my views. Even if I did write, a good
many years ago, to Apollinarius or to any
one else, 1 cught not to be blamed. I find
no fault myself if any member of any society
has been cut off into heresy (and you know
perfectly well whom I mean though I men-
tion nobody by name), because each man will
die in his own sin.

This is my reply to the document sent me,
that you may know the truth, and make it
plain to all who wish not to hold the truth in
unrighteousness. If it prove necessary to
defend myself more at length on each sepa-
rate count, I will do so, God being my


helper. I, brother Olympius, neither main-
tain three Gods, nor communicate with
Apollinarius.’


LETTER ΟΧΧΧΙΙ."
To Abramius, bishop of Batne.*


Ever since the autumn I Have been quite
ignorant of the whereabouts of your rever-
ence; for I kept hearing uncertain rumours,
some saying that you were stopping at Sam-
osata, and some in the country, while others
maintained that they had seen you at Batne.
This is the reason of my not writing fre-
quently. Now, on hearing that you are
staying at Antioch, in the house of the hon-
ourable Count Saturninus, I have been glad
to give this letter to our beloved and reverend
brother Sanctissimus, our fellow presbyter,


1 cf. Letter cxxv. and Greg. Naz., Orat.i. and xxix.

2 Placed in 373. ᾿

847. Letter xcii. He was present at the Council of Con-
stantinople.


200


by whom I salute you, and exhort you, where-
ever you be, to remember firstly God, and
secondly myself, whom you determined from
the beginning to love and to reckon among
your most intimate friends.


LETTER CXXXIII.
To Peter, bishop of Alexandria.’


THE sight of the eyes brings about bodily
friendship, and long companionship strength-
ens it, but genuine regard is the gift of the
Spirit, Who unites what is separated by long
distances, and makes friends known to one
another, not by bodily qualities, but by the
characteristics of the soul. ‘The grace of the
Lord has granted me this favour, by permit-
ting me to see you with the soul’s eye, and
to embrace you with genuine affection, and
as it were, to be drawn very near to you,
and to come into close union with you in the
communion of faith. I am sure that you,
disciple as you are of so great a man, and
long associated with him, will walk in the
same spirit and follow the same doctrines of
true religion. . Under these circumstances I
address your excellency, and beseech you
that among the other things in which you
have succeeded that great man, you will suc-
ceed him in love to me, that you will fre-
quently write me news of you, and will give
heed to the brotherhood all over the world
with the same aticction and the same zeal
which that most blessed man always showed
to all that love God in truth.


LETTER CXXXIV.?


To the presbyter Peonius.


You may conjecture from what it contains,
what pleasure you have given me by your
letter. ‘he pureness of heart, from which
such expressions sprang, was plainly signi-
fied by what you wrote. A streamlet tells
of its own spring, and so the manner of
speech marks the heart from which it came.
I must confess that an extraordinary and
improbable thing has happened to me. For
deeply anxious as I always was to receive a
letter from your excellency, when I had
taken your letter into my hand and had read
it, [was not so much pleased at what you
had written, as annoyed at reckoning up the
loss I had suffered in your long silence.
Now that you have begun to write, pray do
not leave off. You will give me greater


_ 1 Peter II. succeeded Athanasius in May, 373. Athanasius
died May 2. 2 Place in 373.


BASIL.


pleasure than men can give by sending much
money to misers. I have had no writer with
me, neither caligraphist, nor short-hand.
Of all those whom I happen to employ,
some have returned to their former mode of
life, and others are unfit for work from long
sickness.


LETTER CXXXyV.!


Zo Diodorus, presbyter of Antioch.” .


1. JI HAVE read the books sent me by your
excellency. With the second I was delight-
ed, not only with its brevity, as was likely to
be the case with a reader out of health and
inclined to indolence, but, because it is at
once full of thought, and so arranged that
the objections of opponents, and the answers
to them, stand out distinctly. Its simple and
natural style seems to me to befit the profes-
sion of a Christian who writes less for self-
advertisement than for the general good.
The former work, which has practically the
same force, but is much more elaborately
adorned with rich diction, many figures,
and niceties of dialogue, seems to me to
require considerable time to read, and much
mental labour, both to gather its mean-
ing and retain it in the memory. ‘The abuse
of our opponents and the support of our own
side, which are thrown in, although they
may seem to add some charms of dialectic
to the treatise, do yet break the continuity
of the thought and weaken the strength of
the argument, by causing interruption and
delay. I know that your intelligence is
perfectly well aware that the heathen phi-
losophers who wrote dialogues, Aristotle and
Theophrastus, went straight to the point,
because they were aware of their not being
gifted with the graces of Plato. Plato, on
the other. hand, with his great power of
writing, at the same time attacks opinions
and incidentally makes fun of his characters,
assailing now the rashness and recklessness
of a Thrasymachus, the levity and frivolity of
a Hippias, and the arrogance and pomposity
of a Protagoras. When, however, he intro-
duces unmarked characters into his dia-
logues, he uses the interlocutors for making
the point clear, but does not admit anything
more belonging to the characters into his
argument. An instance of this is in the
Laws.


1 Placed in 373.

2cf. Letter clx. Theodoret, Hist. Ecc. iv.24. He was a
pupil of Silvanus, bishop of Tarsus Letter ccxliv. Theo-
doret, Hp. xvi., refers to his obligations to him as ἃ teacher.
In 3278 he became bishop of Tarsus. Only some fragments
of his works remain, the bulk having been destroyed, it is
said, by the Arians,


LETTERS,


201


2. It is well for us too, who betake our-
selves to writing, not from any vain ambition,
but from the design of bequeathing counsels
of sound doctrine to the brethren, if we in-
troduce some character well known to all
the world for presumption of manners, to
interweave into the argument some points in
accordance with the quality of the character,
unless indeed we have no right at all to leave
our work and to accuse men. But if the
subject of the dialogue be wide and general,
digressions against persons interrupt its con-
tinuity and tend to no good end. So much
I have written to prove that you did not send
your work to a flatterer, but have shared
your toil with a real brother. And I have
spoken not for the correction of what is
finished, but as a precaution for the future ;
for assuredly one who is so accustomed to
write, and so diligent in writing, will not
hesitate to do so; and the more so that there
is no falling off in the number of those who
give him subjects. Enough for me to read
your books. Iam as far from being able to
write anything as, I had very nearly said, I
am from being well, or from having the least
leisure from my work. 1 have however now
sent back the larger and earlier of the two
volumes, after perusing it as far as I have
been able. The second I have retained,
with the wish to transcribe it, but, Hitherto,
without finding any quick writer. To such
a pitch of poverty has come the enviable
condition of the Cappadocians!


LETTER CXXXVI.
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.’


1. In what state the good Isaaces has
found me, he himself will best explain to
you; though his tongue cannot be tragic
enough to describe my sufferings, so great
was my illness. However, any one who
knows me ever so little, will be able to con-
jecture what it was. For, if when I am
called well, I am weaker even than persons
who are given over, you may fancy what I
was when thus ill. Yet, since disease is my
natural state, it would follow (let a fever
have its jest) that in this change of habit,
my health became especially flourishing.
But it is the scourge of the Lord which goes
on increasing my pain according to my de-
serts ; therefore I have received illness upon
illness, so that now even a child may see that
this shell of mine must for certain fail, unless

1 Placed in 373.

2 On his own Sickness and the troubles of the Church, On


his bad health, ef. Letters ix., xxvii., cxcvili., ccii., cciii. , and
ccxvi. The translation of the first section is N ewman’ Se.


perchance, God’s mercy vouchsafe to me, in
His long suffering, time for repentance, and
now, as often before, extricate me from evils
beyond human cure. This shall be, as it is
pleasing to Him and good for myself.

2. I need hardly tell you how deplorable
and hopeless is the condition of the Churches.
Now, for the sake of our own safety, we ne-
glect our neighbour’s, and do not even seem
able to see that general disaster involves in-
dividual ruin. Least of all need I say this
to one who, like yourself, foresaw the future
from afar, and has foretold and proclaimed
it and has been among the first to be roused,
and to rouse the rest, writing letters, coming
yourself in person, leaving no deed un-
done, no word unspoken. I remember this
in every instance, but yet we are none
the better off. Now, indeed, were not
my sins in the way, (first of all, my dear
brother the reverend deacon Eustathius fell
seriously ill and detained me two whole
months, looking day by day for his restora-
tion to health; and then all about me fell
sick; brother Isaaces will tell you the
rest; then last of all I myself was attacked
by this complaint) I should long ago have
been to see your excellency, not indeed
thereby to try to improve the general state
of affairs, but to get some good for my-
self from your society. I had made up my
mind to get out of the reach of the ecclesias-
tical artillery, because I am quite unprepared
to meet my enemies’ attacks. May God’s
mighty hand preserve you for all of us, asa
noble guardian of the faith, and a vigilant
champion of the Churches; and grant me,
before I die, to meet you for the comfort of
my soul. ’


LETTER {CXSXV ii


To Antipater, on his assuming the governorship
of Cappadocia.”


I po now really feel the loss which I suf-
fer from being ill; so that, when such a man
succeeds to the government of my country,
my having to nurse myself compels me to
be absent. For a whole month I have been
undergoing the treatment of natural hot
springs, in the hope of drawing some benefit
from them. But I seem to be ‘troubling my-
self to no purpose in my solitude, or indeed
to be deservedly a laughing stock to mankind,
for not heeding the proverb which says
‘¢warmth is no good to the dead.” Even
situated as I am, I am very anxious to put
aside everything else, and betake myself to


1 Placed in 373.
2 Compare Letters clxxxvi. and clxxxvii.


202


BASIL,


your excellency, that I may enjoy the benefit
of all your high qualities, and through your
goodness settle all my home affairs here in
a proper manner. ‘The house of our rever-
end mother Palladia is my own, for I am
not only nearly related to her, but regard
her as a mother on account of her character.
Now, as some disturbance has been raised
about her house, I ask your excellency to
postpone the enquiry for a little while, and
to wait till I come; not at all that justice
may not be done, for I had rather die ten
thousand times than ask a favour of that kind
from a judge who is a friend of law and right,
but that you may learn from me by word of
mouth matters which it would be unbecom-
ing for me to write. If you do so you will
in no wise fail in fealty to the truth, and we
shall suffer noharm. Ibeg you then to keep
the individual in question’? in safe custody
under the charge of the troops, and not
refuse to grant me this harmless favour.


LETTER: ΟΥ̓Χ
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.*


1. WHAT was my state of mind, think you,
when I received your piety’s letter? When
I thought of the feelings which its language
expressed, I was eager to fly straight to
Syria; but when I thought of the bodily
illness, under which I lay bound, I saw my-
self unequal, not only to flying, but even to
turning on my bed. This day, on which
our beloved and excellent brother and dea-
con, Elpidius, has arrived, is the fiftieth of
my illness. Jam much reduced by the fever.
For lack of what it might feed on, it lingers
in this dry flesh as in an expiring wick, and
so has brought on a wasting and tedious
illness. Next my old plague, the liver, com-
ing upon it, has kept me from taking nour-
ishment, prevented sleep, and held me on
the confines of life and death, granting just
life enough to feel its inflictions. In conse-
quence | have had recourse to the hot
springs, and have availed myself of help
from medical men.

But for all these the mischief has proved
too strong. Perhaps another man might
endure it, but, coming as it did unexpect-
edly, no one is so stout as to bear it. Long
troubled by it as I have been, I have never
been so distressed as now at being prevented
by it from meeting you and enjoying your
true friendship. I know of how much

1 Possibly the person to whom the disturbance at Palladia’s
house was due. 2 Placed in 373.


8 The translation of Sec, 1, down to ‘*medical men,” is
partly Newman’s.


pleasure I am deprived, although last year
I did touch with the tip of my finger the
sweet honey of your Church.

2. For many urgent reasons J felt bound
to meet your reverence, both to discuss many
things with you and to learn many things
from you. Here it is not possible even to
find genuine affection. And, could one even
find a true friend, none can give counsel to
me in the present emergency with anything
like the wisdom and experience which you
have acquired in your many labours on the
Church’s behalf. The rest I must not write.
I may, however, safely say what follows.
The presbyter Evagrius,’ son of Pompeianus
of Antioch, who set out some time ago to
the West with the blessed Eusebius, has now
returned from Rome. He demands from me
a letter couched in the precise terms dictated
by the Westerns. My own he has brought
back again to me, and reports that it did not
give satisfaction to the more precise authori-
ties there. He also asks that a commission
of men of repute may be promptly sent,
that they may have a reasonable pretext for
visiting me. My sympathisers in Sebasteia
have stripped the covering from tlie secret
sore of the unorthodoxy of Eustathius, and
demand my ecclesiastical care.’

Iconium is a city of Pisidia, anciently the
first after the greatest,? and now it is capi-
tal of a part, consisting of an union of
different portions, and allowed the gov-
ernment of a distinct province. Iconium
too calls me to visit her and to give her a
bishop; for Faustinus* is dead. Whether 1
ought to shrink from consecrations over the
border; what answer I ought to give to the
Sebastenes; what attitude I should show to
the propositions of Evagrius; all these are
questions to which I was anxious to get
answers in a personal interview with you,
for here in my present weakness I am cut
off from everything. If, then, you can find
any one soon coming this way, be so good as
to give me your answer onthem all. If not,
pray that what is pleasing to the Lord may
come into my mind. In your synod also
bid mention to be made of me, and pray for
me yourself, and join your people with you

1On Evagrius, known generally as Evagrius of Antioch,
to distinguish him from Evagrius the historian, see especially
Theodoret, Ecc. Hist. v. 23. He had travelled to Italy with
Eusebius of Vercella. His communication to Basil from the
Western bishops must have been disappointing and unsatis-
factory. On his correspondence with Basil, after his return to
Antioch, see Letter clvi. His consecration by the dying


Paulinus in 388 inevitably prolonged the disastrous Meletian
schism at Antioch.

2 ¢.e. that Basil, as primate, should either consecrate them
an orthodox bishop, or, if this was impossible under Valens,
should take them under his own immediate episcopal protec-
tion.

3 7.6. Antioch.

4 He was succeeded by John I. cf. Letter clxi. and note,


LETTERS.


*


203


in the prayer that it may be permitted me to
continue my service through the remaining
days or hours of my sojourning here in a
manner pleasing to the Lord.


LEITER €CXxXxax:’
To the Alexandrians.?


1. I HAVE already heard of the persecu-
tion in Alexandria and the rest of Egypt, and,
as might be expected, I am deeply afiected.
I have observed the ingenuity of the devil’s
mode of warfare. When he saw that the
Church increased under the persecution of
enemies and flourished all the more, he
changed his plan. He no longer carries on
an open warfare, but lays secret snares
against us, hiding his hostility under the
name which they bear, in order that we
may both suffer like our fathers, and, at
the same time, seem not to suffer for Christ’s
sake, because our persecutors too bear the
name of Christians. With these thoughts
for a long time we sat still, dazed at the
news of what had happened, for, in sober
earnest, both our ears tingled on hearing of
the shameless and inhuman heresy of your
persecutors. ‘They have reverenced neither
age, nor services to society,* nor people’s
affection. They inflicted torture, ignominy,
and exile; they plundered all the property
they could find; they were careless alike of
human condemnation and of the awful retri-
bution to come at the hands of the righteous
Judge. All this has amazed me and all but
driven me out of my senses. To my re-
flections has been added this thought too;
can the Lord have wholly abandoned His
Churches? Has the last hour come, and is
‘the falling away” thus coming upon us,
that now the lawless one ‘‘ may be revealed,
the son of perdition who opposeth and exalt-
eth himself above all that is called God and
is worshipped” ?* But if the temptation is
for a season, bear it, ye noble athletes of
Christ. If the world is being delivered to
complete, and final destruction, let us not lose
heart for the present, but let us await the
revelation from heaven, and the manifestation
of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ.
If all. creation is to be dissolved, and
the fashion of this world transformed, why
should we be surprised that we, who are a
part of creation, should feel the general woe,

1 Placed in 373.

2 On the cruel persecution roused by Valens in Alexandria
shortly after the death of Athanasius in 373, and the horrors
perpetrated there, see the letter of Peter, Athanasius’ suc-
cessor, in Theod. iv. 19.

3 ἐν τῇ πολιτεὶᾳ καμάτους; ΟΥ̓́, possibly, labours in life, z.e.


ascetic life, The Ben. ed. prefer the latter.
42 Thess. ii. 4.


and be delivered to afflictions which our just
God inflicts on us according to the meas-
ure of our strength, not letting us ‘be
tempted above that we are able, but with
the temptation giving us a way to escape
that we may be able to bear it” 2} Brothers,
martyrs’ crowns await you. The companies
of the confessors are ready to reach out their
hands to you and to welcome you into their
own ranks. Remember how none of the
saints of old won their crowns of patient
endurance by living luxuriously and being
courted; but all were tested by being put
through the fire of great afflictions. ‘For
some had trial of cruel mockings and scourg-
ings, and others were sawn asunder and
were slain with the sword.”? These are the
glories of saints. Blessed is he who is
deemed worthy to suffer for Christ; more
blessed is he whose sufferings are greater,
since *‘the sufferings of this present time
are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed in us.” ὃ

2. Had it but been possible for me to
travel to you I should have liked nothing
better than to meet you, that I might see
and embrace Christ’s athletes, and share your
prayers and spiritual graces. But now my
body is wasted by long sickness, so that I
can scarcely even leave my bed, and there
are many who are lying in wait for me, like
ravening wolves, watching the moment when
they may be able to rend Christ’s sheep. I
have therefore been compelled to visit you
by letter; and I exhort you first of all most
earnestly to pray for me, that for the rest of
my remaining days or hours I may be enabled
to serve the Lord, in accordance with the
gospel of His kingdom. Next I beg you to
pardon me for my absence and for my delay
in writing to you. I have only with great
difficulty found a man able to carry out my
wishes. I speak of my son, the monk
Eugenius, by whom I beseech you to pray
for me and for the whole Church, and to
write back news of you so that, when I
hear, I may be more cheerful.


LETTER ἢ ἧς
To the Church of Antioch.


1. **Ou that I had wings like a dove for
then would I fly away” ® to you, and satisfy
my longing to meet you. But now it is not
only wings that I want, but a whole body,
for mine has suffered from long sickness,
and now is quite worn away with continuous


4 Placed in 373.
5 Ps. lv. 6.


11 Cor. x. 13.
* cf. Heb. xi. 36, 37.
8 Rom, viii. 18.


204


affliction. For no one can be so hard of
heart, so wholly destitute of sympathy and
kindness, as to hear the sigh that strikes my
ear from every quarter, as though from some
sad choir chanting a symphony of lamenta-
tion, without being grieved at heart, being
bent to the ground, and wasting away with
these irremediable troubles. But the holy
God is able to provide a remedy for the ir-
remediable, and to grant you a respite from
your long toils. I should like you to feel
this comfort and, rejoicing in the hope of
consolation, to submit to the present pain of
your afflictions. Are we paying the penalty
of our sins? Then our plagues are such as
to save us for the future from the wrath of
God. Are we called upon through these
temptations to fight for the truth? Then the
righteous Giver of the prizes will not suffer


us to be tried above that which we are able


to bear, but, in return for our previous
struggles, will give us the crown of patience
and of hope in Him. Let us, therefore, not
flinch from fighting a good fight on behalf of
the truth, nor, in despair, fling away the
labours we have already achieved. For the
strength of the soul is not shewn by one brave
deed, nor yet by effort only for a short time ;
but He Who tests our hearts wishes us to
win crowns of righteousness after long and
protracted trial. Only let our spirit be kept
unbroken, the firmness of our faith in Christ
be maintained unshaken, and ere long our
Champion will appear; He will come and
will not tarry. Expect tribulation after tribu-
lation, hope upon hope; yet a little while;
yet a little while. Thus the Holy Ghost
knows how to comfort His nurslings by a
promise of the future. After tribulations
comes hope, and what we are hoping for is
not far off, for let a man name the whole of
human life, it is but a tiny interval compared
with the endless age which is laid up in our
hopes.

2. Now I accept no newer creed written
for me by other men, nor do I venture to
propound the outcome of my own intelli-
gence, lest I make the words of true religion
merely human words; but what I have been
taught by the holy Fathers, that I announce
to all who question me. In my Church the
creed written by the holy Fathers in synod
at Nicza is in use. . I believe that it is also
repeated among you; but I do not refuse to
write its exact terms in my letter, lest I be
accused of taking too little trouble. It is as
follows:* This is our faith. But no defini-
themas. The Ben. note points out that the Nicene Creed was


brought to Caesarea by St. Leontius, and was vigorously
defended by his successor Hermogenes. cf. Letter 1xxxi.


BASIL,


tion was given about the Holy Ghost, the
Pneumatomachi not having at that date
appeared. No mention was therefore made
of the need of anathematizing those who
say that the Holy Ghost is of a created and
ministerial nature. For nothing in the
divine and blessed Trinity is created.


LETTER CXLI.!
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata?


1. I HAVE now received two letters from
your divine and most excellent wisdom,
whereof the one told me clearly how I had
been expected by the laity under the jurisdic-
tion of your holiness, and what disappoint-
ment I had caused by failing to attend the
sacred synod. The other, which from the
writing I conjecture to be of the earlier date,
though it was delivered later, gave me
advice, at once honourable to yourself and
necessary to me, not to neglect the interests
of God’s Churches, nor little by little to allow
the guidance of affairs to pass to our oppo-
nents, whereby their interests must win,
and ours lose. I think that I answered
both. But, as I am uncertain whether my
replies were preserved by those who were
entrusted with the duty of conveying them,
I will make my defence over again. As to
my absence, I can put in an unimpeachable
plea, as to which I think intelligence must
have reached your holiness, that I have been
detained by illness which has brought me to
the very gates of death. Even now as I
write about it, the remains of sickness are
still upon me. And they are such as to an-
other man might be unendurable.

2. Astothe fact of its not being owing
to my neglect that the interests of the
Churches have been betrayed to our oppo-
nents, 1 wish your reverence to know that
the bishops in communion with me, from
lack of earnestness, or because they suspect
me and are not open with me, or because
the devil is always at hand to oppose good
works, are unwilling to codperate with me.
Formerly, indeed, the majority of us were
united with one another, including the excel-
lent Bosporius.? In reality they give me no
aid in what is most essential. ‘The conse-
quence of all this is, that to a great extent
my recovery is hindered by my distress, and


Dianius, who next followed in the see, signed several Arian
formule. The Nicene Creed,thowever, had been maintained at
Czsarea, and in Letter li. Dianius is described as supporting


it.

1 Placed in 373. :

2On his being hindered from travelling by ill health, and
on his difficulties with the bishops in communion with him,

3 of. Letter li.


LEPTEEARS.


205


the sorrow I feel brings back my worst
symptoms. What, however, can I do alone
and unaided, when the canons, as you your-
self know, do not allow points of this kind
to be settled by one man?! And yet what
remedy have I not tried? Of what decision
have I failed to remind them, some by letter
and some in person? They even came to
the city, when they heard a report of my
death; when, by God’s will, they found me
yet alive I made them such a speech as was
proper to the occasion. In my _ presence
they respect me, and promise all that is fit,
but no sooner have they got back again than
they return to their own opinion. In all this
I am a sufferer, like the rest, for the Lord
has clearly abandoned us, whose love has
grown cold because iniquity abounds. For
all this may your great and powerful inter-
cession with God be sufficient for me.
Perhaps we shall either become of some use,
or, even if we fail in our object, we may
escape condemnation.


LETTER CXLII.’


To the prefects’ accountant.®


I ASSEMBLED all my brethren the chore-
piscopi at the synod of the blessed martyr
Kupsychius ὁ to introduce them to your excel-
lency. On account of your absence they
must be brought before you by letter. Know,
therefore, this brother as being worthy to
be trusted by your intelligence, because
he fears the Lord. As to the matters on
behalf of the poor, which he refers to your
good-will, deign to believe him as one
worthy of credit, and to give the afflicted all
the aid in your power. I am sure you will
consent to look favourably upon the hospital
of the poor which is in his district, and
exempt it altogether from taxation. It has
already seemed good to your colleague to
make the little property of the poor not liable
to be rated.


1The Ben. note is: ‘* Canones illos qui apostolis affictt
fuere, nonnunquam citat Basilius in Epistolis canonicis.
Videtur hoc loco respicere ad vigesimum (ἢ xxxvii.) septimum,
"δὲ prescribitur, ut in unaguaque provincia episcopi nihil
majoris vet incipiant stne sententia ilius, gui inter eos pri-
mus,acunus guisgue tis contentus sit, que ad pareciam suam
perlinent: sed nec tlle absque omnitum voluntate quidquam
faciat. Erat Basilius hujus canonis observandi studiosus,
et gquamvis nominis fama et sedis dignitate plurimum posset,
nunguam ab eo communionis restitutionem impetrare potue-
runt Marcelli discipult, antequam Petri Alexandrini auc-
toritates accessisset: et cum ab Episcopis in Palestina
Exsulantibus non ex spectato aliorum Episcoporum consensu
restitutt futssent, factum moleste tulit et libere reprehendit.”
Epist. cclxv.

2 Placed in 373.

8 On the exemption of hospitals from taxation.

4 cf. Letters c. and cclii., and note on p. 184.


LETTER CXLIII.'


To another accountant?


Hap it been possible for me to meet your
excellency I would have in person brought
before you the points about which I am anx-
ious, and would have pleaded the cause of
the afflicted, but I am prevented by illness
and by press of business. I have therefore
sent to you in my stead this chorepiscopus,
my brother, begging you to give him your
aid and use him and to take him into counsel,
for his truthfulness and sagacity qualify him
to advise in such matters. If you are so
good as to inspect the hospital for the poor,
which is managed by him, (I am sure you
will not pass it without a visit, experienced
as you are in the work; for I have been told
that you support one of the hospitals at
Amasea out of the substance wherewith the
Lord has blessed you), I am confident that,
after seeing it, you will give him all he asks.
Your colleague has already promised me
some help towards the hospitals. I tell you
this, not that you may imitate him, for you
are likely to be a leader of others in good
works, but that you may know that others
have shown regard for me in this matter.


LETTER CXLIV-*
To the prefects’ officer.*


You know the bearer from meeting him
inthe town. Nevertheless I write to com-
mend him to you, that: he may be useful to
you in many matters in which you are inter-
ested, from his being able to give pious and
sensible advice. Now is the time to carry
out what you have said to me in private; I
mean when this my brother has told you the
state of the poor.


LETTER CXEV.*
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata®


I xnow the countless labours which you
have undergone for the Churches of God; I
know your press of occupation, while you
discharge your responsibilities, not as though
they were of mere secondary importance, but
in accordance with God’s will. I know the
man ’ who is, as it were, laying close siege
to you and by whom -you are forced, like


1 Of the same date as the preceding.

2 On the same subject. 4 On the same subject.
3 Placed in 373. 5 Placed in 373.

6 On a possible visit of Eusebius to Czsarea.

Τ 7.6. Valens.


206


BASIL.


birds crouching in cover under an eagle, not
to go far from your shelter. I know all this.
But longing is strong, both in hoping for the
impracticable and attempting the impossible.
Rather I should say, hope in God is the
strongest of all things.' For it is not from
unreasonable 4esire, but from strength of
faith, that I expect a way out, even from the
greatest difficulties, and that you will find a
way to get over all hindrances, and to come
to see the Church that loves you best of all,
and to be seen by her. What she values
most of all good things is to behold your face
and to hear your voice. Beware then of
making her hopes vain. When last year, on
my return from Syria, I reported the promise
which you had given me, you cannot think
how elated with her hopes I made her. Do
not, my friend, postpone your coming to
another time. Even if it may be possible
for you to see her one day, you may not see
her and me too, for sickness is hurrying me
on to quit this painful life.


LETTER CXLVI.’
To Antiochus.


I CANNOT accuse you of carelessness and
inattention, because, when an opportunity of
writing occurred, you said nothing. For I
count the greeting which you have sent me
in your own honoured hand worth many
letters. In return I salute you, and beg
you earnestly to give heed to the salvation of
your soul, disciplining all the lusts of the
flesh by reason, and ever keeping the
thought of God built up in your soul, as ina
very holy temple. In every deed and every
word hold before your eyes the judgment of
Christ, so that every individual action, being
referred to that exact and awful examination,
may bring you glory in the day of retribu-
tion, when you win praise from all creation.
If that great man* should be able to pay me
a visit, it would be a pleasure to me to see
you here with him.


LETTER CXLVIL-5
To Aburgius.®


Up to this time I used to think Homer a


1** Vita vere mortalis spes est vite tmmortalis.” St. Au-
gustine in Ps. iii. ‘‘ Spes 172: @eternitatem animum erigit, et
tdcirco nulla mala sentit.’? St. Greg., Moral. cf. Ovid. i.
Pont. 7:

Quamrtis est igitur meritis tndebita nostris,
Magna tamen spes est tn bonitate Det.

2 Placed in 373.

8 Nephew of Eusebius, who had written a salutation in his
uncle’s letter. cf. Letter clxviii.

4 7,6. his uncle Eusebius. 5 Placed in 373.

6 To commend Maximus, late prefect of Cappadocia and
in great distress.


fable, when I read the second part of his
poem, in which he narrates the adventures of
Ulysses. But the calamity which has be-
fallen the most excellent Maximus has led
me to look on what I used to think fabu-
lous and incredible, as exceedingly probable.
Maximus was governor of no insignificant
people, just as Ulysses was chief of the
Cephallenians. Ulysses had had great
wealth, and returned stripped of everything.
To such straits has calamity reduced Max-
imus, that he may have to present himself
at home in borrowed rags. And perhaps he
has suffered all this because he has irritated
some Lestrygones against him, and has
fallen in with some Scylla, hiding a dog’s
fierceness and fury under a woman’s form.
Since then he has barely been able to swim
out of this inextricable whirlpool. He sup-
plicates you by my means for humanity’s
sake to grieve for his undeserved misfortunes
and not be silent about his needs, but make
them known to the authorities. He hopes
thus that he may find some aid against the
slanders which have been got up against
him: and if not, that at all events the inten-
tion of the enemy who has shewn such an
intoxication of hostility against him may
be made public. When a man has been
wronged it is a considerable comfort to him
if the wickedness of his enemies can be made
plain.


LETTER CXLVIII.1


To Trajan.’


Even the ability to bewail their own
calamities brings much comfort to the dis-
tressed; and this is specially the case when
they meet with others capable, from their
lofty character, of sympathizing with their
sorrows. So my right honourable brother
Maximus, after being prefect of my country,
and then suffering what no other man ever
yet suffered, stripped of all his belongings
both inherited from his forefathers and
collected by his own labours, afflicted in
body in many and various ways, by his
wanderings up and down the world, and
not having been able to keep even his civil
status free from attack, to preserve which
freemen are wont to leave no labour un-
done, has made many complaints to me
about all that has happened to him, and has
begged me to give you a short description
of the Iliad of woes in which he is involved.

1 Placed in 373.

2A Trajan was commander-in-chief under Valens. cf.
Theod. iv. 30 and Amm. Marcellinus xxxi. He was killed at


the battle of Adrianople in 378. This may have been the same
officer.


LETTERS.


207


And I, being quite unable to relieve him in
any other way in his troubles, have readily
done him the favour shortly to relate
to your excellency a part of what 1 have
heard from him. He, indeed, seemed to
me to blush at the idea of making a plain
tale of his own calamity. If what has
happened shews that the inflicter of the
wrong is a villain, at all events it proves the
sufferer to be deserving of great pity; since
the very fact of having fallen into troubles,
inflicted by Divine Providence, seems in a
manner to shew that a man has been devoted
to suffering. But it would be a sufficient
comfort to him if you will only look at him
kindly, and extend also to him that abundant
favour which all the recipients of it cannot
exhaust, —I mean your clemency. We are
all of us convinced that before the tribunal
your protection will be an immense step
towards victory. He who has asked for my
letter as likely to be of service is of all
men most upright. May it be granted me
to see him, with the rest, proclaiming aloud
the praises of your lordship with all his
power.


LETTER’ €CXLIX.*


To Trajan?


You yourself have seen with your own
eyes the distressing condition of Maximus,
once a man of high reputation, but now
most of all to be pitied, formerly prefect of
my country. Would that he had never been
so! Many, I think, would be likely to shun
provincial governorships, if their dignities
are likely to issue in suchanend. To aman,
then, from the quickness of his intelligence,
able from a few circumstances to conjecture
the rest, I need hardlv narrate in detail all
that I have seen and all that I have heard.
Perhaps, however, I shall not seem to be
telling a superfluous story if I mention that,
though many and terrible things were auda-
ciously done against him before your coming,
what went on afterwards was such as to
cause the former proceedings to be reckoned
as kindness; to such an excess of outrage
and injury and actually of personal cruelty
did the proceedings go which were after-
wards taken against him by the person in
authority. Now he is here with an escort
to fill up the measure of his evil deeds unless


1 Placed in 373.

2 The Ben. note points out that though in all the MSS. the
inscription is τῷ αὐτῷ, to the same, that is to Trajan, the inter-
nal evidence points to its having been written to some one
else. Trajan had had no personal knowledge of the troubles
of Maximus.


you are willing to stretch out your strong
hand to protect the sufferer. In urging
your goodness to an act of kindness I fecl
that I am undertaking an unnecessary task.
Yet since I desire to be serviceable to Max-
imus I do beg your lordship to add some-
thing for my sake to your natural zeal for
what is right, to the end that he may clearly
perceive that my intervention on his behalf
has been of service to him.


LEP PERCE,


To Amphilochius in the name of Heracidas.’


1. 1 REMEMBER our old conversations
with one another, and am forgetful neither
of what I said, nor of what you said. And
now public life has no hold upon me. For
although I am the same in heart and have not
yet put off the old man, nevertheless, out-
wardly and by withdrawing myself far from
worldly life, I seem already to have begun
to tread the way of Christian conversation.
[I sit apart, like men who are on the point
of embarking on the deep, looking out at
what is before me. Mariners, indeed, need
winds to make their voyage prosperous; 1
on the other hand want a guide to take me
by the hand and conduct me safely through
life’s bitter waves. I feel that I necd first a
curb for my young manhood, and then
pricks to drive me to the course of piety.
Both these seem to be provided by reason,
which at one time disciplines my unruliness
of soul, and at another time my sluggishness.
Again I want other remedies that I may
wash off the impurity of habit. You know
how, long accustomed as 1 was to the
Forum, I am lavish of words, and do not
guard myself against the thoughts put into
my mind by the evil one. Iam the servant
too of honour, and cannot easily give up
thinking great things of myself. Against
all this I feel that I need a great instructor.
Then, further, I conclude that it is of no
small importance, nor of benefit only for a
little while, that the soul’s eye should be so
purged that, after being freed from all the
darkness of ignorance, as though from some
blinding humour, one can gaze intently


1 Placed in 373.

2 Amphilochius, not yet consecrated to Iconium, had aban-
doned his profession as an advocate, and was living in retire-
ment at Ozizala, a place not far from Nazianzus, the see of his
uncle Gregory, devoted to the care of his aged father, whose
name he bore. Heraclidas, it appears, had also renounced the
bar, and devoted himself to religious life; but did not join Am-
philochius on the ground that he was living in Basil’s hospital
at Cesarea. cf. the letters of Gregory, first cousin of Amphi-
lochius. On the relationship, see Bp. Lightfoot in D.C.&, i.
p. 104, and pedigree in prolegomena,


208


BASIL.


on the beauty of the glory of God. All
this I know very well that your wisdom is
aware of; I know that you would wish that
I might have some one to give me such help,
and if ever God grant me to meet you I am
sure that I shall learn more about what I
ought to heed. For now, in my great igno-
rance, I can hardly even form a judgment as
to what I lack. Yet I do not repent of my
first impulse; my soul does not hang back
from the purpose of a godly life as you have
feared for me, nobly and becomingly doing
everything in your power, lest, like the
woman of whom I have heard the story, I
should turn back and become a pillar of
salt." I am still, however, under the restraint
of external authority ; for the magistrates are
seeking me like a deserter. But I am chiefly
influenced by my own heart, which testifies
to itself of all that I have told you. :

2. Since you have mentioned our bond,
and have announced that you mean to prose-
cute, you have made me laugh in this my
dejection, because you are still an advocate
and do not give up your shrewdness. 1
hold, unless, indeed, like an ignorant man,
I am quite missing the truth, that there is
only one way to the Lord, and that all who
are journeying to Him are travelling to-
gether and walking in accordance with one
‘* bond” of life. If this be so, wherever I
go how can 1 be separated from you? How
can I cease to live with you, and with you
serve God, to Whom we have both fled for
refuge? Our bodies may be separated by
distance, but God’s eye still doubtless looks
upon us both; if indeed a life like mine is
fit to be beheld by the divine eyes; for I
have read somewhere in the Psalms that the
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous.’
I do indeed pray that with you and with
all that are like minded with you, I may be
associated, even in body, and that night and
day with you and with any other true wor-
shipper of God I may bow my knees to our
Father which is in heaven; for I know that
communion in prayer brings great gain.
If, as often as it is my lot to lie and groan
in a different corner, I am always to be
accused of lying, I cannot contend against
your argument, and already condemn myself
as a liar, if with my own carelessness I have
said anything which brings me under such
a charge.

2. I was lately at Caesarea, in order to
learn what was going on there. I was un-
willing to remain in the city itself, and betook
myself to the neighbouring hospital, that I


1 cf. Gen. xix. 26, 2 Ps, XXXxiv, 15.


might get there what information I wanted.
According to his custom the very godly
bishop visited it, and I consulted him as to the
points which you had urged upon me. [{ is
not possible for me to remember all that he
said in reply; it went far beyond the limits
of a letter. In sum, however, what he said
about poverty was this, that the rule ought
to be that every one should limit his posses-
sions to one garment. For one proof of
this he quoted the words of John the Baptist
‘‘he that hath two coats let him impart to
him that hath none;’! and for another our
Lord’s prohibition to His disciples to have
two coats.” He further added ‘‘ If thou wilt
be perfect go and sell that thou hast and
give to the poor.”* He said too that the
parable of the pearl bore on this point, be-
cause the merchant, who had found the
pearl of great price, went away and sold all
that he had and bought it; and he added too
that no one ought even to permit himself the
distribution of his own property, but should
leave it in the hands of the person entrusted
with the duty of managing the affairs of the
poor; and he proved the point from the acts
of the apostles,* because they sold their
property and brought and laid it at the feet of
the apostles, and by them it was distributed
to each as every man had need.” For he
said that experience was needed in order to
distinguish between cases of genuine need
and of mere greedy begging. For whoever
gives to the afflicted gives to the Lord, and
from the Lord shall have his reward; but he
who gives to every vagabond casts to a dog,
a nuisance indeed from his importunity, but
deserving no pity on the ground of want.
He was moreover the first to speak
shortly, as befits the importance of the subject,
about some of the daily duties of life. As to
this I should wish you to hear from himself,
for it would not be right for me to weaken
the force of his lessons. I would pray that
we might visit him together, that so you might
both accurately preserve in your memory
what he said, and supply any omissions by
your own intelligence. One thing that I
do remember, out of the many which I
heard, is this; that instruction how to lead
the Christian life depends less on words,
than on daily example. I know that, if you
had not been detained by the duty of succour-
ing your aged father, there is nothing that


1 Luke iii. 11. 3 Matt. xix. 21.

2 Matt. x. 10. 4 Acts iv. 35.

5 It will be observed that St. Basil’s quotation here does not
quite bear out his point. There is no ‘by them” in Acts iv.
35. ‘* Distribution was made unto every man according as he
had need.” .In Acts ii. 45 the primitive communists are said
themselves to have ‘‘ parted to all men.as every man had need,”
the responsibility of distribution being apparently retained.


LETTERS.


209


you would have more greatly esteemed than
a meeting with the bishop, and that you
would not have advised me to leave him in
order to wander in deserts. Caves and rocks
are always ready for us, but the help we get
from our fellow man is not always at hand.
If, then, you will put up with my giving you
advice, you will impress on your father the
desirability of his allowing you to leave him
for a little while in order to meet a man who,
alike from his experience of others and from
his own wisdom, knows much, and is able
to impart it to all who approach him.


LETTER(CER’


Zo Eustathius the Physician.


Ir my letters are of any good, lose no time
in writing to me and in rousing me to write.
We are unquestionably made more cheerful
when we read the letters of wise men who
love the Lord. It is for you to say, who read
it, whether you find anything worth attention
in what I write. Were it not for the multi-
tude of my engagements, I should not debar
myself from the pleasure of writing frequently.
Pray do you, whose cares are fewer, soothe
me by your letters. Wells, it is said, are the
better for being used. The exhortations
which you derive from your profession are
apparently beside the point, for it is not I
who am applying the knife; it is men whose
day is done, who are falling upon them-
selves.» The phrase of the Stoics runs,
‘*since things do not happen as we like, we
like what happens ;” but I cannot make my
mind fallin with what is happening. That
some men should do what they do not like
because they cannot help it, I have no objec-
tion. You doctors do not cauterise a sick
man, or make him suffer pain in some other
way, because you like it; but you often adopt
this treatment in obedience to the necessity of
the case. Mariners do not willingly throw
their cargo overboard ; but in order to escape
shipwreck they put up with the loss, prefer-
ring a life of penury to death. Be sure that
I look with sorrow and with many groans
upon the separation of those who are holding
themselves aloof. But yet I endure it. To
lovers of the truth nothing can be put before
God and hope in Him.*


1 Placed in 373.

2 cf. Letter clxxxix. On those who had renounced com-
munion with Eustathius the bishop.

8 ¢.e. Eustathius, the bishop, is rushing upon the knife.

4 The view of the Ben. Ed. is that the bales thrown over-
board represent the loss of unity incurred by the Sebastenes
by leaving the communion of Eustathius for his own. cf.
Letter ccxxxvii.


LETIER Clary
To Victor, the Commander?


Ir I were to fail to write to any one else I
might possibly with justice incur the charge
of carelessness or forgetfulness. But it is not
possible to forget you, when your name is in
all men’s mouths. But I cannot be careless
about one who is perhaps more distin-
guished than any oneelse intheempire. The
cause of my silence is evident. Iam afraid
of troubling so great a man. If, however,
to all your other virtues you add that of not
only receiving what I send, but of actually
asking after what is missing, lo! here I
am writing to you with joyous heart, and
I shall go on writing for the future, with
prayers to God that you may be requited for
the honour you pay me. For the Church, you
have anticipated my supplications, by doing
everything which I should have asked. And
you act to please not man but God, Who has
honoured you; Who has given you some
good things in this life, and will give you
others in the life to come, because you have
walked with truth in His way, and, from the
beginning to the end, have kept your heart
fixed in the right faith.


LEVER’ CLIN?
To Victor the Ex-Consul,


As often as it falls to my lot to read your
lordship’s letters, so often do 1 thank God
that you continue to remember me, and that
you are not moved by any calumny to lessen
the love which once you consented to enter-
tain for me, either from your wise judgment
or your kindly intercourse. I pray then the
holy God that you may remain in this mind
towards me, and that I may be worthy of the
honour which you give me.


LETTER CLIV.‘
Io Ascholius, bishop of Thessalonica.®


You have done well, and in accordance
with the law of spiritual love, in writing to
me first, and by your good example challeng-
ing me to like energy. The friendship of the
world, indeed, stands in need of actual sight
and intercourse, that thence intimacy may
begin. All, however, who know how to
love in the spirit do not need the flesh to

1 Placed in 373.

2 cf. Greg. Naz., Letters cxxxiii. and cxxxiv. and Theo-
doret, Ecc. Hist. iv. 30 and Amm, Mare. xxxi. 7.

3 Placed in 373. 4 Placed in 373.

5 cf. Letters clxiv.and clxv. Ascholius baptized Theodo-


sius at Thessalonica in 380, and was present at the Council of
Constantinople in 381. Soc., Zcc. Hist. v.6 and 8.


210


BASIL.


promote affection, but are led to spiritual
communion in the fellowship of the faith.
Thanks, then, to the Lord Who has comforted
my heart by showing me that love has not
erown cold in all, but that there are yet in
the world men who show the evidence of the
discipleship of Christ. The state of affairs
with you seems to be something like that of
the stars by night, shining some in one part
of the sky and some in another, whereof the
brightness is charming, and the more charm-
ing because it is unexpected. Suchare you,
luminaries of the Churches, a few at most
and easily counted in this gloomy state of
things, shining as in a moonless night, and,
besides being welcome for your virtue, being
all the more longed for because of its being
so seldom that you are found. Your letter
has made your disposition quite plain to me.
Although small,as far as regards the number
of its syllables, in the correctness of its senti-
ments it was quite enough to give me proof
of your mind and purpose. Your zeal for
the cause of the blessed Athanasius is plain
proof of your being sound as to the most im-
portant matters. In return for my joy at
your letter I am exceedingly grateful to my
honourable son Euphemius, to whom I pray
that,all help may be given by the Holy One,
and I beg you to join in my prayers that we
may soon receive him back with his very
honourable wife, my daughter in the Lord.
As to yourself, I beg that you will not stay
our joy at its beginning, but that you will
write on every possible opportunity, and in-
crease your good feeling towards me by con-
stant communication. Give me news, I beg
you, about your Churches and how they are
situated as regards union. Pray for us here
that our Lord may rebuke the winds and the
sea, and that with us there may be a great
calm.


LETTER CLV.


Without address. In the case of a trainer.


I amat a loss how to defend myself against
all the complaints contained in the first and
only letter which your lordship has been so
good as to send me. It is not that there is
any lack of right on my side, but because
among so many charges it is hard to select
the most vital, and fix on the point at which I
ought to begin to apply a remedy. Perhaps,
if I follow the order of your letter, I shall
come upon each in turn. Up to to-day I

1 Placed in 373.

2 Supposed by Maran (Vit. Bas.) to be Julius Soranus, a
relative of Basil, and dux of Scythia. Maran supposes that
a copyist added these words to the title because Soranus was


‘a trainer’? (αλείπτης) and encourager of martyrs; in Letter
clxiv. Basil calls Ascholius “ a trainer” of the martyr Sabas.


knew nothing about those who are setting
out for Scythia; nor had any one told me
even of those who came from your house,
so that I might greet you by them, although
I am anxious to seize every opportunity of
greeting your lordship. To forget you in
my prayers is impossible, unless first I for-
get the work to which God has called me,
for assuredly, faithful as by God’s grace
you are, you remember all the prayers! of
the Church; how we pray also for om
brethren when on a journey and offer prayer
in the holy church for those who are in
the army, and for those who speak for the
sake of the Lord’s name, and for those who
show the fruits of the Spirit. In most, or all
of these, [reckon your lordship to be included.
How could I ever forget you, as far as I
am individually concerned, when I have so
many reasons to stir me to recollection, such
a sister, such nephews, such kinsfolk, so
good, so fond of me, house, household, and
friends? By all these, even against my will,
I am perforce reminded of your good dis-
position. As to this, however, our brother
has brought me no unpleasant news, nor has
any decision been come to by me which
could do him any injury. Free, then, the
chorepiscopus and myself from all blame,
and grieve rather over those who have made
false reports. If our learned friend wishes
to bring an action against me, he has law
courts and laws. In this I beg you not to
blame me. In all the good deeds that you
do, you are laying up treasure for your-
self; you are preparing for yourself in
the day of retribution the same refreshment ἡ
which you are providing for those who are
persecuted for the sake of the name of
the Lord. Lf you send) the relics son the
martyrs home you will do well; as you
write that the persecution there is, even now,
causing martyrs to the Lord.?


LETTER CEVI.
To the Presbyter Evagrius.‘


1. So far from being impatient at the
length of your letter, I assure you I thought
it even short, from the pleasufe it gave me


1 κηρύγματα. On St. Basil’s use of this word for decree,
vide De Sp. S.c.66. Here it seems to have the force of an ap-
pointed liturgy. cf. the letter of Firmilianus toCyprian. (Zp.
Cyp.75:)

2 This is one of the earliest references to the preservation of
relics. So late as the case of St. Fructuosus (Acta SS. Fruc-
tuost, etc.), who died at Tarragona in 259, the friends are for-
bidden to keep the relics. On St. Basil’s views on the subject,
cf. Hom. in Mart. Ful. 2 and Hom..de SS. Χ]. MM.8. So
Gregory of Nyssa, Hom.i.in xl. Mar. ii.935. As early as the
time of St. Augustine (430) a thriving trade in forged relics
had already begun. (Aug., De Opere Monach. 28.) cf. Little-
dale’s Plain Reasons, p. 51.


8 Placed in 373. 4 cf. Letter cxxxviii.


LETTERS,


--- --


when reading it. For is there anything
more pleasing than the idea of peace? Is
anything more suitable to the sacred office,
or more acceptable to the Lord, than to take
measures for effecting it? May you have
the reward of the peace-maker, since so
blessed an office has been the object of your
good desires and earnest efforts. At the
same time, believe me, my revered friend, I
will yield to none in my earnest wish and
prayer to see the day when those who are
one in sentiment shall all fill the same
assembly. Indeed it would be monstrous to
feel pleasure in the schisms and divisions of
the Churches, and not to consider that the
greatest of goods consists in the knitting to-
gether of the members of Christ’s body. But,
alas! my inability is as real as my desire.
No one knows better than yourself, that
time alone is the remedy of ills that time
has matured. Besides, a strong and vigor-
ous treatment is necessary to get at the. root
of the complaint. You will understand this
hint, though there is no reason why I should
not speak out.

2. Self-importance, when rooted by habit
in the mind, cannot be destroyed by one
man, by one single letter, or in a short time.
Unless there be some arbiter in whom all
parties have confidence, suspicions and col-
lisions will never altogether cease. If, in-
deed, the influence of Divine grace were shed
upon me, and I were given power in word
and deed and spiritual gifts to prevail with
these rival parties, then this daring experi-
ment might be demanded of me; though,
perhaps, even then, you would not advise me
to attempt this adjustment of things by myself,
without the co-operation of the bishop,’ on
whom principally falls the care of the church.
But he cannot come hither, nor can I easily
undertake a long journey while the winter
lasts, or rather I cannot anyhow, for the
Armenian mountains will be soon impassa-
ble, even to the young and vigorous, to say
nothing of my continued bodily ailments. I
have no objection to write to tell him of all
this; but I have no expectation that writing
will lead to anything, for I know his cautious
character, and after all written words have
little power to convince the mind. There
are so many things fo urge, and to hear, and
to reply to, and to object, that a letter has no
soul, and is in fact but waste paper. How-
ever, as [ have said, I will write. Only give
me credit, most religious and dear brother,
for having no private feeling in the matter.
Thank God, I have no such feeling towards
anyone. [ have not busied myself in the in-


1 Meletius of Antioch.


211


vestigation of the supposed or real com-
plaints which are brought against this or
that man; so my opinion has a claim on
your attention as that of one who really can-
not act from partiality or prejudice. I only
desire, through the Lord’s good will, that all
things may be done with ecclesiastical pro-
priety.

3. Iwas vexed to find from my dear son
Dorotheus, our associate in the ministry,
that you had been unwilling to communicate
with him. This was not the kind of con-
versation which you had with me, as well
as I recollect. As to my sending to the
West it is quite out of the question. I have
no one fit for the service. Indeed, when I
look round, I seem to have no one on my
side. Ican but pray I may be found in the
number of those seven thousand who have
not bowed the knee to Baal. I know the
present persecutors of us all seek my life;
yet that shall not diminish ought of the zeal
which I owe to the Churches of God.


LETTER CLVUH.?


To Antiochus.?


You may well imagine how disappointed
I was not to meet you in the summer; not
that our meeting in former years was enough
to satisfy me, but even to see loved objects
in a dream brings those who love some com-
fort. But you do not even write, so slug-
gish are you, and 1 think your absence can
be referred to no other cause than that you
are slow to undertake journeys for affection’s
sake. On this point I will say no more.
Pray for me, and ask the Lord not to desert
me, but as He has brought me out of by-
gone temptations so also to deliver me from
those that I await, for the glory of the name
of Him in Whom I put my trust.


LETTER CLVIIL.’


To Anttochus.


My sins have prevented me from carrying
out the wish to meet you, which I have long
entertained. Let me apologise by letter for
my absence, and beseech you not to omit
to remember me in your prayers, that, if
I live, I may be permitted to enjoy your


1 Placed in 373.

2cf. Letters cxlvi. and cexxxix. Maran. (Vit. Bas.) is of
opinion that as these two letters, clvii. and clviii., written at the
same time, are very much in the same terms, they cannot be
to the same person, and thinks thit the sluggishness, which
Basil complains of, fits in with Eusebius much better than
with Antiochus, who could not travel without his uncle’s per-
mission. 8 Placed in 373.


212


BASIL.


‘society. If not, by the aid of your prayers
may I quit this world with good hope. I
commend to you our brother the camel-
master.


LETIER CLIX?


To Eupaterius and his daughter?


I. You may well imagine what pleasure
the letter of your excellencies gave me, if
only from its very contents. What, indeed,
could give greater gratification to one who
prays ever to be in communication with
them who fear the Lord, and to share their
blessings, than a letter of this kind, wherein
questions are asked about the knowledge of
God? For if, to me, “ὦ live is Christ,” *
truly my words ought to be about Christ, my
every thought and deed ought to depend
upon His commandments, and my soul to be
fashioned after His. I rejoice, therefore, at
being asked about such things, and congratu-
late the askers. By me, to speak shortly,
the faith of the Fathers assembled at Nicza
is honoured before all later inventions. Init
the Son is confessed to be con-substantial
with the Father and to be naturally of the
same nature with Him who begat Him, for
He was confessed to be Light of Light,
God of God, and Good of Good, and the like.
Both by those holy men the same doctrine
was declared, and by me now who pray that I
may walk in their footsteps.

2. But since the question now raised by
those who are always endeavouring to intro-
duce novelties, but passed over in silence by
the men of old, because the doctrine was
never gainsaid, has remained without full
explanation (I mean that which concerns
the Hoiy Ghost) I will add a statement on
this subject in conformity with the sense of
Scripture. As we were baptized, so we
profess our belief. As we profess our belief,
so also we offer praise. As then baptism
has been given us by the Saviour, in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost, so, in accordance with our
baptism, we make the confession of the
creed, and our doxology in accordance with
our creed. We glorify the Holy Ghost to-
gether with the Father and the Son, from
the conviction that He is not separated from
the Divine Nature; for that which is foreign
by nature does not share in the same honors.
All who call the Holy Ghost a creature we
pity, on the ground that, by this utterance,
they are falling into the unpardonable sin of


1 Placed about 373.
2 On the Nicene Creed and the Holy Ghost.
$ Phil. i. 27.


blasphemy against Him. I need use no
argument to prove to those who are even
slightly trained in Scripture, that the crea-
ture is separated from the Godhead. The
creature is a slave; but the Spirit sets free.!
The creature needs life; the Spirit is the
Giver of life.2 The creature requires teach-
ing.’ It is the Spirit. that teaches.° -The
creature is sanctified; it is the Spirit that
sanctifies.* Whether you name angels, arch-
angels, or all the heavenly powers, they re-
ceive their sanctification through the Spirit,
but the Spirit Himself has His holiness by
nature, not received by favour, but essen-
tially His; whence He has received the dis-
tinctive name of Holy. What then is by
nature holy, as the Father is by nature
holy, and the Son by nature holy, we do
not ourselves allow to be separated and
severed from the divine and blessed Trinity,
nor accept those who rashly reckon it as
part of creation. Let this short summary
be sufficient for you, my pious friends.
From little seeds, with the co-operation of
the Holy Ghost, you will reap the fuller
crop of piety. ‘*Give instruction to a wise
man and he will be yet wiser.”°® I will put
off fuller demonstration till we meet. When
we do, it will be possible for me to answer
objections, to give you fuller proofs from
Scripture, and to confirm all the sound rule
of faith. For the present pardon my brevity.
I should not have written at all had I not
thought it a greater injury to you to refuse
your request altogether than to grant it in
part.


LETTERGCEXS
To Diodorus.’


1. I#Ave received the letter which has
raeched me under the name of Diodorus,
but in what it contains creditable to any one
rather than to Diodorus. Some ingenious
person seems to have assumed your name,
with the intention of getting credit with his
hearers. It appears that he was asked by
some one if it was lawful to contract
marriage with his deceased wife’s sister;
and, instead of shuddering at such a ques-
tion, he heard it unmoved, and quite boldly
and bravely supported the unseemly desire.
Had I his letter by me I would have sent
it you, and you would have been able to
defend both yourself and the truth. But the
person who showed it me took it away


1¢f. Rom. viii. 2. 4 Rom. xv. 16.

2 John vi. 63. 5 Proy. 1x: Ὁ.

3 John xiv. 26. 6 Placed in 373 ΟΥ̓ 374.

7On marriage with a deceased wife’s sister. cf. Letter
CXXXV.


LETFERS.


ΤῈ


again, and carried it about as a kind of
trophy of triumph against me who had for-
bidden it from the beginning, declaring that
he had permission in writing. Now I have
written to you that I may attack that spuri-
ous document with double strength, and
leave it no force whereby it may injure its
readers.

2. First of all I have to urge, what is of
most importance in such matters, our own
custom, which has the force of law, because
the rules have been handed down to us by
holy men. It is as follows: if any one, over-
come by impurity, falls into unlawful in-
tercourse with two sisters, this is not to be
looked upon as marriage, nor are they to
be admitted at all intothe Church until they
have separated from one another. Where-
fore, although it were possible to say
nothing further, the custom would be quite
enough to safeguard what is right. But,
since the writer of the letter has endeavoured
to introduce this mischief into our practice
by a false argument, I am under the neces-
sity of not omitting the aid of reasoning;
although in matters which are perfectly
plain every man’s instinctive sentiment is
stronger than argument.

3. It is written, he says, in Leviticus,
‘¢Neither shalt thou take a wife to her
sister, to vex her, to uncover her nakedness,
beside the other zz her life time.’’' From
this it is plain, he argues, that it is lawful to
take her when the wife is dead. ‘To this my
first answer shall be, that whatever the law
says, it says to those who are under the law ;
otherwise we shall be subject to circumcis-
ion, the sabbath, abstinence from meats.
For we certainly must not, when we find
anything which falls in with our pleasures,
subject ourselves to the yoke of slavery to
the law; and then, if anything in the law
seems hard, have recourse to the freedom
which is in Christ. We have been asked if it
is written that one may be taken to wife after
her sister. Let us say what is safe and true,
that it is not written. But to deduce by
sequence of argument what is passed over in
silence is the part of a legislator, not of one
who quotes the articles of the law. Indeed,
on these terms, any one who likes will be at
liberty to take the sister, even in the life-
time of the wife. The same sophism fits in in
this case also. It is written, he says, “" Thou
shalt not take a wife to vex her:” so that,
apart from vexation, there is no_ prohibi-
tion to take her. The man who wants to
| indulge his desire will maintain that the re-


1 Lev. xviii. 18.


lationship of sisters is such that they cannot
vex one another. Take away the reason
given for the prohibition to live with both,
and what is there to prevent a man’s taking
both sisters? This is not written, we shall
say. Neither is the former distinctly stated.
The deduction from the argument allows
liberty in both cases. Buta solution of the
difficulty might be found by going a little
back to what is behind the enactment. It
appears that thé legislator does not include
every kind of sin, but particularly prohibits
those of the Egyptians, from among whom
Israel had gone forth, and of the Canaanites
among whom they were going. The words
are as follows, ‘* After the doings of the land
of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do;
and atter the doings of the land of Canaan,
whither I bring you, shall ye not do: neither
shall ye walk in their ordinances.”! It is
probable that this kind of sin was ποῖ
practised at that time among the Gentiles.
Under these circumstances the lawgiver was,
it may be supposed, under no necessity of
guarding against it; the unwritten custom
sufficed to condemn the crime. How then
is it that while forbidding the greater he was
silent about the less? Because the example
of the patriarch seemed injurious to many
who indulged their flesh so far as to live
with sisters in their life time. What ought
to be my course? To quote the Scriptures,
or to work out what they leave unsaid? In
these laws it is not written that a father and
son ought not to have the same concubine,
but, in the prophet, it is thought deservirg
of the most extreme condemnation, ‘* A man
and his father” it is said “6 will go in unto
the same maid.”? And how many other
forms of unclean lust have been found out
in the devils’ school, while divine scripture
is silent about them, not choosing to befoul
its dignity with the names of filthy things
and condemning their uncleanness in gen-
eral terms! As the apostle Paul says,
‘¢Fornication and all uncleanness . . .
let it not be once named among you as be-
cometh saints,” * thus including the unspeak-
able doings of both males and females under
the name of uncleanness. It follows that
silence certainly does not give license to
voluptuaries. ‘

4. 1, however, maintain that this point
has not been left in silence, but that the law-
giver has made a distinct prohibition. The
words ‘* None of you shall approach to any
one that is near of kin to him, to uncover
their nakedness,” * embraces also this form


3 Eph. v. 3.


1 Lev. xviii. 3.
¢ Lev. xviii. 6,


2 Amos ii. 7.


214


of kinsmanship, for what could be more
akin to a man than his own wife, or rather
than his own flesh? ‘* For they are no more
twain but one flesh.” ? So, through the wife,
the sister is made akin to the husband.
For as he shall not take his wife’s mother,
nor yet his wife’s daughter, because he may
not take his own mother nor his own
daughter, so he may not take his wife’s
sister, because he may not take his own
sister. And, on the other hand, it will not
be lawful for the wife to be joined with the
husband’s kin, for the rights of relationship
hold good on both sides. But, for my part,
to every one who is thinking about marriage
I testify that, ‘*the fashion of this world
passeth away,”” andthe time is short: * it
remaineth that both they that have wives be
as.ahough; they had none.”’?,. if (he/,im-
properly quotes the charge ‘‘ Increase and
multiply,” * I laugh at him, for not discern-
ing the signs of the times. Second marriage
is a remedy against fornication, not a means
of lasciviousness. ‘* If they cannot contain,”
it is said **let them marry;’’® but if they
marry they must not break the law.
5. But they whose souls are blinded by
dishonourable lust do not regard even
nature, which from old time distinguished
the names of the family. For under what
relationship will those who contract these
unions name their sons? Will they call them
brothers or cousins of one another? For, on
account of the confusion, both names will
apply. O man, do not make the aunt the
little one’s stepmother; do not arm with
implacable jealousy her who ought to cherish
them with a mother’s love. It is only step-
mothers who extend their hatred even be-
yond death; other enemies make a truce
with the dead; stepmothers begin their
hatred after death. The sum of what I say
is this. If any one wants to contract a law-
ful marriage, the whole world is open to him:
if he is only impelled by lust, let him be the
more restricted, ‘‘*that he may know how
to possess his vessel in sanctification and
honour, not in the lust of concupiscence.”’’”
I should like to say more, but the limits of
my letter leave me no further room. I pray
that my exhortation may prove stronger than
lust, or at least that this pollution may not


1St. Matt. xix. 6. 31 Cor. vii. 29.

κι (Core Vil, 21. 4 Gen. i. 28.

6 On the ancient dislike of stepmothers, cf. Herod. iv. 154,
and Eurip., A/cest7s 309, where they are said to be as dangerous
to the children as vipers. Menander writes δεινότερον οὐδὲν
ἄλλο μητρυιᾶς κακόν.

71 Thess. iv. 4. So A.V.,apparently taking σκεῦος for body
with Chrys., Theodoret, and others. The Greek is, most
simply, not ‘ possess,’’ but get, and is in favour of the inter-
pretation of Theod, of Mops., Augustine, and others, “ get his
wife.” See Ellicott, Thess. p. 53.


51 Cor. vii. 9.


BASIL.


be found in myown province. Where it


has been ventured on there let it abide.


LETTER CLXI.1


To Amphilochius on his consecration as Bishop.


1. BrLEssED be God Who from age to age
chooses them that please Him, distinguishes
vessels of election, and uses them for the
ministry of the Saints. Though you were
trying to flee, as you confess, not from me,
but from the calling you expected through
me, He has netted you in the sure meshes
of grace, and has brought you into the midst
of Pisidia to catch men for the Lord, and
draw the devil’s prey from the deep into’
the light. You, too, may say as the blessed
David said, ‘¢ Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
presence.” ” Such is the wonderful work of
our loving Master. ‘* Asses are lost”? that
there may be a king of Israel. David, how-
ever, being an Israelite was granted to Israel ;
but the land which has nursed you and
brought you to such a height of virtue, pos-
sesses you no longer, and sees her neighbour
beautified by her own adornment. But all
believers in Christ are one people; all
Christ’s people, although He is hailed from
many regions, are one Church; and so our
country is glad and rejoices at the dispensa-
tion of the Lord, and instead of thinking
that she is one man the poorer, considers
that through one man she has become pos-
sessed of whole Churches. Only may the
Lord grant me both to see you in person,
and, so long as I am parted from you, to
hear of your progress in the gospel, and of
the good order of your Churches.

2. Play the man, then, and be strong, and
walk before the people whom the Most
High has entrusted to your hand. Like a
skilful pilot, rise in mind above every wave


lifted by heretical blasts; keep the boat from


being whelmed by the salt and bitter billows
of false doctrine; and wait for the calm to
be made by the Lord so soon as there shall
have been found a voice worthy of rousing
Him to rebuke the winds and the sea. If
you wish to visit me, now hurried by long
sickness towards the inevitable end, do not
wait for an opportunity, or for the word
from me. You know that to a father’s heart
every time is suitable to embrace a well-loved

1 Placed in 374. 2 Ps. cxxxix. 7.

81 Sam. ix. 3. So six MSS. Editors have substituted
‘“‘enemies.’’ The letter does not exist inthe Codex Harleanus.
“Ovo. is supposed to mean that Faustinus and John, the pre-
decessors of Amphilochius in the see of Iconium, were not


very wise bishops. ἔχθροι might mean that they were Arian.
cf. Letter cxxxviii.


LETEERS.


son, and that affection is stronger than words.
Do not lament over a responsibility transcend-
ing your strength. If you had been destined
to bear the burden unaided, it would have been
not merely heavy ; it would have been intoler-
able. But if the Lord shares the load with
you, ** cast all your care upon the Lord”! and
He will Himself act. Only be exhorted ever
to give heed lest you be carried away by
wicked customs. Rather change all previous
evil ways into good by the help of the wisdom
given you by God. For Christ has sent you
not to follow others, but yourself to take the
lead of all who are being saved. I charge
you to pray for me, that, if I am still in this
life, 1 may be permitted to see you with your
Church. If, however, it is ordained that I
now depart, may I see all of you hereafter
with the Lord, your Church blooming like a
vine with good works, and yourself like a
wise husbandman and good servant giving
meat in due season to his fellow-servants,
and receiving the reward of a wise and
trusty steward. All who are with me salute
your reverence. May you be strong and
joyful in the Lord. May you be preserved
glorious in the graces of the Spirit and of
wisdom.


BETTER, @LXIt*
Lo Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.*


THE same cause seems to make me hesi-
tate to write, and to prove that I must write.
When I think of the visit which I owe, and
reckon up the gain at meeting you, I cannot
help despising letters, as being not even
shadows in comparison with the reality.
Then, again, when I reckon that my only
consolation, deprived as 1 am of all that is
best and most important, is to salute such
aman and beg him, as I am wont, not to
forget me in his prayers, I bethink me:that
letters are of no small value. I do not, my-
self, wish to give up all hope of my visit,
nor to despair of seeing you. I should be
ashamed not to seem to put so much con-
fidence in your prayers as even to expect to
be turned from an old man into a young one,
if such a need were to arise, and not merely
from a sick and emaciated one, as I am now,
into one a little bit stronger. It is not easy
to express in words the reason of my not
being with you already, because I am not
only prevented by actual illness, but have
not even force of speech enough at any time
to give you an account of such manifold and
complex disease. I can only say that, ever


1 cf. Ps. lv. 22 and 1 Pet. v. 7. 2 Placed in 374.
8 On Basil’s hopes of visiting Eusebius. 9


215


since Easter up to now, fever, diarrhcea, and |
intestinal’ disturbance, ‘drowning me _ like
waves, do not sufler me to lift my head
above them. Brother Barachus may be able
to tell you the character of my symptoms, if
not as their severity deserves, at least clearly
enough to make you understand the reason
of my delay. If you join cordially in my
prayers, I have no doubt that my troubles
will easily pass away.


LE VEER VUCEXITE!


Zo Count Jovinus.


ONE can see your soul in your letter, for in
reality no painter can so exactly catch an out-
ward likeness, as uttered thoughts can image
the secrets of the soul. As I read your letter,
your words exactly characterized your stead-
fastness, your real dignity, your unfailing
sincerity ; in all those things it comforted me
greatly though I could not see you. Never
fail, then, to seize every opportunity of writ-
ing to me, and to give me the pleasure of
conversing with you at a distance; for to
see you face to face I am now forbidden by
the distressing state of my health. How
serious this is vou will learn from the God-
beloved bishop Amphilochius, who is both
able to report to you from his having been
constantly with me, and fully competent to
tell you what he has seen. But the only
reason why I wish you to know of my suf-
ferings is, that you will forgive me for the
future, and acquit me of lack of energy, if
I fail to come and see you, though in truth
my loss does not so much need defence from
me as comfort from you. Had it been pos-
sible for me to come to you, I should have
very much preferred a sight of your excel-
lency to all the ends that other men count
worth an effort. .


LETRER Εν:
To Ascholius.*


1. [τ would not be easy for me to say how
very much delighted I am with your holi-
ness’s letter. My words are too weak to
express all that I feel; you, however, ought
to be able to conjecture it, from the beauty
of what you have written. For what did
not your letter contain? It contained love
to God; the marvellous description of the
martyrs, which put the manner of their good
fight so plainly before me that I seemed actu-
ally to see it; love and kindness to myself;


1 Placed in 374. 2 Placed in 374. 3 cf, Letter liv.


216


BASIL.


- words of surpassing beauty. ‘So when I had
taken it into my hands, and read it many
times, and perceived how abundantly full
it was of the grace of the Spirit, 1 thought
that I had gone back to the good old times,
when God’s Churches flourished, rooted
in faith, united in love, all the members
being in harmony, as though in one body.
Then the persecutors were manifest, and
manifest too the persecuted. Then the peo-
ple grew more numerous by being attacked.
Then the blood of the martyrs, watering
the Churches, nourished many more cham-
pions of true religion, each generation
stripping for the struggle with the zeal of
those that had gone before. Then we Chris-
tians were in peace with one another, the
peace which the Lord bequeathed us, of
which, so cruelly have we driven it from
among us, not a single trace is now left us.
Yet my soul did go back to that blessedness
of old, when a letter came from a long dis-
tance, bright with the beauty of love, and a
martyr travelled to me from wild regions
beyond the Danube, preaching in his own
person the exactitude of the faith which is
there observed. Who could tell the delight
of my soul at all this? What power of
speech could be devised competent to de-
scribe all that I felt in the bottom of my
heart? However, when I saw the athlete,
I blessed his trainer: he, too, before the just
Judge, after strengthening many for the con-
flict on behalf of true religion, shall receive
the crown of righteousness.

2. By bringing the blessed Eutyches’
to my recollection, and honouring ny
country for having sown the seeds of true
religion, you have at once delighted me by
your reminder of the past, and distressed
me by your conviction of the present.
None of us now comes near Enutyches
in goodness: so far are we from bringing
barbarians under the softening power of
the Spirit, and the operation of His
graces, that by the greatness of our sins
we turn gentle hearted men into barba-
rians, for to ourselves and to our sins I
attribute it that the influence of the heretics
is so widely diffused. Peradventure no part
of the world has escaped the conflagration of
heresy. You tell me of struggles of athletes,
bodies lacerated for the truth’s sake, savage
fury despised by men of fearless heart,
various tortures of persecutors, and con-
stancy of the wrestlers through them all, the
block and the water whereby the martyrs


1 Eutyches was a Cappadocian, who was taken prisoner by
the Goths, in the reign of Gallienus, in a raid into Cappadocia.
It was through the teaching of these captives that the ances.
tors of Ulphilas became Christians. cf. Philost., H.£. ii. 5.


died. And what is our condition? Love is
grown cold; the teaching of the Fathers is
being laid waste; everywhere is shipwreck
of the Faith; the mouths of the faithful
are silent; the people, "driven! trom: "the
houses of prayer, lift up their hands in the
open air to their Lord which is in heaven.
Our afflictions are heavy, martyrdom is no-
where to be seen, because those who evilly
entreat us are called by the same name as
ourselves. Wherefore pray to the Lord
yourself, and join all Christ’s noble athletes
with you in prayer for the Churches, to the
end that, if any further time remains for this
world, and all things are not being driven to
destruction, God may be reconciled to his
own Churches and restore them to their an-
cient peace.


LETTER CLXV2


To Ascholius, bishop of Thessalonica.®


Gop has fulfilled my old prayer in deign-
ing to allow me to receive the letter of your
veritable holiness. What I most of all de-
sire is to see you and to be seen by you, and
to enjoy in actual intercourse all the graces
of the Spirit with which you are endowed.
This, however, is impossible, both on ac-
count of the distance which separates us,
and the engrossing occupations of each of
us. 1 therefore pray, in the second place,
that my soul may be fed by frequent letters
from your love in Christ. This has now
been granted me on taking your epistle into
my hands. I have been doubly delighted at
the enjoyment of your communication. I
felt as though I could really see your very
soul shining in your words as in some mir-
ror; and 1 was moved to exceeding joy, not
only at your proving to be what all testimony
says.of you, but that your noble qualities
are the ornament of my country. You have
filled the country beyond our borders with
spiritual fruits, like some vigorous branch
sprung from a glorious root. Rightly, then,
does our country rejoice in her own off-
shoots. When you were engaging in con-

1 The Ben. note illustrates these modes of martyrdom from
the letter of the Gothic Church, supposed to have been written
by Ascholius, sent to Caesarea with the body of Saint Sabas,
who suffered under Athanaricus, king of the Goths, in the end
of the fourth century. ‘‘ They bring him down to the water,
giving thanks and glorifying God: then they flung him down,
and put a block about his neck, and plunged him into the
depth. So slain by wood and water, he kept the symbol of
salvation undefiled, being 38 years old.” c/. Ruinart., Act.
Sinc. p. 670.

2 Placed in 374.

8 80 411 {πὸ MSS. But it is the opinion of Maran that there
can be no doubt of the letter being addressed, not to Ascho-
lius, but to Soranus, duke of Scythia. We have seen in letter
255 that Basil requested his relative Julius Soranus to send
him some relics of the Gothic martyrs. This letter appears to


refer*to his prompt compliance with the request by sending
relics of Saint Sabas.


LETTERS.


flicts for the Faith she heard that the goodly
heritage of the Fathers was preserved in you,
and she glorified God. And now what are
you about? You have honoured the land
that gave you birth by sending her a martyr
who has just fought a good fight in the
barbarian country on your borders, just as
a grateful gardener might send his first
fruits to those who had given him the seeds.
Verily the gift is worthy of Christ’s athlete,
a martyr of the truth just crowned with the
crown of righteousness, whom we _ have
gladly welcomed, glorifying God who has
now fulfilled the gospel of His Christ in all
the world. Let me ask you to remember in
your prayers me who love you, and for my
soul’s sake earnestly to beseech the Lord
that one day I, too, may be deemed worthy
to begin to serve God, according to the way
of Hiscommandments which He has given
us to salvation.


LE PEERY CEXVE}
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.’


LETTER CLXVILI.?
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.


I am delighted at your remembering me
and writing, and, what is yet more impor-
tant, at your sending me your blessing in
your letter. Had I been but worthy of your
labours and of your struggles in Christ’s
cause, I should have been permitted to come
to you and embrace you, and to take you as
a model of patience. But since I am not
worthy of this, and am detained by many
afflictions and much occupation, I do what
is next best. I salute your excellency, and
beseech you not to grow weary of remember-
ing me. For the honour and pieasure of
receiving your letters is not only an advan-
tage to me, but it is a ground of boasting
and pride before the world that I should be
held in honour by one whose virtue is so
great, and who is in such close communion
with God as to be able, alike by his teach-
ing and example, to unite others with him
in it.

LETTER CLXVIIE*
To Antochus.°


I mourn for the Church that is deprived
of the guidance of such a shepherd.*® But I


1 Placed in 374.

2 This letter is numbered Ixv. among those of Gregory of
Nazianzus, to whom it is to be attributed. It is only found in
one MS. of the letters of Basil (Coisl. i.)

8 Placed in 374. 4 Placed in 374.

5.Nephew of Eusebius. cf. Letters cxlvi., clvii., and clviii.

6 Eusebius was now in exile in Thrace. On the picturesque


217


have so much the more ground for congratu-
lating you on being worthy of the privilege
of enjoying, at such a moment, the society
of one who is fighting such a good fight in
the cause of the truth, and I am sure that
you, who nobly support and stimulate his
zeal, will be thought worthy by the Lord of
a lot like his. What a blessing, to enjoy in
unbroken quiet the society of the man so
rich in learning and experienced in life!
Now, at least, you must, I am sure, know
how wise he is. In days gone by his mind
was necessarily given to many divided cares,
and you were too busy a man to give your
sole heed to the spiritual fountain which
springs from his pure heart. God grant that
you may be a comfort to him, and never
yourself want consolation from others. I
am sure of the disposition of your heart,
alike from the experience which I, for a
short time, have had of you, and from the
exalted teaching of your illustrious instructor,
with whom to pass one single day is a sufh-
cient provision for the journey to salvation.


LETTER CLXIX.’
Basil to Gregory.’


You have undertaken a kindly and chari-
table task in getting together the captive
troop of the insolent Glycerius (at present I
must so write), and, so far as in you lay,
covering our common shame. _ It is only
right that your reverence should undo this
dishonour with a full knowledge of the facts
about him. :

This grave and venerable Glycerius of
yours was ordained by me deacon of the
church of Venesa® to serve the presbyter, and
look after the work of the Church, for,
though the fellow is in other respects intract-
able, he is naturally clever at manual labour.
No sooner was he appointed than he neg-
lected his work, as though there had been
absolutely nothing to do. But, of his own
private power and authority, he got together
some wretched virgins, some of whom came
to him of their own accord (you know how
young people are prone to anything of this


scene of his forced departure from his diocese, the agony of
his flock at losing him, and his calm submission to the tyranny
δε Valens, see Theodoret iv. 12 and 13, pp. 115, 116, of this
edition,

1 Placed in 374, on the misconduct of Glycerius, a deacon.

2 Tillemont says either of Nyssa or Nazianzus. In the
MS. Coisl. I. it is preceded by Ixxi., unquestionably addressed
to Gregory of Nazianzus, and inscribed ‘to the same.’’ In
the Codex Harl. it is inscribed Tpnyopiw ἑταίρῳ. Garnier,
however ( Vita S. Bas. xxxi. § iv.) allows that there are
arguments in favor of Gregory of Nyssa. Probably it is the
elder Gregory who is addressed. See Prolegomena.

8 Or Veésa, or Synnasa; the MSS. vary.


218


BASIL:


kind), and others were unwillingly forced to
accept him as leader of their company. Then
he assumed the style and title of patriarch,
and began all of a sudden to play the man of
dignity. He had not attained to this on any
reasonable or pious ground; his only object
was to get a means of livelihood, just as
some men start one trade and some another.
He has all but upset the whole Church,
scorning his own presbyter, a man venerable
both by character and age; scorning his
chorepiscopus, and myself, as of no account
at all, continually filling the town and all
the clergy with disorder and disturbance.
And now, on being mildly rebuked by me
and his chorepiscopus, that he may not treat
us with contempt (for he was trying to stir
the younger men to like insubordination), he
is meditating conduct most audacious and
inhuman. After robbing as many of the
virgins as he could, he has made off by night.
I am sure all this will have seemed very sad
to you. Think of the time too. The feast
was being held there, and, as was natural,
large numbers of people were gathered to-
gether. He, however, on his side, brought
out his own troop, who followed young men
and danced round them, causing all well-dis-
posed persons to be most distressed, while
loose chatterers laughed aloud. And even this
was not enough, enormous as was the scandal.
Iam told that even the parents of the vir-
gins, finding their bereavement unendurable,
wishful to bring home the scattered com-
pany, and falling with not unnatural sighs
and tears at their daughters’ feet, have been
insulted and outraged by this excellent young
man and his troop of bandits. JI am sure
your reverence will think all this intolerable.
The ridicule of it attaches to us all alike.
First of all, order him to come back with the
virgins. He might find some mercy, if he
were to come back with a letter from you.
If you do not adopt this course, at least send
the virgins back to their mother the Church.
If this cannot be done, at all events do not
allow any violence to be done to those that
are willing to return, but get them to return
tome. Otherwise I call God and man to
witness that all this is ill done, and a breach
of the law of the Church. The best course
would be for Glycerius to come back with a
letter," and in a becoming and proper frame
of mind; if not, let him be deprived of his
ministry.”


1 ἐπιστολῆς is read in the version of this letter appearing in
the works of Greg. Naz., and Combefis is no doubt right
in thinking that it makes better sense than ἐπιστήμης, the read-
ing of the chief MSS. here.

2 cf; Prolegomena, and Ramsay’s Church and Roman Em-
pire, Cap. Xviii.


LETTER CLAX*


Zo Glycerius.


How far will your mad folly go? How
long will you counsel mischief against your-
self? How long will you go on rousing me
to wrath, and bringing shame on the com-
mon order of solitaries? Return. Put
confidence in God, and in me, who imitate
God’s loving-kindness. If I rebuked you
like a father, like a father I will forgive you.
This is the treatment you shall receive from
me, for many others are making supplication
in your behalf, and before all the rest your
own presbyter, for whose grey hairs and
compassionate disposition I feel much re-
spect. Continue longer to hold aloof from
me and you have quite fallen from your
degree.” You will also fall away from God,
for with your songs and your garb ὅ you are
leading the young women not to God, but
to the pit.


LETTER CLXXI.*


Io Gregory.


I wroTeE to you, not long ago, about
Glycerius and the virgins. Even now they
have not returned, but are still hesitating,
how and why I know not. I should be
sorry to charge this against you, as though
you were acting thus to bring discredit on
me, either because you have some ground
of complaint against me, or to gratify others.
Let them then come, fearing nothing. Do
you be surety for their doing this. For it
pains me to have my members cut off,
although they have been rightly cut ο If
they hold out the burden will rest on others.
I wash my hands of it.


LETTER ΤΟΣ
To Sophronius, the bishop.


THERE is no need for me to say how much
I was delighted by your letter. Your own


1 Placed with the preceding.

2 τοῦ βαθμοῦ. cf. 1 Tim. iii. 13. οἱ καλῶς διακονήσαντες
βαθμὸν ἑαυτοῖς καλὸν περιποιοῦνται. There seems an evident
allusion to this passage, but not such as to enable Basil to be
positively ranked with Chrysostom in his apparent interpreta-
tion of βαθμός objectively of preferment, or with Theodoret in
his subjective idea of honour with God. Apparently the
“degree”? is the Diaconate.

3 στολή. The technical use of this word for a “stole” is
not earlier than the ninth century. It was indeed used for a
sacred vestment, e.g. the sacred robe which Constantine pre-
sented to Macarius, Bishop of Jerusalem. (Theodoret ii. 27.)
In Latin ‘“stola’’ designated the distinctive dress of the
matron, and it seems to be used with a suggestion of effem-
inacy.

© laced with the preceding. 5 Placed in 374.

6 This Sophronius is distinguished by Maran from the
Sophronius, magister officiorum, to whom Letters xxxii.,
Ixxvi,, and xcvi. have already been addressed, and who is also
the recipient of clxxvi., clxxx., cxcii., cclxii. Nothing else
is known of him,


LEFEERS.


219


words will enable you to conjecture what I
felt on receiving it. You have exhibited to
me in your letter, the first fruits of the
Spirit, love. Than this what can be more
precious to me in the present state of aflairs,
when, because iniquity abounds, the love of
many has waxed cold?’ Nothing is rarer
now than spiritual intercourse with a brother,
a word of peace, and such spiritual com-
munion as I have found in you. For this I
thank the Lord, beseeching Him that I may
have part in the perfect joy that 15 found in
you. If such be your letter, what must it
be to meet you in person? If when you are
far away you so affect me, what will you be
to me when you are seen face to face? Be
sure that if I had not been detained by in-
numerable occupations, and all the unavoid-
‘able anxieties which tie me down, I should
have hurried to see your excellency. Al-
though that old complaint of mine is a great
hindrance to my moving about, nevertheless,
in view of the good I expect, I would not
have allowed this to standin my way. ‘To
be permitted to meet a man holding the
same views and reverencing the faith of the
Fathers, as you are said to do by our honour-
able brethren and fellow presbyters, is in
truth to go back to the ancient blessedness
of the Churches, when the sufferers from
unsound disputation were few, and all lived
in peace, ““ workmen” obeying the com-
mandments and not ‘* needing to be
ashamed,”” serving the Lord with simple
and clear confession, and keeping plain and
inviolate their faith in Father, Son and


Holy Ghost.
LETTER. ΟἸΧΧΤῊ


To Theodora the Canoness.*


I sHouLpD be more diligent in writing to
you but for my belief that my letters do not
always, my friend, reach your own hands.
I am afraid that through the naughtiness of
those on whose service I depend, especially
at a time like this when the whole world is
in a state of confusion, a great many other
people get hold of them. So I wait to be
found fault with, and to be eagerly asked for
my letters, that so I may have this proof of
their delivery. Yet, whether I write or not,
one thing I do without failing, and that is to
keep in my heart the memory of your ex-

1 Matt. xxiv. 12. 22 Tim. ii. 15. 3 Placed in 374.

4On the Canonice, pious women who devoted themselves
to education, district visiting, funerals, and various charitable
works, and living ina community apart from men, cf. Soc.
i, 17, *‘virgins in the register,” and Sozomen viii. 23, on
Nicarete. They were distinguished from nuns as not being


bound by vows, aud from deaconesses as not so distinctly dis-
charging ministerial duties.


cellency, and to pray the Lord to grant that
you may complete the course of good living
which you have chosen. For in truth it is
no light thing for one, who makes a profes-
sion, to follow up all that the promise entails.
Any one may embrace the gospel life, but
only a very few of those who have come
within my knowledge have completely
carried out their duty in its minutest details,
and have overlooked nothing that is contained
therein. Only a very few have been con-
sistent in keeping the tongue in check and
the eye under guidance, as the Gospel would
have it; in working with the hands accord-
ing to the mark of doing what is pleasing to
God; in moving the feet, and using every
member, as the Creator ordained from the
beginning. Propriety in dress, watchfulness
in the society of men, moderation in eating
and drinking, the avoidance of superfluity
in the acquisition of necessities; all these
things seem small enough when they are
thus merely mentioned, but, as 1 have found
by experience, their consistent observance
requires no light struggle. Further, such a
perfection of humility as not even to remem-
ber nobility of family, nor to be elevated by
any natural advantage of body or mind
which we may have, nor to allow other
people’s opinion of us to be a ground of
pride and exaltation, all this belongs to
the evangelic life. There is also sustained
self-control, industry in prayer, sympathy in
brotherly love, generosity to the poor, lowli-
ness of temper, contrition of heart, sound-
ness of faith, calmness in depression, while
we never forget the terrible and inevitable
tribunal. To that judgment we are all
hastening, but those who remember it, and
are anxious about what is to follow after it, are
very few.


LETEBRRCLXXTVv
To a Widow.


I HAVE been most wishful to write con-
stantly to your excellency, but I have from
time to time denied myself, for fear of caus-
ing any temptation to beset you, because of
those who are ill disposed toward me. AsI
am told, their hatred has even gone so far
that they make a fuss if any one happens to
receive a letter from me. But now that you
have begun to write yourself, and very good
it is of you to do so, sending me needful in-
formation about all that is in your mind, I
am stirred to write back to you. Let me
then set right what has been omitted in the
past, and at the same time reply to what


1 Placed in 374.


220


BASIL.


your excellency has written. Truly blessed
is the soul, which by night and by day has
no other anxiety than how, when the great
day comes wherein all creation shall stand
before the Judge and shall give an account
for its deeds, she too may be able easily to
get quit of the reckoning of life.

For he who keeps that day and that hour
ever before him, and is ever meditating upon
the defence to be made before the tribunal
where no excuses will avail, will sin not at
all, or not seriously, for we begin to sin when
there is a lack of the fear of God in us.
When men have a clear apprehension of
what is threatened them, the awe inherent in
them will never allow them to fall into in-
considerate action or thought. Be mindful
therefore of God. Keep the fear of Him in
your heart, and enlist all men to join with
you in your prayers, for great is the aid of
them that are able to move God by their im-
portunity. Never cease to do this. Even
while we are living this life in the flesh,
prayer will be a mighty helper to us, and
when we are departing hence it will be a
sufficient provision for us on the journey to
the world to come.’

Anxiety is a good thing; but, on the other
hand, despondency, dejection, and despair of
our salvation, are injurious to the soul.
Trust therefore in the goodness of God, and
look for His succour, knowing that if we
turn to Him rightly and sincerely, not only
will He not cast us off forever, but will say
to us, even while we are in the act of utter-
ing the words of our prayer, ‘“ Lo! I am
with you.”


LETTER CLXXV.?


To Count Magnenianus.*


Your excellency lately wrote to me,
plainly charging me, besides other matters,
to write concerning the Faith. I admire your
zeal in the matter, and I pray God that your
choice of good things may be persistent,
and that, advancing in knowledge and good
works, you may be made perfect. But I have
no wish to leave behind me a treatise on the
Faith, or to write various creeds, and so I
have declined to send what you asked.‘
You seem to me to be surrounded by the din
of your men there, idle fellows, who say cer-
tain things to calumniate me, with the idea
that they will improve their own position by

1 ἐς Prayer ardent opens heaven.”’

2 Written probably early in 374.

3One MS. reads Magninianus. On the identification of
this officer with the recipient of cccxxv., see that letter.

4 But what Basil declined to do at the prompting of Magnen-


ianus, he shortly afterwards did for Amphilochius, and wrote
the De Spiritu Sancto.


Young, NV. T. viii., 721.


lying disgracefully against me.’ The past
shews what they are, and future experience
will shew them in still plainer colours. I,
however, call on all who trust in Christ not
to busy themselves in opposition to the
ancient faith, but, as we believe, so to be
baptized, and, as we are baptized, so to offer
the doxology.” It is enough for us to con-
fess those names which we have received
from Holy Scripture, and to shun all innova-
tion about them. Our salvation does not
lie in the invention of modes of address, but
in the sound confession of the Godhead in
which we have professed our faith,


LETTER CLXXVI.'
To Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconium.


Gop grant that when this letter is put
into your hands, it may find you in good
health, quite at leisure, and as you would
wish to be. For then it will not be in vain
that I send you this invitation to be present
at our city, to add greater dignity to the an-
nual festival which it is the custom of our
Church to hold in honour of the martyrs.°®
For be sure my most honoured and dear
friend, that our people here, though they
have had experience of many, desire no
one’s presence so eagerly as they do yours;
so affectionate an impression has your short
intercourse with them left behind. So, then,
that the Lord may be glorified, the people
delighted, the martyrs honoured, and that I
in my old age may receive the attention due
to me from my true son, do not refuse to
travel to me with all speed. I will beg you
too to anticipate the day of assembly, that so
we may converse at leisure and may comfort
one another by the interchange of spiritual
gifts. The day is the fifth of September.®
Come then three days beforehand in order
that you may also honour with your presence
the Church‘ of the Hospital. May you by


1 Maran (V. Basi] xxx.) thinks that the allusion is to Atar-
bius of Neocesarea and to some of his presbyters. cf. Letter
cex,

2cf. De Sp. Scto. p. ae 8 Placed in 374.

4 An invitation to the feast of St. Eupsychius, with a request
to arrive three days before the actual day of the festival, which
was observed on the 7th of September. (cf. Letter c. and note,
and the invitation to the Pontic bishops in cclii.)

5 7.6. Damas and Eupsychius.

6 So the date stands in eight MSS. However it arose, 5th is
a mistake for 7th, the day of St. Eupsychius in the Greek,
Kalendar.

Ἰ Μνήμη. The Ben. Ed. understand by this word the
church erected by Basil in his hospital (cf. Letter xciv.) at
Cesarea. In illustration of the use of μνήμη in this sense
Du Cange cites Act. Conc. Chalced. i. 144, and explains it as
being equivalent to ‘‘ memorta,” ὦ 6. ““ «4165 sacra tn qua extat
sancti alicujus us Eien ld cf. Nomocan. Photit.v.§ 1. For
the similar use of ‘* memoria,” in Latin, cf. Aug., De Crv. Der.
xxii. 10: ** Nos autem martyribus nostris non templa sicut
dits sed memorias sicut hominibus mortuis fabricamus.”


LEPVERS.


the grace of the Lord be kept in good health
and spirits in the Lord, praying for me and
for the Church of God.


LETTER CLXXVII.?


To Sophronius the Master.


To reckon up all those who have received
kindness at your excellency’s hand, for my
sake, is no easy task; so many are there
whom I feel that I have benefited through
your kind aid, a boon which the Lord has
given me to help me in these very serious
times. Worthiest of all is he who is now in-
troduced to you by my letter, the reverend
brother Eusebius, attacked by a ridiculous
calumny which it depends upon you alone,
in your uprightness, to destroy. I beseech
you, therefore, both as respecting the right
and as being humanely disposed, to grant me
your accustomed favours, by adopting the
cause of Eusebius as your own, and cham-
pioning him, and, at the same time, truth.
It is no small thing that he has the right on
his side; and this, if he be not stricken down
by the present crisis, he will have no diffi-
culty in proving plainly and without possi-
bility of contradiction.


Pere R CUXXVITI.’


To Aburgius.*


I xnow that I have often recommended
many persons to your excellency, and so in
serious emergencies have been very useful
to friends in distress. But I do not think
that I have ever sent to you one whom I re-
gard with greater respect, or one engaged in
contests of greater importance, than my very
dear son Eusebius, who now places this let-
ter in your hands. He will himself inform
your excellency, if the opportunity is per-
mitted him, in what difficulties he is involved.
I ought to say, at least, as much as this.
The man ought not to be misjudged, nor,
because many have been convicted of dis-
graceful doings, ought he to come under
common suspicion. He ought to have a
fair trial, and his life must be enquired into.
In this way the untruth of the charges against
him will be made plain, and he, after enjoy-
ing your righteous protection, will ever pro-
claim what he owes to your kindness.‘


1 Placed in 374. 2 Placed with the preceding.
8 Also recommending the interests of Eusebius.


4 The Ben. note considers the circumstances referred to are


the cruelties of Valens to those who were accused of enquiring
by divination as to who should succeed him on the throne. cf.
Ammianus Marcellinus xxix, 1, 2.


LETTER CLXXIxX:.!
To Avrintheus?


Your natural nobility of character and
your general accessibility have taught me to
regard you as a friend of freedom and of
men. I have, therefore, no hesitation in ap-
proaching you in behalf of one who is ren-
dered illustrious by a long line of ancestry,
but is worthy of greater esteem and honour
on his own account, because of his innate
goodness of disposition. I beg you, on my
entreaty, to give him your support under a
legal charge, in reality, indeed, ridiculous,
but difficult to meet on account of the seri-
ousness of the accusation. It would be of
great importance to his success if you would
deign to say a kind word in his behalf.
You would, in the first place, be helping
the right; but you would further be showing
in this your wonted respect and kindness to
myself, who am your friend.


ΤΙ CLxxx.*


70 the Master Sophronius, on behalf of Eu-
nathius.


I nHAvE been much distressed on meeting a
worthy man involved in very great trouble.
Being human, how could I fail to sympathise
with a man of high character afflicted beyond
his deserts? On thinking in what way I
could be useful to him, I did find one means
of helping him out of his difficulties, and
that is by making him known to your excel-
lency. Itis now for you to extend also to
him the same good offices which, as I can
testify, you have shown to many. You will
learn all the facts of the case from the pe-
tition presented by him to the emperors.
This document I beg you to take into your
hands, and implore you to help him to the
utmost of your power. You will be helping
a Christian, a gentleman, and one whose
deep learning ought towinrespect. If I add
that in helping him you will confer a great
kindness upon me, though, indeed, my in-
terests are matters of small moment, yet,
since you are always so good as to make them
of importance, your boon to me will be no
small one.


1 Placed in 374.
2 Possibly commendatory of the same Eusebius,
3 Of the same date,


222


DASE;


ΠΕ ΤΠ ACLUXXXI,’
To Otreius, bishop of Melitene?


Your reverence is, I know, no less dis-
tressed than myself at the removal of the
very God-beloved bishop Eusebius. We
both of us need comfort. Let us try to give
it to one another. Do you write to me
what you hear from Samosata, and I will
report to you anything that I may learn
from: Thrace.’

It is to me no slight alleviation of our
present distress to know the constancy of
the people. It will be the same to you to
have news of our common father. Of
course I cannot now tell you this by letter,
but I commend to you one who is fully
informed, and will report to you in what
condition he left him, and how he bears his
troubles. Pray, then, for him and for me,
that the Lord will grant him speedy release
from his distress.


LETTER CLXXXII.*
To the presbyters of Samosata.


GRIEVED as I am at the desolation of the
Church,*° I none the less congratulate you
on having, been brought so soon to this ex-
treme limit of your hard struggle. God grant
that you may pass through it with patience,
to the end that in return for your faithful
stewardship, and the noble constancy which
you have shewn in Christ’s cause, you may
receive the great reward.


LETTER CLXXXIIL.®
To the Senate of Samosata.


SEEING, as I do, that temptation is now
spread all over the world, and that the
greater cities of Syria have been tried by
the same sufferings as yourselves, (though,
indeed, nowhere is the Senate so approved
and renowned for good works, as your own,
noted as you are for your righteous zeal, )
I all but thank the troubles which have be-
fallen you.’

For had not this affliction come to pass,


1 Placed in 374.

2 In Armenia Minor, now Malatia. Basil asks him for and
offers sympathy in the exile of Eusebius. Otreius was at Tyana
in 367, and at Constantinople in 381 (Labbe ii. 99 and 955).

8 Where Eusebius was tn exile. 4 Placed in 374.

5 Specially the exile of Eusebius. « Of the same date.

7 χάριν ἔχειν τοῖς οἰκονομ ηθεῖσιν, With the Cod. Med., instead
of ἐπὶ τοῖς οἰκονομηθεῖσιν. The Ben. note points out that this
expression of gratitude to the troubles themselves is of a niece
with the expression of gratitude to enemies in the De. Sp. S.
vi. 8 12. (Ρ. 8), and concludes: ‘* Sic etiam Machabeorum mater
apud Gregorium Naztanzenum orat. xxtt. att se tyranno
pene gratias agere.”


your proof under trial would never have
been known. To all that earnestly strive
for any good, the affliction they endure for
the sake of their hope in God is like a fur-
nace to gold.’ |

Rouse ye, then, most excellent sirs, that
the labours you are about to undertake may
not be unworthy of those which you have
already sustained, and that on a firm foun-
dation you may be seen putting a yet wor-
thier finish. Rouse ye, that ye may stand
round about the shepherd of the Church,
when the Lord grants him to be seen on
his own throne, telling each of you in his
turn, some good deed done for the sake of
the Church of God. On the great day of
the Lord, each, according to the propor-
tion of his labours, shall receive his re-
compense from the munificent Lord. By
remembering me and writing to me as often
as you can, you will be doing justice in
sending mea reply, and will moreover give
me very great pleasure, by sending me in
writing a plain token of a voice which it is
delightful to me to hear.


LETTER CLXXXIV.’


To Eustathius, bishop of Himmeria.®


OrRPHANHOOD is, I know, very dismal, and
entails a great deal of work, because it de-
prives us of those who are set over us.
Whence I conclude that you do not write to
me, because you are depressed at what has
happened to you, and at the same time are
now very much occupied in visiting the
folds of Christ, because they are attacked
on every side by foes. But every grief finds
consolation in communication with sympa-
thising friends. Do then, I beg you, as
often as you can, write to me. You will
both refresh yourself by speaking to me,
and you will comfort me by letting me hear
from you. I shall endeavour to do the same
to you, as often as my work lets me. Pray
yourself, and entreat all the brotherhood
earnestly to importune the Lord, to grant
us one day release from the present distress.


LETTER CLXXXvV.*
To Theodotus, bishop of Berea.’


ALtTHouGH you do not write to me, I
know that there is recollection of me in
your heart; and this I infer, not because 1


1 cf. Prov, xvii. 3 and xxvii. 21. 2 Placed in 374. Ὁ

3 Nothing more is known of this Eustathius. Himmeria 15
in Osrhoene. : 4 Placed in 374.

δ Nothing more is known of this Theodotus.


LEITERS.


223


am worthy of any favourable recollection,
but because your soul is rich in abundance
of tove. Yet, as far .as im you lies, use
whatever opportunities you have of writing
tome, to the end that E:may both be
cheered by hearing news of you, and have
occasion to send you tidings of myself.
This is the only mode of communication for
those who live far apart. Do not let us
deprive one another of it, so far as our
labours will permit. But I pray God that
Wwe may meet in person, that our love may
be increased, and that we may multiply
gratitude to our Master for His greater
boons.


LETTER» CLXXXVI?
To Antipater, the governor?


PHILOSOPHY is an excellent thing, if only
for this, that it even heals its disciples at
small cost; for, in philosophy, the same
thing is both dainty and healthy fare. I
am told that you have recovered your fail-
ing appetite by pickled cabbage. Formerly
I used to dislike it, both on account of the
proverb,*® and because it reminded me of the
poverty that went with it. Now, however,
I am driven to change my mind. I laugh
at the proverb when I see that cabbage is
such a ** good nursing mother of men,” * and
has restored our governor to the vigour of
youth. For the future I shall think nothing
like cabbage, not even Homer’s lotus,’ not
even that ambrosia,® whatever it was, which


fed the Olympians.


LETTER CLXXXVII.
Antipater to Basil.


‘¢ TwicE cabbage is death,” says the un-
kind proverb. I, however, though I have
called for it often, shall die once. Yes:
even though I had never called for it at all!
If you do die anyhow, don’t fear to eat a
delicious relish, unjustly reviled by the
proverb! 7

LETTER: CEXXXVIIi"*


(CANONICA PRIMA.)


To Amphilochius, concerning the Canons.®


‘¢ EvEN a fool,” it is said, ‘* when he asks
9 9


iL. * Placed in 374. 2 cf, Letter cxxxvii.

3 The Greek proverb was δὶς κράμβη θάνατος, vide Politian.
Miscel. 33. cf. ** Occidtt miseros crambe repetita magtstros.”
Juv. vii. 154.

4 κουροτρόφος. Ithaca is ἀγαθὴ κουροτρόφος, because it bore

and bred hardy men. Od. ix. 27.

8 Od. 1X, G3. 6 Od. v. 93. 7 Placed in 347.

ὁ In this letter Basil replies to several questions of Amphilo-
chius concerning the Canons, and also concerning the inter-
pretation of some passages of Holy Scripture. Maran dates
it at the end of 374.


questions,” is counted wise.’ But when a
wise man asks questions, he makes even a
fool wise. And this, thank God, is my
case, as often as I receive a letter from your
industrious self. For we become more
learned and wiser than we were before,
merely by asking questions, because we are
taught many things which we did not know ;
and our anxiety to answer them acts as a
teacher to us. Assuredly at the present
time, though I have never before paid at-
tention to the points you raise, I have been
forced to make accurate enquiry, and to turn
over in my mind both whatever I have
heard from the elders, and all that I have
been taught in conformity with their lessons.

I. As to your enquiry about the Cathari,’
a statement has already been made, and you
have properly reminded me that it is right
to follow the custom obtaining in each
region, because those, who at the time gave
decision on these points, held different opin-
ions concerning their baptism. But the
baptism of the Pepuzeni*® seems to me to
have no authority ; and I am astonished how
this can have escaped Dionysius,’ acquainted
as he was with the canons. The old au-
thorities decided to accept that baptism
which in nowise errs from the faith. Thus
they used the names of heresies, of schisms,
and of unlawful congregations.’ By hereszes
they meant men who were altogether broken
off and alienated in matters relating to the
actual faith ; by schzsms° men who had sep-
arated for some ecclesiastical reasons and
questions capable of mutual solution; by
unlawful congregations gatherings held by
disorderly presbyters or bishops or by unin-


1. Prov. Xvii. 28, lax:

2.27.6. the followers of Novatian. cf. Eusebius vi. 43. cf.
De Sp. Scto, ch. x. p. 17 and note.

8 Or Pepuziani, another name for the Montanists. ‘* Epiph-
anius may safely be disregarded, who, treating of the Mon-
tanists, in the 451} section of his work on heresies, treats of the
Pepuziani, in the ggth, as a kindred, but distinct, sect” Dr.
Salmon in D.C. δ. iv. 303. The name is derived from Pepuza
in Western Phrygia, the Montanist, or Cataphrygian, “ Jeru-
salem.” (Eus. H.£.v. 18.)

4 7,6. of Alexandria. Jerome ( Vir. ‘lust. 1xix.) says that
he agreed with Cyprian and the African Synod on the rebap-
tizing of heretics. The Ben. note says: “ Videtur hac in re
major auctoritas Basilio attribuenda quam Hieronymo. Plus
opere insumpserat Basilius in ea re examinanda.”

5 παρασυναγωγή.

6 Archbp. Trench (N.7*. Syz. 330) quotes Augustine (Coz.
Crescon. Don. ii. 7): ““ Schisma est recens congregationis ex
aliquaé sententiarum diversitate dissensio ; heresis autem
schisma inveteratum,” and Jerome (£p.ad Tit. iii.10) :“*/uter
heresim οὐ schisma hoc esse arbitrantur, quod heresis per-
versum dogma habeat ; schisma propter episcopalem dissen-
sionem ab ecclesia separetur ; quod quidem in principio aliqua
ex parte intelligt queat. Caeterum nullum schisma non sibi
aliquam confingit heresim, ut recte ab ecclesia recessisse
videatur.”

To these may be added Aug. (Quest. in Matt. xi. 2) : “ Solet
autem etiam queri schismatict quid ab hereticts distent, et
hoc tnventri quod schismaticos non fides diversa faciat sed
communionis disrupta soctetas. Sed utrum inter zizania
numerandi sint dubitari potest, magis autem videntur spicts
corruptis esse similiores, vel palets artstarum fractis, vel
scissis et de segete abruptis.”


224


BASIL.


structed laymen. As, for instance, if a man | tanus or Priscilla? For those who have not


be convicted of crime, and prohibited from
discharging ministerial functions, and then
refuses to submit to the canons, but arro-
gates to himself episcopal and ministerial
rights, and persons leave the- Catholic
Church and join him, this is unlawful as-
sembly. To disagree with members of the
Church about repentance, is schzsm. In-
stances of heresy are those of the Maniche-
ans, of the Valentinians, of the Marcionites,
and of these Pepuzenes; for with them there
comes in at once their disagreement con-
cerning the actual faith in God. So it
seemed good to the ancient authorities to
reject the baptism of heretics altogether, but
to admit that of schismatics,' on the ground
that they still belonged to the Church.

As to those who assembled in unlawful
congregations, their decision was to join
them again to the Church, after they had
been brought to a better state by proper
repentance and rebuke, and so, in many
cases, when men in orders? had rebelled
with the disorderly, to receive them on their
repentance, into the same rank. Now the
Pepuzeni are plainly heretical, for, by un-
lawfully and shamefully applying to Mon-
tanus and Priscilla the title of the Paraclete,
they have blasphemed against the Holy
Ghost. They are, therefore, to be con-
demned for ascribing divinity to men; and
for outraging the Holy Ghost by comparing
Him to men. They are thus also liable to
eternal damnation, inasmuch as blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost admits of no forgive-
ness. What ground is there, then, for the
acceptance of the baptism of men who bap-
tize into the Father and the Son and Mon-


1 τῶν ἀποσχισάντων, ὡς ETL ἐκ τῆς ἐκκλησίας ὄντων.

The Ben. note is: ‘* Quod autem addit Basilius, ut aduc
ex Ecclesia exsistentium, zon tdctrco addit quod schismaticos
in Ecclesie membris numeraret. Ilitus verba st quis in
delertorem partem raptat, facilis et expedita responsiv, Nam
sub finemhujus,canonts de Encratitis ipsts, td est, de herettcts
incarnationem et Dei singularitatem negantibus, ait sibi non
Jun tntegrum esse eos qui huic secte conjunct? sunt ab Ecclesia
Separare, guia duos eorum episcopos sine baptismo ac sine
nova ordinatione receperat. Nemo autem suspicabitur Basil-
tum ejusmodi hereticos ab Ecclesia altenissimos non judt-
casse. Quare quidquid schismaticts tribuit, in sola baptismt
soctetate positum est. Nam cum Cyprianus et Firmilianus
schismaticos et hereticos tta ab Ecclesia distractos crederent,
ut nthil prorsus ad eos ex fontibus Ecclesia perflueret ; Basit-
ws hutc sententie non assentitur, et in schismaticts quia
fidem Ecclesia retinent, vestigium quoddam agnoscit necesst-
tudints et soctetatis cum Ecclesia, tta ut valida sacramen-
torum administratio ab Ecclesia ad illos permanare possit.
Hlinc sibt integrum negat detestandos hereticos ab Ecclesia
separare, quorum baptisma ratum habuerat. Idem docent duo
prestantissint unittatis defensores. Optatus et Augustinus.
Quod enim scissum est, zzgurt Optatus 1ib. fit. 71. 0, ex parte
divisum est, non ex toto: cum constet merito, quia nobis et
vobis ecclesiastica una est conversatio, et si hominum litigant
mentes, non litigant sacramenta. Vid. lib. 7v.n. 2. “Sic etiam
Augustinus lib. i. De baptismo n. 3: Itaque isti (heretic? et
schismatrc?) in quibusdam rebus nobiscum sunt: in quibus
autem noliscum non sunt, ut veniendo accipiant, vel red-
eundo recipiant, adhortamur. Vyd. 718. tri. n. 26. Sic ex
Basilio heretict nobiscum sunt quoad baptisma.”

2 τοὺς cv 30940. cf. note on p. 218.


been baptized into the names delivered to
us have not been baptized at all. So that,
although this escaped the vigilance of the
great Dionysius, we must by no means
imitate his error. The absurdity of the
position is obvious in a moment, and evi-
dent to all who are gifted with even a small
share of reasoning capacity.

The Cathari are schismatics; “but it
seemed good to the ancient authorities, I
mean Cyprian and our own’ Firmilianus, to
reject all these, Cathari, Encratites,* and
Hydroparastate,* by one common condem-
nation, because the origin of separation arose
through schism, and those who had aposta-
tized from the Church had no longer on them
the grace of the Holy Spirit, for it ceased to
be imparted when the continuity was broken.
The first separatists had received their ordi-
nation from the Fathers, and possessed the
spiritual gift by the laying on of their hands.
But they who were broken off had become
laymen, and, because they are no longer able
to confer on others that grace of the Holy
Spirit from which they themselves are fallen
away, they had no authority either to bap-
tize or to ordain. And therefore those who
were from time to time baptized by them,
were ordered, as though baptized by laymen,
to come to the church to be purified by the
Church’s true baptism. Nevertheless, since
it has seemed to some of those of Asia that,
for the sake of management of the majority,
their baptism should be accepted, let it be
accepted. We must, however, perceive the
iniquitous action of the Encratites; who, in
order to shut themselves out from being re-
ceived back by the Church have endeavoured
for the future to anticipate readmission by a
peculiar baptism of their own, violating, in
this manner even their own special practice.*

1 As being oneof Basil’s predecessors in the see of Czsarea.

2% Hoc Encratitarum facinore non corrupta essentialis
baptismi forma. Sed nove quedam adjecte cerimonia.”
Ben. Ed

3 7,6. those who used water instead of wine in the Eucharist,
as Tatian and his followers. cf.Clem. Al., Strom. i. 19 and
Cyprian. F#. Ixiii. 3

4The Ben. note points out that the improper proceeding of
the Encratites consisted not in any corruption of the baptismal
formula, but in the addition of certain novel ceremonies, and
proceeds: ‘* Nam in canone 47 sic eos loquentes inducit. In
Patrem et Filium et Spiritum baptizati sumus. //i7c eorum
baptisma ratum habet, st qua incidertt magni momenti causa.
Quod autem ait hoc facinus eos tncripere, ut reditum sibi in
Ecclesiam intercludant, videtur id prima specie tn eam sen-
tentiam accipiendum, guast Encratite baptisma suum ea
mente immutassent, ut Catholicos ad tllud rejicitendum inci-
tarent, sicque plures in secta continerct odium et fuga novi
baptismatis. Abhorrebat enim ab omniumanimts tteratus 4
tismus, ut pluribus exemplis probat Augustinus, lib. v. De
baptismo, n. 6. WVidetur ergo prima specie Encratitis, ea,


quam dixt, exstitisse causa, cur baptismum immutarent.
Atqgue tta hund locum interpretatur Tillemontius, tom. 1.


p. 028. Sic etiam illius exemplo interpretatus sum in Pref.


nove Cypriant operum editiont premissa cap. 4. p.12. Sed
hutc interpretation? non conventt cum hts que addit Basilius.
Verert enim se stgnificat ne Catholict, dum. Encratitas ab
hac baptismi tmmutatione deterrere voluni, nimium restricts


LETGERS.


225


My opinion, therefore, is that nothing being
distinctly laid down concerning them, it is
our duty to reject their baptism, and that in
the case of any one who has received bap-
tism from them, we should, on his coming to
the church, baptize him. If, however, there
is any likelihood of this being detrimental to
general discipline, we must fall back upon
custom, and follow the fathers who have
ordered what course we are to pursue.
For Iam under some apprehension lest, in
our wish to discourage them from baptizing,
we may, through the severity of our decision,
be a hindrance to those who are being saved.
If they accept our baptism, do not allow this
to distress us. Weare by no means bound
to return them the same favour, but only
strictly to obey canons. On every ground
let it be enjoined that those who come to us
from their baptism be anointed * in the pres-
ence of the faithful, and only on these terms
approach the mysteries. J am aware that I
have received into episcopal rank Izois and
Saturninus from the Encratite following.’ I
am precluded therefore from separating from
the Church those who have been united to
their company, inasmuch as, through my
acceptance of tice bishops, I have promulgated
a kind of canon of communion with them.

II. The woman who purposcly destroys
her unborn child is guilty of murder. With
us there is no nice enquiry as to its being
formed or unformed. In this case it is not
only the being about to be born who is vindi-
cated, but the woman in her attack upon
herself; because in most cases women who
make such attempts dic. The destruction
of the embryo is an additional crime, a second
murder, at all events if we regard it as done
with intent. The punishment, however, of
these women should not be for life, but for
the term of ten years. And let their treat-
ment depend not on mere lapse of time, but
on the character of their repentance.

11. A deacon who commits fornication
after his appointment to the diaconate is to
be deposed. But, after he has been rejected
stint et severt in eorum bahlismo rejicien io.
Catholict tardiores‘ad ejus modi bapltisma Encratitas futuros,
st tllud Catholict ratum habere nollent nedum ἐρεῖ Encra-
tite baptismatis tmmutatronem eo consilio induxer int, ut ejus-
modt baptisma a Catholicis reficeretur. Quamobrem hec
verba, ut reditum sibi in Ecclesiam intercludant, 202 constlium
et propositum Encratitarum destgnant, sed tncommodum
guod ex eorum facinore conseguebatur; wvelut st dicamus
aliquem scelus admittere, ut @ternam sibt damnationem
accersat,”® -

1cf. note on p. 42. St. Cyprian (£p.1xx.) says that heretics
who have notrue altar cannot have oil sanctified by the altar.
“Gregory of Nazianzus, Orat. (xlviii in Jul.) speaks of oil
sanctified or consecrated on the spiritual or divine table;
Optatus of Milevis (c. Doz. vii. 102) says that this ointinent
is compounded (conditur) in the name of Christ; and the
Psendo-Dionysius (De Hierarch. Eccles. α. 4) mentions the
use of the sign of the cross in the consecration of it.” D.C.A.


i. 355-
2 This is the only known reference to these two bishops.


and ranked among the laity, he is not to be
excluded from communion. For there is an
ancient canon that those who have fallen
from their degree are to be subjected to this
kind of punishment alone.’

Herein, as I suppose, the ancient authori-
ties followed the old rule ** Thou shalt not
avenge twice for the same thing.” ” There
is this further reason too, that laymen, when
expelled from the place of the faithful, are
from time to time restored to the rank whence
they have fallen; but the deacon undergoes
once for all the lasting penalty of deposition.
Hlis deacon’s orders not being restored to
him, they rested at this one punishment. So
far is this as regards what depends on law
laid down. [But generally a truer remedy is
the departure from sin. Wherefore that man
will give me full proof of his cure who,
after rejecting grace for the sake of the indul-
gence of the flesh, has then, through bruis-
ing of the flesh*® and the enslaving of it * by
means of self control, abandoned the pleas-
ures whereby he was subdued. We ought
therefore to know both what is of exact pre-
scription and what is of custom; and, in
cases which do not admit of the highest
treatment, to follow the traditional direction.

IV. Inthecase of trigamy and polygamy
they laid down the same rule, in propor-
tion, as in the case of digamy; namely one
year for digamy (some authorities say two
years) ; for trigamy men are separated for
three and often for four years; but this is no
longer described as marriage at all, but as
polygamy; nay rather as limited fornication.
It is for this reason that the Lord said to the
woman of Samaria, who had had five hus-
bands, ‘*he whom thou now hast is not thy
husband.” ° He does not reckon those who
had exceeded the limits of a second marriage
as worthy of the title of husband or wife. In
cases of trigamy we have accepted a seclu-
sion of five years, not by the canons, but fol-
lowing the precept of our predecessors.


‘Such offenders ought not to be altogether


prohibited from the privileges of the Church ;


eae they should be considered deserving of hear-


ing after two or three years, and afterwards
of being permitted to stand in their place;
but they must be kept from the communion
of the good gift, and only restored to the


1% Pespicit, nt fallor,ad canonem 25 apostolorum,ad quem
Balsamon et Zonaras observant nonnulla esse peccata, quibus
excommunicatio, non solum depositio, infligitur; velut st quis
pecunta, vel magistratus potentia, sacerdotium assequatur, ut
sancitur Can. 29 et 30.” Ben note. 2 Nahum i. 9g, LXX.

3 Duo veteres libri ovvtpispov τῆς Kapdias.” Ben. note.

4 cf 4: Cor. 1X.. 27+

5 John iv. 18. For the more usual modern _ interpretation
that the sixth union was an unlawful one, cf. Bengel. Matri-
montum hoc sextum non erat legitimum, vel non consummatum,
aut desertio aliudve impedimentum tntercesserat, ex altera
utra parte.


226


BASIE.


place of communion after showing some fruit
of repentance.

V. Heretics repenting at death ought to
be) received; yet. to be received, of course,
not indiscriminately, but on trial of exhibi-
tion of true repentance and of producing fruit
in evidence of their zeal for salvation.’

VI. The fornication of canonical persons
is not to be reckoned as wedlock, and their
union is to be completely dissolved, for this
is both profitable for the security of the
Church and will prevent the heretics from
having a ground of attack against us, as
though we induced men to join us by the at-
traction of liberty to sin.

VII. Abusers of themselves with man-
kind, and with beasts, as also murderers, wiz-
ards, adulterers, and idolaters, are deserving
of the same punishment. Whatever rule you
have in the case of the rest, observe also in
their case. ‘There can, however, be no doubt
that we ought to receive those who have re-
pented of impurity committed in ignorance
for thirty years.” In this case there is
ground for forgiveness in ignorance, in the
spontaneity of confession, and the long ex-
tent ‘of time. ‘Perhaps - they shave’ been
delivered to Satan for a whole age of man
that they may learn not to behave unseemly ; ὅ
wherefore order them to be received without
delay, specially if they shed tears to move
your mercy, and shew a manner of living
worthy of compassion.*

VIII. The man who ina rage has taken


1 τῶν κανονικῶν. The Greek is of either gender. The Ben.
note is* Clericos stve eos gui tn canone recensentur hac voce
designart hactenus extstimarunt Basilit interpretes, ac tpst
etiam Zonaras et Balsamon. Sed ut canonicas sive sacras
virgines tnterpreter, plurimis rationum momentis adducor:
1. Basilius hoc nomine clericos appellare non solet, sed sacras
tirgines, ut perspict potest ex epistolis 52 et 175 3 2. prescrip-
tum Basilit non conventt tn clericos, quorum nonnullis,
nempe lectortbus et alits ejus modt venia dubatur ineundt
matrimonit, guanvis tn canone recenserentur: 3. prohibet
Bastlius ejusmodt stupra que honesto matrimonit nomtne
pretext solebant. Atid non inconcessum erat matrimontum,
alios vero matrimonium post ordinationem intrenulla prorsus
Ecclesia patiebatur, aut certe matrimontt pretium erat de-
positio. Contra virginibus nubentibus non longior pena
pluribus tn locis imponebatur, quam digamis, ut perspicitur
ex canone 18,ubt Bastlius hance consuetudinem abrogat, ac
virginum matrimonta instar adultertt existimat.

2Sothe MSS. But the Ben. note points out that there must
be some error, if asin knowingly committed was punished by
excommunication for fifteen years (Canons lviii., Ixii., Ixiii.),
and one unwittingly committed by a punishment of twice the
duration. Sof. 1 Mim. i, 20.

4 The Ben. note continues : “ Deinde vero testatur Bastlius
eos fere hominis extatem satane traditos fursse. At @tas
homints (γενεά) s@epe annorum vigintt spatio extstimatur ;
velut cum ait Dionysius Alexandrinus apud Eusebium, lib.
wit. cap. 21. Tsraelitas in deserto futsse duabus etatibus.
1256 Basilius tn Epistola 201, que scripta est anno 375, Neo-
cesartenses tncusat quod sibi jam totam fere hominis etatem
succenseant ; quos tamen non tta pridem amicos habuerat;
ac anno 56S, Musontit morte affitctos litteris amicissimis con-
solatus fuerat. Seculum apud Latinos non semper stricte
sumitur ; velut cum att Hieronymus in Epist. 27 ad Marcel-
lun, 72 Christi verbts explicandis per tanta jam szcula
tantorum ingenia sudasse; vel cum auctor libri De rebaptis-
mate 72 Cyprianum tactto nomine tnvehitur, quod adversus
prisca consulta post tot seculorum tantam seriem nunc pri-
mum repente sine ratione ‘msurgat, ~p. 357. De hoc ergo
triginta annorum numero nou paucos deducendos esse credid-
ertm,


up a hatchet against his own wife is a mur-
derer. Butit is what I should have expected
from your intelligence that you should very
properly remind me to speak on these points
more fully, because a wide distinction must be
drawn between cases where there is and where
there is not intent. A case of an act purely
unintentional, and widely removed from the
purpose of the agent, is that of a man who
throws a stone at a dog or a tree, and hits a
man. ‘The object was to drive off the beast
or to shake down the fruit. The chance
comer falls fortuitously in the way of the
blow, and the act is unintentional. Unin-
tentional too is the act of any one who
strikes another with a strap or a flexible
stick, for the purpose of chastising him, and
the man who is being beaten dies. In this
case it must be taken into consideration that
the object was not to kill, but to improve, the
offender. Further, among unintentional acts
must be reckoned the case of a man in a
fight who when warding off an enemy’s
attack with cudgel or hand, hits him without
mercy in some vital part, so as to injure him,
though not quite to killhim. This, however,
comes very near to the intentional; for
the man who employs such a weapon in
self defence, or who strikes without mercy,
evidently does not spare his opponent, be-
cause he is mastered by passion. In like
manner the case of any one who uses a
heavy cudgel, or a stone too big for a man to
stand, is reckoned among the unintentional,
because he does not do what he meant: in
his rage he deals such a blow as to kill his
victim, yet all he had in his mind was to
give him a thrashing, not to do him to
death. If, however, a man uses a sword,
or anything of the kind, he has no excuse;
certainly none if he throws his hatchet.
For he does not strike with the hand, so that
the force of the blow may be within his
own control, but throws, so that from the
weight and edge of the iron, and the force
of the throw, the wound cannot fail to be
fatal.

On the other hand acts done in the attacks
of war or robbery are distinctly intentional,
and admit of no doubt. Robbers kill for
greed, and to avoid conviction. Soldiers
who inflict death in war do so with the
obvious purpose not of fighting, nor chastis-
ing, but of killing their opponents. And
if any one has concocted some magic philtre
for some other reason, and then causes death,
I count this as intentional. Women frequently
endeavour to draw men to love them by incan-
tations and magic knots, and give them drugs »
which dull their intelligence. Such women,


LETTERS.


225


when they cause death, though the result of
their action may not be what they intended,
are nevertheless, on account of their pro-
ceedings being magical and prohibited, to
be reckoned among intentional homicides.
Women also who administer drugs to cause
abortion, as well as those who take poisons
to destroy unborn children, are murderesses.
So much on this subject.

IX. The sentence of the Lord that it is
unlawful to withdraw from wedlock, save on
account of fornication,’ applies, according
to the argument, to men and women alike.
Custom, however, does not so obtain. Yet,
in relation with women, very strict expres-
sions are to be found; as, for instance, the
words of the apostle ‘* He which is joined to
a harlot is one body”? and of Jeremiah, If
a wife ‘‘ become another man’s shall he re-
turn unto her again? shall not that land be
greatly polluted?” * And again, ** He that
hath an adulteress is a fool and impious.” *
Yet custom ordains that men who commit
adultery and are in fornication be retained by
their wives. Consequently I do not know if
the woman who lives with the man who has
been dismissed can properly be called an
adulteress; the charge in this case attaches
to the woman who has put away her hus-
band, and depends upon the cause for which
she withdrew from wedlock.® In the
case of her being beaten, and_ refusing
to submit, it would be better for her to en-
dure than to be separated from her husband ;
in the case of her objecting to pecuniary loss,
even here she would not have sufficient
ground. If her reason is his living in forni-
cation we do not find this in the custom of
the church; but from an unbelieving hus-
band a wife is commanded not to depart,
but to remain, on account of the uncertainty
of the issue. ‘* For what knowest thou, O
wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband?” ®
Here then the wife, if she leaves her husband
and goes to another, is an adulteress. But
the man who has been abandoned is pardon-
able, and the woman who lives with such a
man isnot condemned. But if the man who


1Matt. v. 32. S 76 ΤΙ τ,

2; Cor. vi. 16. 4 Prov. xviii. 22, LXX.

5 The Ben. note is, Seguttur in hoc canone Basilius Ro-
manas leges. quas tamen fatetur cum evangelio minus consen-
tire. Lex Constantini jubet in repudio mittendo a femtna hec
sola crimina tnquirt, st homicidam, vel medicamentarium, vel
sepulcrorum dissolutorem maritum suum esse probavertt, At
. eadem lege virts conceditur, ut adulteras uxores dimittant.
Aliud discrimen hoc tn canone uxores tnter et maritos ponitur,
guod uxor injuste dimissa.si ab alia ducatur, adultert: notam
non effugiat; dimissus autem tnjuste maritus nec adulter sit,
st allam ducat, nec que ab co ducrtur, adultera. Caterum
Bastlius ante episcopatum eodem jure uxorem ac maritum esse
censebat. Nam in Moral. reg. 73 statuit virum ab uxore, aut
uxorem @ viro non debere separart, nist quis deprehendatur
tn adulterto. Utrique pariter interdicit novis nupttis, sive
repudient, sive repudientur. 6 1 Cor, vii, 16,


has deserted his wife goes to another, he is
himself an adulterer because he makes her
commit adultery ; and the woman who lives
with him is an adulteress, because she has
caused another woman’s husband to come
over to her.

X. Those who swear that they will not
receive ordination, declining orders upon
oath, must not be driven to perjure them-
selves, although there does seem to be a
canon making concessions to such persons.
Yet I have found by experience that per-
jurers never turn out well." Account must
however be taken of the form of the oath,
its terms, the frame of mind in which it was
taken, and the minutest additions made to
the terms, since, if no ground of relief can
anywhere be found, such persons must be
dismissed. The case, however, of Severus,
I mean of the presbyter ordained by him,
does seem to me to allow of relief of this
kind, if you will permit it. Give directions
for the district placed under Mestia, to which
the man was appointed, to be reckoned under
Vasoda. Thus he will not forswear himself
by not departing from the place, and Longi-
nus, having Cyriacus with him, will not leave
the Church unprovided for, nor himself be
cuilty of neglect of work.’ I moreover
shall not be held guilty of taking action in
contravention of any canons by making a
concession to Cyriacus who had sworn that
he would remain at Mindana and yet accepted
the transfer. [115 return will be in accordance
with his. oath;-and. .shis' «obedience Ao, the
arrangement will not be reckoned against
him as perjury, because it was not added to
his oath that he would not go, even a short
time, from Mindana, but would remain there
for the future. Severus, who pleads forget-
fulness, I shall pardon, only telling him that
One who knows what is secret will not over-
look the ravaging of His Church by a man
of such a character; a man who originally
appoints uncanonically, then imposes oaths in
violation of the Gospel, then tells a man to


1 The Ben. note refers to the case of Dracontius, who had
sworn that he would escape if he were ordained bishop, and 55
did; but was urged by Athanasius to discharge the duties of
his diocese, notwithstanding his oath.

2 On this obscure passage the Ben. note is: Longinus pres-
byter erat in agro Mestia subjecto. Sed cum 1s dcepositus essit
ob aliquod delictum, ac forte honorem sacerdotti retinerct, ut
nonnumguam ficbat, Severus episcopus in ejus locum transtulit
Cyriacum, quem antea Mindants ordinaverat, ac jurare
coegerat 56 Mindanis mansurum. Nihil hacin re statut posse
videbatur, quod non in magnam aliquam dificultatem ticur-
vrerct. Nam st in agro Mesti@ subjecto Cyriacus remanerct,
perjurti culpam sustincbat. Si rediret Mindana, ager Mestia
subjectus presbytero carebat, atque hujus tncommodi culpa re-
dundabat in caput Longint, quit ob delictum eet Gah
Quid tgitur Basilius? Utrigue occurrit tncommodo; Jubct
agrum, gut Mestie subjectus erat Vasodts subjict, td est loco,
cut subjecta erant Mindana. Hoc ex remedio duo consequebatur
Basilius, ut et ager tlle presbytero non careret, et Cyriacus tbi
remanens Mindana tamen redire censeretur, cum jam hic locus
eidem ac Mindana chorepiscopo pareret.


228


BASEL.


perjure himself in the matter of his transfer,
and last of all lies in pretended forgetfulness.
I am no judge of hearts; I only judge by
what I hear; let us leave vengeance to the
Lord, and ourselves pardon the common
human error of forgetfulness, and receive
the man without question.

XI. The man who is guilty of uninten-
tional homicide has given sufficient satisfac-
tion in eleven years. We shall, without
doubt, observe what is laid down by Moses
in the case of wounded men, and shall not
hold a murder to have been committed in
the case of a man who lies down after he
has been struck, and walks again leaning on
his staff! If, however, he does not rise
again after he has been struck, nevertheless,
from there being no intent to kill, the striker
is a homicide, but an unintentional homicide.

XII. The canon absolutely excludes dig-
amists from the ministry.”

XIII. Homicide in war is not reckoned by
our Fathers as homicide; I presume from
their wish to make concession to men fight-
ing on behalf of chastity and true religion.
Perhaps, however, it is well to counsel that
those whose hands are not clean only abstain
from communion for three years.°

XIV. A taker of usury, if he consent to
spend his unjust gain on the poor, and to be
rid for the future of the plague of covetous-
ness, may be received into the ministry.*

XV. 1 am astonished at your requiring
exactitude in Scripture, and arguing that
there is something forced in the diction of
the interpretation which gives the meaning


1 Exod. xxi. 19,

2 Ap. Can. xiii. 14: “Τί is clear from the Philosophumena
of Hippolytus (ix. 12) that by the beginning of tie 3d century
the rule of monogamy for the clergy was well established,
since‘he complains that in the days of Callistus ‘ digamist and
trigamist bishops, and priests and deacons, began to be ad-
mitted into the clergy.’ ‘Lertullian recognises the rule as to
the clergy. Thus in hig De Exhortatione Castitatts (c, 7) he
asks scornfully; ‘Being a digamist, dust thou baptize? Dost
thou make the offerinu?*” Dict. C.A.i. 552.

Vide also Canon Bright, Notes on the Canons of the first
four General Councils. On Can. Nic. viii. p. 27.

8’ The Ben. note quotes Balsamon, Zonaras, and Alexius
Aristenus as remarking on this that Basil gives advice, not
direction, and regards the hands, not the hearts, of soldiers as
defiled; and as recalling that this canon was quoted in oppo-
sition to the Emperor Phocas when he wished to reckon
soldiers as martyrs. The canon was little regarded, as being
contrary to general Christian sentiment.

cf. Athan. Ep. xviii. p. 557 of this edition: **In war it is
lawful and praiseworthy to destroy the enemy; accordingly
not only are they who have distinguished themselves in the
field held worthy of great honours, but monuments are put up
proclaiming their achievements.”

4cf.Can. Nic. xvii. Canon Bright (On the Canons, etc.,
p. 56) remarks: “Τῇ must be remembered that interest, called
τόκος and fenus, as the product of the principal, was associated
in the early stages of socivty, —in Greece and Rome as well
as in Palestine, — with the notion of undue profit extorted by
a rich lender from the needy borrower (see Grote, Hist. Gr.
ii. 311, H.; Arnold, ///st. Rome i. 252; Mommsen, fist. R. i.
291). Hence Tacitus says, ‘ sane vetus urbi fenebre malum,
et seditionum discordtarumque creberrima causa’ (Ann. vi.
16), and Gibbon calls usury ‘the inveterate grievance of the
city, abolished by the clamours of the people, revived by their
wants and idleness.’ ” (v. 314.)


of the original, but does not exactly render
what is meAnt by the Hebrew word. Yet I
must not carelessly pass by the question
started by an enquiring mind. At the crea-
tion of the world, birds of the air and the
fishes of the sea had the same origin; ! for
both kinds were produced from the water.’
The reason is that both have the same char-
acteristics. The latter swim in the water,
the former in the air. They are therefore
mentioned together. The form of expres-
sion 15 not used without distinction, but of
all that lives in the water it is used very
properly. The birds of the air and the fishes
of the sea are subject to man; and not they
alone, but all that passes through the paths
of the sea. For every water-creature is not a
fish, as for instance the sea monsters, whales,
sharks, dolphins, seals, even sea-horses, sea-
dogs, saw-fish, sword-fish, and sea-cows;
and, if you like, sea nettles, cockles and all
hard-shelled creatures of whom none are fish,
and all pass through the paths of the sea; so
that there are three kinds, birds of the air,
fishes of the sea, and all water-creatures
which are distinct from fish, and pass through
the paths of the sea.

XVI. Naaman was not a great man with
the Lord, but with his lord; that is, he was
one of the chief princes of the King of the
Syrians.* Read your Bible carefully, and
you will find the answer to your question
there,


LETFER ‘CLAXXIX:*


To Lustathius the physician?


Humanity is the regular business of all
you who practise as physicians. And, in
my opinion, to put your science at the head
and front of life’s pursuits is to decide
reasonably and rightly. This at all events
seems to be the case if man’s most precious
possession, life, is painful and not worth
living, unless it be lived in health, and if for
health we are dependent on your skill. In
your own case medicine is seen, as it were,
with two right hands; you enlarge the
accepted limits of philanthropy by not confin-
ing the application of your skill to men’s
bodies, but by attending also to the cure of
the diseases of their souls. It is not only in
accordance with popular report that I thus
write. JI am moved by the personal experi-


2 Ps, viii. 8. 2 Gen. i. 20 and 21. 8 2 Kings v. I.


4 Placed in 374 or the a rae of 375. ;

5 cf. Letter cli. This doctrinal statement is also found
among the works of Gregory of Nvssa; but is more probably
to be attributed to Basil. Vide Tillem. Mém, Ecc. ix. 678.


EEPTERS.


229


ence which 1 have had on many occasions,
and toa remarkable degree at the present
time, in the midst of the unspeakable wick-
edness of our enemies, which has flooded
our life like a noxious torrent. You have
most skilfully dispersed it and by pouring in
your soothing words have allayed the inflam-
mation of my heart. Having regard to the
successive and diversified attacks of my
enemies against me, I thought that I ought
to keep silence and to bear their successive
assaults without reply, and without attempt-
ing to contradict foes armed with a lie, that
terrible weapon which too often drives its
point through the heart of truth herself.
You did well in urging me not to abandon
the defence of truth, but rather to convict
our calumniators, lest haply, by the success
of lies, many be hurt.

2. In adopting an unexpected atti-
tude of hatred against me my opponents
seem to be repeating the old story in A4sop.
He makes the wolf bring certain charges
against the lamb, as being | really ashamed to
seem to kill a creature who had done him no
harm without some reasonable pretext; then
when the lamb easily rebuts the slander, the
wolf, none the less, continues his attack,
and, though defeated in equity, comes off
winner in biting. Just so with those who
seem to count hatred to me as a virtue.
They will perhaps blush to hate me without
a cause, and so invent pleas and charges
against me, without abiding by any of their
allegations, but urging as the ground of their
detestation now this, now that, and now
something else. In no single case is their
malice consistent ; but when they are baulked
in one charge they cling to another and,
foiled in this. have recourse to a third; aad
if all their accusations are scattered they do
not drop their ill-will. They say that I
preach three Gods, dinning the charge into
the ears of the mob and pressing the calumny
plausibly and persistently. Nevertheless,
truth is fighting on my side; and both in
public to all the world, and in private to all
whom I meet, I prove that I anathematize
every one who maintains three Gods and do
not even allow him to be a Christian. No
sooner do they hear this than Sabellius is
handy for them to urge against me. and it is
noised abroad that my teaching is tainted
with hiserror. Once more I hold out in my
defence my wonted weapon of truth, and
demonstrate that I shudder at Sabellianism as
much as at Judaism.

2.4 What, then?» Afterall » these. ‘efforts
were they tired? Did they leave off P Not
atall. They are charging me with innova-


tion, and base their charge on my confession
of three hypostases, and blame me for as-
serting one Goodness, one Power, one God-
head. In this they are not wide of the truth,
for I do so assert. Their complaint is that
their custom does not accept this, and that
Scripture does not agree. What is my
reply? T-.dotnot, consider «10. fair thatthe
custom which obtains among them should be
regarded as a law and rule of orthodoxy.
If custom is to be taken in proof of what is
right, then it is certainly competent for me
to put forward on my side the custom which
obtains here. Ii they “reject: thisg we sare
clearly not bound to follow them. There-
fore let God-inspired Scripture decide be-
tween us; and on whichever side be found
doctrines in harmony with the word of God,
in favour of that side will be cast the vote of
truth. What’ then is) the, charge? (sl we
points are advanced at one and the same
time in the accusations levelled against me.
I am accused on the one hand of parting the
hypostases asunder; on the other of never
using in the plural any one of the nouns
relating to the: Divinity, but of always speak-
ing in the singular number of one Goodness,
as I have already said; of one Power; one
Godhead; and soon. As to the parting of
the hypostases, there ought to be no objec-
tion nor opposition on the part of those who
assert in the case of the divine nature a dis-
tinction of essences. For it is unreasonable
to maintain three essences and to object to
three hypostases. Nothing, then, 15 left but
the charge of using words of the divine
nature in the singulars.

4. Ihave quite a little difficulty in meet-
ing the second charge. Whoever condemns
those who assert that the Godhead is one,
must of necessity agree with all who main-
tain many godheads, or with those who
maintain that there is none. No third posi-
tion is conceivable. The teaching of in-
spired Scripture does not allow of our
speaking of many godheads, but, wherever
it mentions the Godhead, speaks of it in the
singular number; as, for instance, “ὁ in him
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily.” ? And again; ‘* for the invisible
things of him from the creation of the worid
are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal power
and Godhead.”? If, then, to multiply god-
heads is the special mark of the victims of
polytheistic error, and to deny the Godhead
altogether is to fall into atheism, what sense
is there in this charge against me of con-


1 Col. ii. 9. 2 Rom. i. 20.


230


BASIL.


fessing one Godhead? But they make a
plainer disclosure of the end they have in
view ; namely, in the. case of the Father to
agree that He is God, and consenting in like
manner that the Son be honoured with the
attribute of Godhead; but to refuse to com-
prehend the Spirit, though reckoned with
Father and with Son in the idea of Godhead.
They allow that the power of the Godhead
extends from the Father to the Son, but
they divide the nature of the Spirit from the
divine glory. Against this view, to the best
of my ability, I must enter a brief defence of
my own position.

5. What, then, is) my argument?: In
delivering the Faith of Salvation to those
who are being made disciples in His doc-
trine, the Lord conjoins with Father and
with Son the Holy Spirit also. That which
is conjoined once I maintain to be conjoined
everywhere and always. ‘There is no ques-
tion here of a ranking together in one respect
and isolation in others. In the quickening
power whereby our nature is transformed
from the life of corruption to immortality, the
power of the Spirit is comprehended with
Father and with Son, and in many other
instances, as in the conception of the good,
the holy, the eternal, the wise, the right, the
supreme, the efficient, and generally in all
terms which have the higher meaning, He is
inseparably united. Wherefrom I judge it
right to hold that the Spirit, thus conjoined
with Father and Son in so many sublime and
divine senses, is never separated. Indeed 1
am unaware of any degrees of better or worse
in the terms concerning the divine nature,
nor can I imagine its being reverent and
right to allow the Spirit a participation in
those of lesser dignity, while He is judged
unworthy of the higher. For all conceptions
and terms which regard the divine are of
equal dignity one with another, in that they
do not vary in regard to the meaning of the
subject matter to which they are applied.
Our thought is not led to one subject by the
attribution of good, and to another by that of
wise, powerful, and just; mention any attri-
butes you will, the thing signified is one
and the same. And if you name God, you
mean the same Being whom you understood
by the rest of the terms. Granting, then, that
all the terms applied to the divine nature
are of equal force one with another in rela-
tion to that which they describe, one empha-
sizing one point and another another, but all
bringing our intelligence to the contempla-
tion of the same object; what ground is there
for conceding to the Spirit fellowship with
Father and Son in all other terms, and isolat-


ing Him from the Godhead alone? There
is no escape from the position that we must
either allow the fellowship here, or refuse it
everywhere. If He is worthy in every other
respect, He is certainly not unworthy in this.
If, as our opponents argue, He is too in-
significant to be allowed fellowship with
Father and with Son in Godhead, He is not
worthy to share any single one of the divine
attributes: for when the ternis are carefully
considered, and compared with one another,
by the help of the special meaning contem-
plated in each, they will be found to involve
nothing less than the title of God. A proof
of what I say lies in the fact that even many
inferior objects are designated by this name.
Nay, Holy Scripture does not even shrink
from using this term in the case of things of
a totally opposite character, as when it ap-
plies the title god to idols. ‘+ Let the gods,”
it is written, ‘* who have not made heaven
and earth, be taken away, and cast beneath
the earth;”? and again, ‘*the gods of the
nations are idols.”?*? And the witch, when
she called up the required spirits for Saul, is
said to have seen gods.* Balaam too, an
augur and seer, with the oracles in his hand,
as Scripture says, when he had got him the
teaching of the demons by his divine in-
genuity, is described by Scripture as taking
counsel with God.* From many similar
instances in Holy Scripture it may be proved
that the name of God has no pre-eminence
over other words which are applied to the
divine, since, as has been said, we find it
employed without distinction even in the
case of things of quite opposite character.
On the other hand we are taught by Scripture
that the names holy, incorruptible, righteous,
and good, are nowhere indiscriminately used
of unworthy objects. It follows, then, that
if they do not deny that the Holy Spirit is
associated withthe Son and with the Father,
in the names which are specially applied, by
the usage of true religion, to the divine
nature alone, there is no reasonable ground
for refusing to allow the same association in
the case of that word alone which, as I have
shown, is used as a recognised homonym
even of demons and idols.

6. But they contend that this title sets
forth the nature of that to which it is ap-
plied; that the nature of the Spirit is not
a nature shared in common with that of
Father and of Son; and that, for this reason,
the Spirit ought not to be allowed the com-
mon use of the name. It is, therefore, for
them to show by what means they have per-


1 Jer. x. 11, LXX.


Ἴ 2) PS. χουν. 5. 3 SAMsXXVill, 135
4 Num. xxii. 20.


Contrast Bp. Butler, Serm. vii.


LETTERS.


231


ceived this variation in the nature. If it
were indeed possible for the divine nature to
be contemplated in itself; could what is
proper to it and what is foreign to it be dis-
covered by means of visible things; we
should then certainly stand in no need of
words or other tokens to lead us to the ap-
prehension of the object of the enquiry. But
the divine nature is too exalted to be per-
ceived as objects of enquiry are perceived,
and about things which are beyond our
knowledge we reason on probable evidence.
We are therefore of necessity guided in the
investigation of the divine nature by its oper-
ations. Suppose we observe the operations
of the Father, of the Son, of the Holy Ghost,
to be different from one another, we shall
then conjecture, from the diversity of the
operations, that the operating natures are
also diterent. For it is impossible that
things which are distinct, as regards their
nature, should be associated as regards the
form of their operations ; fire does not freeze ;
ice does not warm; difference of natures im-
plies difference of the operations proceeding
from them. Grant, then, that we perceive
the operation of Father, Son and Holy Ghost
to be one and the same, in no respect show-
ing difference or variation; from this identity
of operation we necessarily infer the unity of
the nature.

The Father, the Son and’ the Holy
Ghost alike hallow, quicken, enlighten, and
comfort. No one will attribute a special
and peculiar operation of hallowing to the
operation of the Spirit, after hearing the
Saviour in the Gospel saying to the Father
about Elis disciples, sanctify them in Thy
name.’ In like manner all other operations
are equally performed, in all who are worthy
of them, by the Father and by the Son and
by the Holy Ghost; every grace and virtue,
guidance, life, consolation, change into the
immortal, the passage into freedom and all
other good things which come down to man.
Nay even the dispensation which is above us
in relation to the creature considered both in
regard to intelligence and sense, if indeed it
is possible for any conjecture concerning
what lies above us to be formed from what
we know, is not constituted apart from the
operation and power of the Holy Ghost,
every individual sharing His help in propor-
tion to the dignity and need of each. ‘Truly
the ordering and administration of beings
above our nature is obscure to our percep-
tion; nevertheless any one, arguing from
what is known to us, would find it more


1 ef, St. John xvii. 11 and 17.


reasonable to conclude that the power of the
Spirit operates even in those beings, than
that He is excluded from the government of
supramundane things. So to assert is to ad-
vance a blasphemy bare and unsupported ;
it is to support absurdity on fallacy. On the
other hand to agree that even the world
beyond us is governed by the power of the
Spirit, as well as by that of the Father and
of the Son, is to advance a contention, sup-
ported on the plain testimony of what is
seen in human life. Identity of operation in
the case of Father and of Son and of Holy
Ghost clearly proves invariability of nature.
It follows that, even if the name of Godhead
does signify nature, the community of es-
sence proves that this title is very properly
applied to the Holy Spirit.

8. Iam, however, at a loss to understand
how our opponents with all their ingenuity
can adduce the title of Godhead in proof of
nature, as though they had never heard from
Scripture that nature does not result from
institution and appointment.’ Moses was
made? a god of the Egyptians when the
divine voice said, ‘‘See 1 have made thee a
god to Pharaoh.* The title therefore does
give proof of a certain authority of oversight
or of action.’ The divine nature, on the
other hand, in all the words which are con-
trived, remains always inexplicable, as I
always teach. We have learnt that it is
beneficent, judicial, righteous, good, and
so on; and so have been taught differences
of operations. But we are, nevertheless,
unable to understand the nature of the oper-
ator through our idea of the operations. Let
any one give an account of each one of these
names, and of the actual nature to which
they are applied, and it will be found that
the definition will not in both cases be the
same. And where the definition is not iden-
tical the nature is different. There is, then, a
distinction to be observed between the es-
sence, of which no explanatory term has yet
been discovered, and the meaning of the
names applied to it in reference to some
operation or dignity. That there should be
no difference in the operations we infer from
the community of terms. But, we derive no
clear proof of variation in nature, because,
as has been said, identity of operations indi-
cates community of nature. If then God-
head be the name of an operation, we say
that the Godhead is one, as there is one
operation of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
if, however, as is popularly supposed, the
name of Godhead indicates nature, then,


1 χειροτονητή.- 2 ἐχειροτονήθη. ὃ Ex. vii. I.


232


BASIL.


since we find no variation in the nature, we
reasonably define the Holy Trinity to be of
one Godhead.


LETTER ΟΧΟΡἢ͵
To Amphilochius, bishop of Leontum.*


1. THE interest which you have shewn
in the aHairs of the Isaurian Church is only
what might have been expected from that
zeal and propriety of conduct which so con-
tinually rouses my admiration of you. The
most careless observer must at once perceive
that it is in all respects more advantageous
for care and anxiety to be divided among
several bishops. This has not escaped your
observation, and you have done well in
noting, and in acquainting me with, the posi-
tion of affairs. But it is not easy to find fit
men. While, then, we are desirous of hav-
ing the credit that comes of numbers, and
cause God’s Church to be more eflectively
administered by more officers, let us be.care-
ful lest we unwittingly bring the word into
contempt on account of the unsatisfactory
character of the men who are called to office,
and accustom the laity to indifference. You
yourself know well that the conduct of the
governed is commonly of a piece with that
of those who are set over them. Perhaps
therefore it might be better to appoint one
well approved man, though even this may
not be an easy matter, to the supervision of
the whole city, and entrust him with the
management of details on his own responsi-
bility. Only let him bea servant of God, “ἃ
workman that needeth not to be ashamed,” ὃ
not ** looking on his own things,” * but on
the things of the most, ‘* that they be saved.” °
1 he finds himself overweighted with re-
sponsibility, he will associate other labourers
for the harvest with himself. If only we can
find such a man, I own that I think the one
worth many, and the ordering of the cure of
souls in this way likely to be attended at once
with more advantage to the Churches and
with less risk tous. If, however, this course
prove difficult, let us first do our best to ap-
point superintendents ° to the small townships
or villages which have of old been episcopal


1 Placed by Maran in 374. After Easter 375 by Tillemont.

2 Isauria, the district of Pisidia, forming the S. W. corner
of the modern Karamania, was under the ecclesiastical juris-
diction of Iconium. ‘Inthe heart of the Roman monarchy,
the Isaurians long continued a nation of wild barbarians.
Succeeding powers, unable to reduce them to obedience either
by arms or policy, were compelled to acknowledge their weak-
ness by surrounding the hostile and independent spot with a
strong chain of fortifications (H/st. Aug. 197) which often
proved insufficient to restrain the invasions of these domestic
foes.’”’ Gibbon. chap. X. Raids and Arian persecution had
disorganised the Isaurian Episcopate. (Maran, Vit. Bas.)

82 Tim. ii. 15. 51 Thess. ii. Τῶν

4 Phil. ii. 4. 6 προϊσταμένους,


sees. Then afterwards we will appoint once
more the [bishop] of the city. Unless we
take this course the man appointed may prove
a hindrance to subsequent administration. and
from his wish to rule over a larger diocese,
and his refusal to accept the ordination of
the bishops, we may find ourselves suddenly
involved in a domestic quarrel. If this
course is difficult, and time coes not allow,
see to it that the Isaurian bishop is strictly
kept within his own bounds by ordaining
some of his immediate neighbours. In the
future it will be reserved for us to give to the
rest bishops at the proper scason, after we
have carefully examined those whom we our-
selves may judge to be most fit.

2. I have asked George, as you requested.
He replies as you reported. In all this
we must remain quiet, casting the care of
the house on the Lord. For I put my trust
in the Holy God that He will by my aid’?
grant to him deliverance from his difficulties
in some other way, and to me to live my life
without trouble. If this cannot be, be so
good as to send me word yourself as to what
part I must look after, that I may begin to
ask this favour of each of my friends in
power, either for nothing, or for some
moderate price, as the Lord may prosper

2
me.

I have, in accordance with your request,
written to brother Valerius. Matters at
Nyssa are going on as they were left by your
reverence, and, by the aid of your holiness,
are improving. Of those who were then
separated from me some have gone off to the
court, and some remain waiting for tidings
from it. The Lord is able as well to frus-
trate the expectations of these latter as to
make the return of the former useless.

3. Philo, on the authority of some Jewish
tradition, explains the manna to have been
of such a nature that it changed with the taste |
of the eater: that of itself it was like millet
seed boiled in honey; it served sometimes
for bread, sometimes for meat, either of birds
or beasts; at other times for vegetables, ac-

1 Here the MSS. vary, and the sense is obscure. Ben. Ed.
σὺν ἡμῖν. al. συνέσιν.

2“ Videtur illa dignitas, quam se amict causa alicujus
petitturum promittit Bastlius, non administratio aliqua
fiisse, sed tantum codicillaria diguitas. foc entn consilio
hance dignitatem petere statuerat, ut amici domus magnum
aliguod incommodum effugeret. Porro in hunc usum impe-
trart solebant codictlli, ut curta, vel saltem duumviratus et
cluttatits cura vitarentur. Pretio autem itmpetratos non
modo nulla tmmunitas, sed etiam multa sequebatur ui per-
spicttur ex Cod. Theod. vi, 22. Sic enim habet lex secunda
imperatoris Constantit; * Ab honoribus mercandis per
suffragia, vel qualibet ambitione querendis,.certa multa pro-
hibuitt: cut addimus et quicunque, fugientes obsequia curt-
arum, umbras et nomina affectaverint dignitatem, tricenas
libras argenti inferre cogantur, manente tlla preterita tnla-
tione aurt qua perpetua lege constructt sunt.’ Unde miror
Basilium ab hac via tentanda non omnino alienum futsse.


Sed forte he leges non admodum accurate servabuntur sub
Valente.’ Ben. note.


LETTERS.


233


cording to each man’s liking; even for fish,
so that the flavour of each separate kind was
exactly reproduced in the eater’s mouth.

Scripture recognises chariots containing
three riders, because while other chariots
contained two, the driver and the man-at-
arms, Pharaoh’s held three, two men-at-arms,
and one to hold the reins.

Sympius has written me a letter expressive
of respect and communion. The letter which
I have written in reply Iam sending to your
holiness, that you may send it on to him if
you quite approve of it, with the addition of
some communication from yourself. May
you, by the loving kindness of the Holy One,
be preserved for me and for the Church of
God, in good health, happy in the Lord, and
ever praying for me.


LE FLERvCXCEz
To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.?


On reading the letter of your reverence I
heartily thanked God. I did so because I
found in your expressions traces of ancient
affection. You are not like the majority.
You did not persist in refusing to begin an
affectionate correspondence. You have
learned the greatness of the prize promised
to the saints for humility, and so you have
chosen, by taking the second place, to get
before me. Among Christians such are the
conditions of victory, and it is he who is
content to take the second place who wins a
crown. But I must not be behindhand in
this virtuous rivalry, and so I thus salute
your reverence in return ; and inform you as to
how [am minded, in that, since agreement
in the faith is established among us,* there
is nothing further to prevent our being one
body and one spirit, as we have been called
in one hope of our calling.‘ It is for you,
then, of your charity to follow up a good
beginning, to rally men of like mind to stand
at your side, and to appoint both time and
place for meeting. Thus, by God’s grace,
through mutual accommodation we may
govern the Churches by the ancient kind of
love; receiving as our own members brothers
coming from the other side, sending as to
our kin, and in turn receiving as from our
own kin. Such, indeed, was once the boast
of the Church. Brothers from each Church,
travelling from one end of the world to the


1 Placed in 374.

2 So the MSS. and Editors. The Ben. note would have it
addressed to the recipient of the preceding. Tillemont thinks
it written to one of the Lycian bishops referred to in Letter
ccxviii.

4 cf. Eph. iv. 4.


8 ἡμῖν. Some MSS. have ὑμῖν.


other, were provided with little tokens,
and found all men fathers and brothers.
This is a privilege whereof, like all the rest,
the enemy of Christ’s Churches has robbed
us. Weare confined each in his own city,
and every one looks at his neighbour with
distrust. What more is to be said but that
our love has grown cold,’ whereby alone our
Lord has told us that His disciples are dis-
tinguished?? First of all, if you will, do
you become known to one another, that I
may know with whom I am to be in agree-
ment. Thus by common consent we will fix ᾿
on some place convenient to both, and, ata
season suitable for travelling, we will hasten
to meet one another; the Lord will direct us
in the way. Farewell. Be of good cheer.
Pray for me. May you be granted to me
by the grace of the Holy One.?


LEER CXCIt
To Sophronius the Master.


WITH your extraordinary zeal in good deeds
you have written to me to say that you your-
self owe me double thanks; first, for get-
ting a letter from me, and secondly, for
doing me a service. What thanks, then,
must not I owe you, both for reading your
most delightful words, and for finding what
I hoped for so quickly accomplished! The
message was exceedingly gratifying on its
own account, but it gave me much greater
gratification from the fact that you were the
friend to whom I owed the boon. God
grant that ere long I may see you, and re-
turn you thanks in words, and enjoy the
great pleasure of your society.


LETTER CXCIII?
To Meletius the Physician.


I am not able to flee from the discomforts
of winter so well as cranes are, although for
foreseeing the future I am quite as clever as
acrane. But as to liberty of life the birds
are almost as far ahead of me as they are in
the being able to fly. In the first place I have
been detained by certain worldly business;
then I have been so wasted by constant and
violent attacks of fever that there does seem
something thinner even than I was, —I am

1 Matt. xxiv. 12. 2John xiii. 35.

3 Whether the proposed meeting took place, and, indeed,
what meeting is referred to, cannot be determined. Basil met
Amphilochius and some neighbouring bishops in Pisidia in
275. But before this he counts the Isaurians as already in
communion with him (Le/ter cciv.). Perhaps all that the meet-
ing was desired to bring about was effected by correspondence,


This is the explanation of the Ben. Ed.
4 Placed in 374. 5 Placed in 375.


234


BASIL.


thinner than ever. Besides all this, bouts of
quartan ague have gone on for more than
twenty turns. Now I do seem to be free
from fever, but I am in such a feeble state
that Iam no stronger than a cobweb. Hence
the shortest journey is too far for me, and
every breath of wind is more dangerous to
me than big waves to those at sea. I have
no alternative but to hide in my hut and wait
for spring, if only I can last out so long, and
am not carried off beforehand’ by the inter-
nal malady of which I am never rid. If the
Lord saves me with His mighty hand, I
shall gladly betake myself to your remote
region, and gladly embrace a friend so dear.
Only pray that my life may be ordered as may
be best for my soul’s good.


LETTER τοις:
Lo LOUUS.


WHAT are you about, most excellent sir,
in anticipating me in humility? Educated
as you are, and able to write such a letter as
you have sent, you nevertheless ask for for-
giveness at my hands, as though you were
engaged in some undertaking rash and be-
yond your position. Buta truce to mockery.
Continue to write to me on every occasion.
Am I not wholly illiterate? It is delightful
to read the letters of an eloquent writer.
Have I learned from Scripture how good a
thing is love? I count intercourse with a
loving friend invaluable. And I do hope
that you may tell me of all the good gifts
which I pray for you; the best of health,
and the prosperity of all your house. Now
as to my own affairs, my condition is not
more endurable than usual. It is enough to
tell you this and you will understand the
bad state of my health. It has indeed reached
such extreme suffering as to be as diffi-
cult to describe as to experience, if indeed
your own experience has fallen short of mine.
But it is the work of the good God to give
me power to bear in patience whatever trials
are inflicted on me for my own good at the
hands of our merciful Lord. ©


LETTER CXCV.5
70 Luphronius, bishop of Colonia Armenia.


Cotonra, which the Lord has placed under
your authority, is far out of the way of
ordinary routes. The consequence is that,


1 προδιαρπασθῶμεν with two MSS. ποοδιαμάοτοιμεν has
better authority, but is bad Greek, and makes worse sense.
2 Placed in 375. 8 Placed in 375.


although I am frequently writing to the rest
of the brethren in Armenia Minor, I hesitate
to write to your reverence, because I have
no expectation of finding any one to convey
my letter. Now, however, that Iam hop-
ing either for your presence, or that my let-
ter will be sent on to you by some of the
bishops to whom [have written, I thus write
and salute you by letter. J wish to tell you
that I seem to be still alive, and at the same
time to exhort you to pray for me, that the
Lord may lessen my afflictions, and lift from
me the heavy load of pain which now
presses like a cloud upon my heart. I
shall have this relief if He will only grant a
quick restoration to those godly bishops who
are now punished for their faithfulness to
true religion by being scattered all abroad.


LETTER CXCVI:!
To Aburgius.


Rumour, messenger of good news, is
continually reporting how you dart across,
like the stars, appearing now here, now there,
in the barbarian regions; now supplying the
troops with provisions, now appearing in
gorgeous array before the emperor. I pray
God that your doings may prosper as they
deserve, and that you may achieve eminent
success. I pray that, so long as I live and
breathe this air, (for my life now is no
more than drawing breath), our country
may from time to time behold you.


LETTER: CACVil*
To Ambrose, bishop of Milan.


1. THE gifts of the Lord are ever great
and many; in greatness beyond measure,
in number incalculable. To those who are
not insensible of His mercy one of the great-
est of these gifts is that of which I am now
availing myself, the opportunity allowed us,
far apart in place though we be, of address-
ing one another by letter. He grants us two
means of becoming acquainted ; one by per-
sonal intercourse, another by epistolary cor-
respondence. Now I have becomeacquainted
with you through what you have said. Ido
not mean that my memory is impressed with
your outward appearance, but that the beauty
of the inner man has been brought home to
me by the rich variety of your utterances, for


1 Placed in 375. 2 Placed in 375.
3 Ambrose was placed in the archiepiscopate of Milan in
374. The letter of Basil is in reply to a request the for restora-


tion to his native city of the relics of St. Dionysius of Milan,
who died in Cappadocia in 374. cf. Ath., Ep. ad Sol.; Amb.


iii. 920.


LEVERS.


each of us ‘* speaketh out of the abundance
of the heart.” ! I have given glory to God,
Who in every generation selects those who
are well-pleasing to Him; Who of old indeed
chose from the sheepfold a prince for His
people;* Who through the Spirit gifted
Amos the herdman with power and raised
him up to bea prophet ; Who now has drawn
forth for the care of Christ’s flock a man
from the imperial city, entrusted with the
government of a whole nation, exalted in
character, in lineage, in position, in elo-
quence, in all that this worldadmires. This
same man has flung away all the advantages
of the world, counting them all loss that he
may gain Christ,’ and has taken in his hand
the helm of the ship, great and famous for
its faith in God, the Church of Christ.
Come, then, O man of God; not from men
have you received or been taught the Gospel
of Christ; it is the Lord Himself who has
transferred you from the judges of the earth
to the throne of the Apostles; fight the good
fight ; heal the infirmity of the people, if any
are infected by the disease of Arian madness ;
renew the ancient footprints of the Fathers.
You have laid the foundation of affection
towards me; strive to build upon it by the
frequency of your salutations. Thus shall
we be able to be near one another in spirit,
although our earthly homes are far apart.

2. By your earnestness and zeal in the
matter of the blessed bishop Dionysius you
testify all your love to the Lord, your honour
for your predecessors, and your zeal for the
faith. For our disposition towards our faith-
ful fellow-servants is referred to the Lord
Whom they have served. Whoever honours
men that have contended for the faith proves
that he has like zeal for it. One single
action is proof of much virtue.

I wish to acquaint your love in Christ that
the very zealous brethren who have been
commissioned by your reverence to act for
you in this good work have won praise for
all the clergy by the amiability of their
manners; for by their individual modesty
and conciliatoriness they have shewn the
sound condition of all. Moreover, with all
zeal and diligence they have braved an in-
clement season; and with unbroken perse-
verance have persuaded the faithful guardians
of the blessed body to transmit to them the
custody of what they have regarded as the
safeguard of their lives. And you must un-
derstand that they are men who would never
have been forced by any human authority
or sovereignty, had not the perseverance of
3 Phil, iii. 8,


1 Matt. xii. 34. 2 Ps. 1xxviii. 70.


235


these brethren moved them to compliance.
No doubt a great aid to the attainment of the
object desired was the presence of our well


beloved and reverend son Therasius the
presbyter. He voluntarily undertook all the


toil of the journey ; he moderated the energy
of the faithful on the spot; he persuaded op-
ponents by his arguments; in the presence of
priests and deacons, and of many others who
fear the Lord, he took up the relics with all
hecoming reverence, and has aided the
brethren in their preservation. These relics
do you receive with a joy equivalent to the
distress with which their custodians have
parted with them and sent them to you.
Let none dispute; let none doubt. Here
you have that unconquered athlete. These
bones, which shared in the conflict with the
blessed soul, are known to the Lord. These
bones He will crown, together with that
soul, in the righteous day of His requital, as
it is written, ‘*we must stand before the
judgment seat of Christ, that each may give
an account of the deeds he has done in the
body.”? One coffin held that honoured
corpse. None other lay by his side. The
burial was a noble one; the honours of a
martyr were paid him. Christians who had
welcomed him as a guest and then with their
own hands laid him in the grave, have now
disinterred him. They have wept as men
bereaved of a father and a champion. But
they have sent him to you, for they put your
joy before their own consolation. Pious
were the hands that gave ; scrupulously care-
ful were the hands that received. There has
been no room for deceit ; no room for guile.
I bear witness to this. Let the untainted
truth be accepted by you.


LETTER CXCVIIT.’
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.


AFTER the letter conveyed to me by the offi-
ciales 1 have received one other despatched
to me later. I have not sent many myself, for
I have not found any one travelling in your
direction. But I have sent more than the
four, among which also were those conveyed
to me from Samosata after the first epistle of
your holiness. These I have sealed and sent
to our honourable brother Leontius, perequa-
tor of Nicza, urging that by his agency they
may be delivered to the steward of the house-
hold of our honourable brother Sophronius,
that he may see to their transmission to you.


1 cf. Rom. xiv. 10 and 2 Cor. v. 10.
2 Placed in 375. 3 Clergy engaged in crafts,


236


BASIL,


As my letters are going through many
hands, it is likely enough that because one
man is very busy or very careless, your
reverence may never get them. Pardon me,
then, I beseech you, if my letters are few.
With your usual intelligence you have prop-
erly found fault with me for not sending, as
I ought, a courier of my own when there was
occasion for doing so; but you must under-
stand that we have had a winter of such
severity that all the roads were blocked till
Easter, and I had no one disposed to brave
the difficulties of the journey. For although
our clergy do seem very numerous, they are
men inexperienced in travelling because they
never traffic, and prefer not to live far away
from home, the majority of them plying
sedentary crafts, whereby they get their daily
bread. The brother whom I have now sent
to your reverence I have summoned from
the country, and employed in the conveyance
of my letter to your holiness, that he may
both give you clear intelligence as to me and
my attairs, and, moreover, by God’s grace,
bring me back plain and prompt information
about you and yours. Our dear brother
Eusebius the reader has for some time been
anxious to hasten to your holiness, but I have
kept him here for the weather to improve.
Even now I am under no little anxiety lest
his inexperience in travelling may cause him
trouble, and bring on some illness; for he is
not robust.

2. I need say nothing to you by letter
about the innovations of the East, for the
brothers can themselves give you accurate in-
formation. You must know, my honoured
friend, that, when I was writing these words,
I was so ill that I had lost all hope of life.
It is impossible for me to enumerate all my
painful symptoms, my weakness, the violence
of my attacks of fever, and my bad health in
general. One point only may be selected.
I have now completed the time of my sojourn
in this miserable and painful life.


DICT DER “ORCL
CANONICA SECUNDA.


To Amphilochius, concerning the Canons.


I wRoTE some time ago in reply to the
questions of your reverence, but I did not
send the letter, partly because from my long
and dangerous illness I had not time to do
so; partly because I had no one to send with
it. I have but few men with me who are


experienced in travelling and fit for service
ea EN aT EL Se Sl


1 Placed in 375.


fungatur.


of this kind. When you thus learn the


causes of my delay, forgive me.. I have
been quite astonished at your readiness
to learn and at your humility. You are


entrusted with the office of a teacher, and
yet you condescend to learn, and to learn
of me, who pretend to no great know-
ledge. Nevertheless, since you consent, on
account of your fear of God, to do what
another man might hesitate to do, I am
bound for my part to go even beyond my
strength in aiding your readiness and right-
eous zeal.

XVII. You asked me about the presbyter
Bianor—can he be admitted among the
clergy, because of his oath? I know that
I have already given the clergy of Antioch
a general sentence in the case of all those
who had sworn with him; namely, that
they should abstain from’ the public congre-
gations, but might perform priestly functions
in private.’ Moreover, he has the further
liberty for the performance of his minis-
terial functions, from the fact that his sacred
duties lie not at Antioch, but at Iconium;
for, as you have written to me yourself, he
has chosen to live rather at the latter than at
the former place. The man in question
may, therefore, be received; but your rever-
ence must require him to shew repentance
for the rash readiness of the oath which he
took before the unbeliever,? being unable to
bear the trouble of that small peril.

XVIII. Concerning fallen virgins, who,
after professing a chaste life before the Lord,
make their vows vain, because they have
fallen under the lusts of the flesh, our


1The Ben. Ed. note: ‘* Sepe vituperantur apud sanctos
Patres, qui sacra in privatis edibus sive domesticts oratorits
celebrant. Hinc Irenaeus, lib. iv. cap. 26, oportere att eos, qui
absistunt a principali successione et quocunque loco colligunt,
suspectos habere, vel quasi hxreticos et malz sententiz, vel
quasi scindentes et elatos et sibi placentes; aut rursus ut
hypocritas questus gratia et vane gloriz hoc operantes.
Basilius, in Psalm xxvii. n. 3: Non igitur extra sanctam
hanc aulam adorare oportet, sed intra ipsam, etc. Szmilia
habet Eusebius in ee μείἐ 10: p- 313. Sic elfam Cyrillus
Alexandrinus in libro adversus Anthropomorphitas, cap. 12,
et in libro dectmo De adorat., ἢ. 356. Sed his in locts per-
spicuum est hereticorum aut schismaticorum synagogas
notart, vel quas vocat Basilius, σαι. 1. παρασυνανγνωγάς, slve
tllicitos conventus a presbyteris aut episcopis rebellibus habi-
tos, aut a populis discipline expertibus. At interdum graves
cause suberant, cur sacra in privatis edibus tmpermissa non
essent. TIpsa persecutio necessitatem hujus ret sepe afferebat,
cum catholict episcoporum hereticorum communionem fuge-
rent, ut Sebastie ecclesiarum aditu prohiberentur. Minime
ergo mirum, st presbyteris Antiochenis eam. sacerdotit per-
functionem Basilius religuit, que et ad jurisjurandi relig-
tonem et ad temporum molestias accommodata videbatur.
Synodus Laodicena vetat, can. 58, in domibus fieri oblationem
ab episcopis vel presbyteris. Canon 31. Trullanus id cleri-
cts non tnterdicit, modo accedat episcopt consensus. Non
tnusttata fuisse ejusmodi sacra tn domesticts oratorits con-
firmat canon Basiltt 27, τὲ vetatur, ne presbyter tllicitis
nuptits tmplicatus privatim aut publice sacerdotii munere
Eustathtus Sebastenus Ancyre cum Ariants in
domibus communicavit, ut ex pluribus Basiltt eptstolis disct-
mus, cum apertam ab ets communionem impetrare non posset.”*

2 Videtur infidelis tlle vir unus aliquis futsse ex potentior!-
bus Artanis ejusque furor tdcirco in presbyteros Antiochenos
incitatus quod hi ecclesiam absente Meletio regerent, ac maxi-
mam civium partem tn illius fide et communtione retinerent.


LETTERS.


237


fathers, tenderly ' and meekly making allow-
ance for the infirmities of them that fall,
laid down that they might be received after
a year, ranking them with the digamists.
Since, however, by God’s grace the Church
erows mightier as she advances, and the
order of virgins is becoming more numerous,
it is my judgment that careful heed should
be given both to the act as it appears upon
consideration, and to the mind of Scripture,
which may be discovered from the context.
Widowhood is inferior to virginity; conse-
quently the sin of the widows comes far
behind that of the virgins. Let us see what
Paul writes to Timothy. ‘The young
widows refuse: for when they have begun
to wax wanton against Christ, they will
marty ; having damnation because they have
cast off their first faith.” * If, therefore, a
widow lies under a very heavy charge, as
setting at naught her faith in Christ, what
inust we think of the virgin, who is the
bride of Christ, and a chosen vessel dedi-
cated to the Lord? It is a grave fault even
on the part of a slave to give herself away
in secret wedlock and fill the house with
impurity, and, by her wicked life, to wrong
her owner ; but it is forsooth far more shock-
ing for the bride to become an adulteress,
and, dishonouring her union with the bride-
groom, to yield herself to unchaste indul-
gence. The widow, as being a corrupted
slave, is indeed condemned; but the virgin
comes under the charge of adultery. We
call the man who lives with another man’s
wife an adulterer, and do not receive him
into communion until he has ceased from
his sin; and so we shall ordain in the case
of him who has the virgin. One point,
however, must be determined beforehand,
that the name werg7z is given to a woman
who voluntarily devotes herself to the Lord,
renounces marriage, and embraces a life
of holiness. And we admit professions
dating from the age of full intelligence.®
For it is not right in such cases to admit the
words of mere children. Buta girl of sixteen
or seventeen years of age, in full possession
of her faculties, who has been submitted to
strict examination, and is then constant, and
persists in her entreaty to be admitted, may
then be ranked among the virgins, her pro-
fession ratified, and its violation rigorously
punished. Many girls are brought forward
by their parents and brothers, and other
kinsfolk, before they are of full age, and


1 ἁπαλῶς, with four MSS.,, al. ἁπλῶς, 21 Tins ν. 11, 12.

8... Hoc Basilit decretum de professtonts etate citatur in
canone quadragesimo synodt in Trullo”? (A.D. 691) “ et
decem et septem annt quos Bastlius requirit, ad decem redi-
guntur.”’


have no inner impulse towards a celibate
life. The object of the friends is simply to
provide for themselves. Such women as
these must not be readily received, before we
have made public investigation of their own
sentiments.

XIX. I do not recognise the profession of
men, except in the case of those who have
enrolled themselves in the order of monks,
and seem to have secretly adopted the
celibate. life’ Yet im) their “case 1) think it
becoming that there should be a previous
examination, and that a distinct profession
should be received from them, so that when-
ever they may revert to the life of the pleas-
ures of the flesh, they may be subjected to
the punishment of fornicators.

XX. Ido not think that any condemna-
tion ought to be passed on women who
professed virginity while in heresy, and then
afterwards preferred marriage. ‘* What
things soever the law saith, it saith to them
who are under the law.”"? Those who have
not yet put on Christ’s yoke do not recog-
nise the laws of the Lord. They are there-
fore to be received in the church, as having
remission in the case of these sins too, as of
all, from their faith in Christ. As a general
rule, ail sins formerly committed in the
catechumenical state are not taken into
account.” The Church does not receive
these persons without baptism; and it is
very necessary that in such cases the birth-
rights should be observed.

XXI. If a man living with a wife is not
satisfied with his marriage and falls into
fornication, I account him a fornicator, and
prolong his period of punishment. Never-
theless, we have no canon subjecting him to
the charge of adultery, if the sin be committed
against an unmarried woman. For the adul-
teress, it is said, ** being polluted shall be
polluted,” * and she shall not return to her
husband: and ‘“‘ He that keepeth an adulteress
is a fool and impious.” * He, however, who
has committed fornication is not to be cut off
from the society of his own wife. So the
wife will receive the husband on his return
from fornication, but the husband will expel
the polluted woman from his house. The
argument here is not easy, but the custom
has so obtained.*


1 Rom, iii. 10.

26 Male Angli in Pandectis et alti tnterpretes reddunt, que
in catechumenica vita fiunt. Mon entm dictt Bastlius ea non
rite gue in hoc statu peccantur, sed tantum peccata anta

aptismum commissa baptismo expiar!, nec fam esse Judicio

ecclestastico obnoxta. tne observat Zonaras non pugnare
hunc canonem cum canone quinto Neocesarienst, in quo pane
catechuments peccantibus decernuntur.’’


Jer. ily ας Prove XVIll, 225) Laws
5 “Non solus Basilius hanc consuetudinem secutus. Auctor
constitutionum apostolicarum sre loguitur lib. vi. cap. 14:


Qyi corruptam retinet, nature legem violat: quando quidem


238


BASIL.


XXII. Men who keep women carried off
by violence, if they carried them off when
betrothed to other men, must not be received
before removal of the women and their res-
toration to those to whom they were first
contracted, whether they wish to receive
them, or to separate from them. In the
case of a girl who has been taken when not
betrothed, she ought first to be removed, and
restored to her own people, and handed over
to the will of her own people whether
parents, or brothers, or any one having
authority over her. If they choose to give
her up, the cohabitation may stand; but, if
they refuse, no violence should be used.
In the case of a man having a wife by se-
duction, be it secret or by violence, he must
be held guilty of fornication. The punish-
ment of fornicators is fixed at four years.
In the first year they must be expelled from
prayer, and weep at the door of the church;
in the second they may be received to ser-
mon; in the third to penance; in the fourth
to standing with the people, while they are
withheld from the oblation. Finally, they
may be admitted to the communion of the
good gift.

XXIIL. Concerning men who marry two
sisters, or Women who marry two brothers,
a short letter of mine has been published,
of which I have sent a copy to your rever-
ence. The man who has taken his own
brother’s wife is not to be received until he
have separated from her.

XXIV. A widow whose name is in the
list of widows, that is, who is supported? by
the Church, is ordered by the Apostle to be
supported no longer when she marries.?

There is no special rule for a widower.
The punishment appointed for digamy may
suffice. If a widow who is sixty years of
age chooses again to live with a husband,
she shall be held unworthy of the commun-
ion of the good gift until she be moved no
longer by her impure desire. If we reckon
her before sixty years, the blame rests with
us, and not with the woman.

XXV. The man who retains as his wife


gut rvetinet adulteram, stultus est et impius. Abscinde enim
eam, tnguit, a carnibus tuts. Nam adjutrix non est, sed insid-
iatrix, que mentem ad alium declinarit. Canon 8, Neocesa-
riensts latcis, quorum uxores adulterit convictea, aditum ad
ministerium ecclestasticum claudit; clericts depostttonis
penam trrogat, si _adulteram nolint’ dimtitere. Canon 65
Eliberitanus sic λαοί; Si cujus clerici uxor fuerit mechata,
et scierit eam maritus suus mechari, et non eam statim pro-
jecerit, nec in fine accipiat communionem. /fermas lib. 1, c. 2,
adulteram ejict jubet, sed tamen penttentem recipi. S. Augus-
tinus adultertum legitimam esse dimittendi causam pronun-
trat, sed non necessariam, lib.ii. De Adulter. nuptits)cap.s,

1 Probably Lefter clx. to Diodorus is referred to.

2 Avaxovovmevnv. So the Ben. Ed. Another possible ren-
dering is ‘“ received into the order of deaconesses.”

8. πῆς iden th deen


the woman whom he has violated, shall be
liable to the penalty of rape, but it shall be
lawful for him to have her to wife.

XXVI. Fornication is not wedlock, nor
yet the beginning of wedlock. Wherefore
it is best, if possible, to put asunder those
who are united in fornication. If they are set
on cohabitation, let them admit the penalty
of fornication. Let them be allowed to live
together, lest a worse thing happen.

XXVII. As to the priest ignorantly in-
volved in an illegal marriage,’ I have made
the fitting regulation, that he may hold his
seat, but must abstain from other functions.
For such a case pardon is enough. It is
unreasonable that the man who has to treat
his own wounds should be blessing another,
for benediction is the imparting of holiness.
How can he who through his fault, com-
mitted in ignorance, is without holiness,
impart it to another? Let him bless neither
in public nor in private, nor distribute the
body of Christ to others, nor perform any
other sacred function, but, content with his
seat of honour, Iet him beseech the Lord with
weeping, that his sin, committed in igno-
rance, may be forgiven.

XXVIII. It has seemed to me ridiculous
that any one should make a vow to abstain
from swine’s flesh. Be so good as to teach
men to abstain from foolish vows and prom-
ises. Represent the use to be quite indiffer-
ent. No creature of God, received with
thanksgiving, is to be rejected.2, The vow
is ridiculous; the abstinence unnecessary.

XXIX. Itds especially desirable that at-
tention should be given to the case of per-
sons in power who threaten on oath to do
some hurt to those under their authority.
The remedy is twofold. In the first place,
let them be taught not to take oaths at ran-
dom: secondly, not to persist in their wicked
determinations. Any one who is arrested in
the design of fulfilling an oath to injure
another ought to shew repentance for the
rashness of his oath, and must not confirm
his wickedness under the pretext of piety.
Herod was none the better for fulfilling his
oath, when, of course only to save himself
from perjury, he became the prophet’s mur-
derer.2 Swearing is absolutely forbidden,*
and it is only reasonable that the oath which
tends to evil should be condemned. The
swearer must therefore change his mind, and
not persist in confirming his impiety. Con-
sider the absurdity of the thing a little further.
Suppose a man to swear that he will put
his brother’s eyes out: is it well for him to


1 «ε᾿Αθέσμῳ γάμῳ," /licttas nuptics.


21 Tim. iv. 4. 3 Matt, xiv. 10. 4 Matt. v. 34.


LETTERS.


carry his oath into action? Or to commit
murder? or to break any other command-
ment? ‘+I have sworn, and I will perform
it,’ * not tosin, but to **keep thy righteous
judgments.” It is no less our duty to undo
and destroy sin, than it is to confirm the com-
mandment by immutable counsels.

XXX. As to those guilty of abduction
we haveno ancient rule, but I have expressed
my own judgment. The period is three
years;* the culprits and their accomplices
to be excluded from service. The act com-
mitted without violence is not liable to pun-
ishment, whenever it has not been preceded
by violation or robbery. The widow is in-
dependent, and to follow or not is in her
own power. We must, therefore, pay no
heed to excuses.

XXXI. A woman whose husband has
gone away and disappeared, and who marries
another, before she has evidence of his death,
commits adultery. Clerics who are guilty
of the sin unto death* are degraded from
their order, but not excluded from the com-
munion of the laity. Thou shalt not punish
twice for the same fault.*

XXXIII. Let an indictment for murder
be preferred against the woman who gives
birth to a child on the road and pays no at-
tention to it.

XXXIV. Women who had committed
adultery, and confessed their fault through
piety, or were in any way convicted, were
not allowed by our fathers to be publicly ex-
posed, that we might not cause their death
after conviction. But they ordered that they
should be excluded from communion till
they had fulfilled their term of penance.

XXXV. In the case of a man deserte« by
his wife, the cause of the desertion must be
taken into account. If she appear to have
abandoned him without reason, he is deserv-
ing of pardon, but the wife of punishment.
Pardon will be given to him that he may
communicate with the Church.

XXXVI. Soldiers’ wives who have mar-
ried in their husbands’ absence will come
under the same principle as wives who,
when their husbands have been on a journey,
have not waited their return. Their case,
however, does admit of some concession
on the ground of there being greater reason
to suspect death.


1 Ps. cxix. 106.

2 The Ben. Ed. point out that in Canon xxii. four years is
the allotted period, as in the case of fornicators.

3 St. Basil on Isaiah iv. calls sins wilfully committed after
full knowledge ‘sins unto death.”? But in the same com-
mentary he applies the same designation to sins which lead to
hell. The sense to be applied to the phrase in Canon. xxxii. is
to be learnt, according to the Ben. note, from Canons Ixix. and
Ixx., where a less punishment is assigned to mere wilful sins
unto death than in Canon xxxii. 4 Nahum i.g, LXX.


239


XXXVITI. The man who marries after
abducting another man’s wife will incur the
charge of adultery for the first case; but for
the second will go free.

XXXVIII. Girls who follow against their
fathers’ will commit fornication; but if their
fathers are reconciled to them, the act seems
to admit of a remedy. ‘They are not how-
ever immediately restored to communion,
but are to be punished for three years.

XXXIX. The woman who lives with
an adulterer is an adulteress the whole time.’

XL. The woman who yields to a man
against her master’s will commits fornication ;
but if afterwards she accepts free marriage,
she marries. The former case is fornication ;
the latter marriage. The covenants of persons
who are not independent have no validity.

XLI. The woman in widowhood, who
is independent, may dwell with a husband
without blame, if there is no one to prevent
their cohabitation; for the Apostle says;
‘¢but if her husband be dead, she is at lib-
erty to be married to whom she will; only
inthe: Lord.?*.2

XLII. Marriages contracted without the
permission of those in authority, are forni-
cation. If neither father nor master be
living the contracting parties are free from
blame; just as if the authorities assent to the
cohabitation, it assumes the fixity of marriage.

XLII. He who smites his neighbour to
death is a murderer, whether he struck first
or in self defence.

XLIV. The deaconess. who commits
fornication with a heathen may be received
into repentance and will be admitted to the
oblation in the seventh year; of course if
she be living in chastity. The heathen
who, after he has believed, takes to idolatry,
returns to his vomit. We do not, however,
give up the body of the deaconess to the use
of the flesh, as being consecrated.

XLV. If any one, after taking the name
of Christianity, insults Christ, he gets no
good from the name.

XLVI. The woman who unwillingly
marries a man deserted at the time by his
wife, and is afterwards repudiated, because
of the return of the former to him, com-
mits fornication, but involuntarily. She will,
therefore, not be prohibited from marriage ;
but it is better if she remain as she is.°


XLVII. Encratite,* Saccophori,® and


1 Or, according to another reading, in every way.

21 Cor.vil. 309.

ὃ This is Can. xciii. of the Council in Trullo.

4Generally reckoned rather as Manichzans than as here
by Basil as Marcionites, but dualism was common to both
systems.

5 A Manichean sect, who led a solitary life. Death is
threatened against them in a law of Theodosius dated A.D.


240


BASIL.


Apotactite ' are not regarded in the same
manner as Novatians, since in their case a
canon has been pronounced, although differ-
ent; while of the former nothing has been
said. All these I re-baptize on the same
principle. If among you their re-baptism is
forbidden, for the sake of some arrangement,
nevertheless let my principle prevail. Their
heresy is, as it were, an offshoot of the Mar-
cionites, abominating, as they do, marriage,
refusing wine, and calling God’s creature
polluted. We do not therefore receive them
into the Church, unless they be baptized
into our baptism. Let them not say that
they have been baptized into Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, inasmuch as they make
God the author of evil, after the example of
Marcion and the rest of the heresies.
Wherefore, if this be determined on, more
bishops ought to meet together in one place
and publish the canon in these terms, that
action may be taken without peril, and
authority given to answers to questions of
this kind.

XLVIII. The woman who has been
abandoned by her husband, ought, in my
judgment, to remain as she is. The Lord
said, δ΄ If any one leave’ his wife, saving for
the cause of fornication, he causeth her to
commit adultery;”° thus, by calling her
adulteress, He excludes her from intercourse
with another man. For how can the man
being guilty, as having caused adultery, and
the woman, go without blame, when she is
called adulteress by the Lord for having in-
tercourse with another man?

XLIX. Suffering violation should not be
. a cause of condemnation. So the slave girl,
if she has been forced by her own master, is
free from blame.

L. There is no law as to trigamy: a
third marriage is not contracted by law.
We look upon such things as the defile-
ments of the Church. But we do not sub-
ject them to public condemnation, as being
better than unrestrained fornication.‘


LEATHER CCS
To Amphilochius, bishop of Icontum.


I am attacked by sickness after sickness,
and all the work given me, not only by the


322 (Cod. Theod. 1b. xvi. tit. 5, leg. 9), identified by the Ben.
Ed. with the Hydroparastate.

1A Manichean sect. cf. Epiphanius ii. 18, In the work of
Macarius Magnes, published in Paris 1876, they are identified
with the Encratites.

2 καταλίπῃ for ἀπολύσῃ. 3 Matt. v. 22.

4 cf. however Canon iv., where trizgamy is called polygamy
or at best a limited fornication, and those guilty of it subjected
to exclusion from the Eucharist. 5 Placed in 375.


affairs of the Church, but by those who are
troubling the Church, has detained me
during the whole winter, and up to the
present time. It has been therefore quite
impossible for me to send any one to you or
to pay you a visit.
are similarly situated; not, indeed, as to
sickness, God forbid; may the Lord grant
you continued health for carrying out His
commandments. But I know that the care
of the Churches gives you the same distress
as it does me. I was now about to send
some one to get me accurate information
about your condition. But when my well
beloved son Meletius, who is moving the
newly enlisted troops, reminded me of the
opportunity of my saluting you by him, I
gladly accepted the occasion to write and
had recourse to the kind services of the con-
veyor of my letter. He is one who may
himself serve instead of a letter, both be-
cause of his amiable disposition, and of his
being well acquainted with all which con-
cerns me. By him, then, I beseech your
reverence especially to pray for me, that
the Lord may grant to me a riddance from
this troublesome body of mine; to His
Churches, peace; and to you, rest; and,
whenever you have settled the affairs of
Lycaonia in apostolic fashion, as you have
begun, an opportunity to visit also this
place. Whether I be sojourning in the
flesh, or shall have been already bidden to
take my departure to the Lord, I hope that
you will interest yourself in our part of the
world, as your own, as indeed it is, strength-
ening all that is weak, rousing all that is
slothful and, by the help of the Spirit Which
abides in you, transforming everything into
acondition well pleasing to the Lord. My
very honourable sons, Meletius and Melitius,
whom you have known for some time, and
know to be devoted to yourself, keep in
your good care and pray for them. ‘This is
enough to keep them in safety. Salute in
my name, I beg you, all who are with your
holiness, both all the clergy, and all the laity
under your pastoral care, and my very
religious brothers and fellow ministers.
Bear in mind the memory of the blessed
martyr Eupsychius, and do not wait for me
to mention him again. Do not take pains
to come on the exact day, but anticipate
it, and so give me joy, if I be yet living
on this earth.
grace of the Holy One, be preserved for
me and for God’s Churches, enjoying
health and wealth in the Lord, and praying
for me.


I conjecture that. you ”


Till then may you, by the


LETTERS.


LETTER CCI.
To Amphitochius, bishop of Iconium.


I LonG to meet you for many reasons,
that I may have the benefit of your advice
in the matters I had in hand, and that on
beholding you after a long interval I may
have some comfort for your absence. But
since both of us are prevented by the same
reasons, you by the illness which has be-
fallen you, and I by the malady of longer
standing which has not yet left me, let us,
if you will, each forgive the other, that both
may free ourselves from blame.


ER VT Cer.
To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconitum.


ὌΝΡΕΚ other circumstances I should think
it a special privilege to meet with your rev-
erence, but above all now, when the busi-
ness which brings us together is of such great
importance. But so much of my illness as
still clings to me is enough to prevent my
stirring ever so short a distance. I tried to
drive as far as the martyrs® and had a re-
lapse almost into my old state. You must
therefore forgive me. If the matter can be
put off for a few days, I will, by God’s grace
join you, and share your anxieties. If the
business presses, do, by God’s help, what has
to be done; but reckon me as present with
you and as participating in your worthy
deeds. May you, by the grace of the Holy
One, be preserved to God’s Church, strong
and joyous in the Lord, and praying for
me.


ERT IER. CCUL*


To the bishops of the sea coast.’


I HAVE had a strong desire to meet you,
but from time to time some hindrance has


1 Placed in 375. 2 Placed in 375.

8 Tillemont conjectures that the drive was to St. Eupsvchius,
but the day of St. Eupsychius fell in September, which the
Ben. note thinks too late for the date of this letter. The
memorials of St. Julitta and St. Gordius were also near
Cesarea, but their days fell in January, which the same note
thinks too early. Gregory of Nyssa (Migne iii. p. 653) says
that there were’more altars in Cappadocia than in all the
world, so that we need have no difficulty in supposing some
saint whose date would synchronize with the letter. Basil,
however, may have tried to drive to the shrine of some martyr
on some other day than the anniversary of his death,

4 Placed in 375.

5On this letter Newman notes that Eustathius brought
about a separation of a portion of the coast of Pontus from the
Church of Cesarea, which for a time caused Basil great
despondency, as if he were being left solitary in all Christen-
dom, without communion with other places. “With the advice
of the bishops of Cappadocia, he addressed an expostulation
with these separatists for not coming to him. (Ch. of the
Fathers, p.95.) Vhe portion of the translation of this letter
enclosed in brackets is Newman’s,


241
supervened and prevented my fulfilling my
purpose. I have either been hindered by
sickness, and you know well how, from my
early manhood to my present old age, this
ailment has been my constant companion,
brought up with me, and chastising me, by
the righteous judgment of God, Who ordains
all things in wisdom; or by the cares of
the Church, or by struggles with the oppo-
nents of the doctrines of truth. [Up to this
day I live in much affliction and grief, hav-
ing the feeling present before me, that you
are wanting to me. For when God tells me,
who took on Him His sojourn in the flesh
for the very purpose that, by patterns of
duty, He might regulate our life, and might
by His own voice announce to us the Gospel
of the kingdom, — when He says, ‘ By this
shall all men know that ye are my disciples,
if ye love one another,’ and whereas the
Lord left His own peace to His disciples as
a farewell gift,’ when about to complete the
dispensation in the flesh, saying, ‘ Peace I
leave with you, My peace I give you,’ I can-
not persuade myself that without love to
others, and without, as far as rests with me,
peaceableness towards all, I can be called
a worthy servant of Jesus Christ. I have
waited a long while for the chance of your
love paying us a visit. For ye are not igno-
rant that we, being exposed to all, as rocks
running out in the sea, sustain the fury of
the heretical waves, which, in that they
break around us, do not cover the district
behind.:: 1 say ** we” inorder, tan reterac
not to human power, but to the grace of
God, Who, by the weakness of men shows
1115 power, as says the prophet in the person
of the Lord, ‘Will ye not fear Me, who
have placed the sand as a boundary to the
sea?’ for by the weakest and most contempt-
ible of all things, the sand, the Mighty One
has bounded the great and full sea. Since,
then, this is our position, it became your love
to be frequent in sending true brothers to
visit us who labour with the storm, and
more frequently letters of love, partly to con-
firm our courage, partly to correct any mis-
take of ours. For we confess that we are
liable to numberless mistakes, being men,
and living in the flesh. ]

2. But hitherto, very honourable breth-
ren, you have not given me my due; and
this for two reasons. Either you failed to
perceive the proper course; or else, under
the influence of some of the calumnies spread
abroad about me, you did not think me de-
serving of being visited by you in love.


1 ἐξιτήριον δῶρον. cf. note on p. 46.


242


ope θεν ibe


Now, therefore, I myself take the initiative.
I beg to state that 1 am perfectly ready to
rid myself, in your presence, of the charges
urged against me, but only on condition that
my revilers are admitted to stand face to face
with me before your reverences. If I am
convicted, I shall not deny my error. You,
after the conviction, will receive pardon
from the Lord for withdrawing yourselves
from the communion of me a sinner. The
successful accusers, too, will have their re-
ward in the publication of my secret wicked-
ness. If, however, you condemn me before
you have the evidence before you, I shall be
none the worse, barring the loss I shall sustain
of a possession I hold most dear— your love:
while you, for your part, will suffer the same
loss in losing me, and will seem to be run-
ning counter to the words of the Gospel:
‘¢Doth our law judge any man before it
hear him?” ! The reviler, moreover, if he
adduce no proof of what he says, will be
shewn to have got nothing from his wicked
language but a bad name for himself. For
what name can be properly applied to the
slanderer? except that which he professes
to bear by the very conduct of which he is
guilty? Let the reviler, therefore, appear
not as slanderer,® but as accuser; nay, I will
not call him accuser, I will rather regard him
as a brother, admonishing in love, and pro-
ducing conviction for my amendment. And
you must not be hearers of calumny, but
triers of proof. Nor must I be left uncured,
because my sin is not being made manifest.
Let not this consideration influence
you. * We dwell on the sea, we are exempt
from the sufferings of the generality, we
need no succour from others; so what is the
good to us of foreign communion?’ For the
same Lord Who divided the islands from the
continent by the sea, bound the island Chris-
tians to those of the continent by love. No-
thing, brethren, separates us from each other,
but deliberate estrangement. We have one
Lord, one faith, the same hope. The hands
need each other; the feet steady each other.
The eyes possess their clear apprehension
from agreement. We, for our part, confess
our own weakness, and we seek your fellow
feeling. For we are assured, that though ye
are not present in body, yet by the aid of
prayer, ye will do us much benefit in these
most critical times. It is neither decorous
before men, nor pleasing to God, that you
should make avowals which not even the
Gentiles adopt, which know not God.


1 John vii. 51.


ὃ διάβολος.
2 τὸν διαβάλλοντα.


Even they, as we hear, though the country
they live in be sufficient for all things, yet,
on account of the uncertainty of the fucure,
make much of alliances with each other, and
seek mutual intercourse as being advan-
tageous to them. Yet we, the sons of
fathers who have laid down the law that by
brief notes the proofs of communion should
be carried about from one end of the earth to
the other, and that all should be citizens and


‘familiars with all, now sever ourselves from


the whole world, and are neither ashamed at
our solitariness, nor shudder that on us is
fallen the fearful prophecy of the Lord,
‘ Because of lawlessness abounding, the love
of the many shall wax cold.’ ] |

4. Do not, most honourable brethren, do
not suffer this. Rather, by letters of peace
and by salutations of love, comfort me for the
past. You have made a wound in my heart
by your former neglect. Soothe its anguish,
as it were, bya tender touch. Whether you
wish to come to me, and examine for your-
selves into the truth of what you hear of my
infirmities, or whether by the addition of
more lies my sins are reported to you to be
yet more grievous, I must accept even this.
[ am ready to welcome you with open hands
and to offer myself to the strictest test, only
let love preside over the proceedings. Or
if you prefer to indicate any spotin your own
district to which I may come and pay you
the visit which is due, submitting myself, as
far as may be, to examination, for the heal-
ing of the past, and the prevention of slander
for the future, I accept this. Although my
flesh is weak, yet, as Jong as I breathe, I am
responsible for the due discharge of every
duty which may tend to the edification of
the Churches of Christ. Do not, I beseech
you, make light of my entreaty. Do not
force me to disclose my distress to others.
Hitherto, brethren, as you are well aware, I
have kept my grief to myself, for I blush to
speak of your alienation from me to those of
our communion who are at a distance. I
shrink at once from paining them and from
gratifying those who hate me. I alone am
writing this now; but I send in the name of
all the brethren in Cappadocia, who have.
charged me not to employ any chance mes-
senger, but some one who, in case I should,
from my anxiety not to be too prolix, leave
out any points of importance, might supply
them with the intelligence wherewith God
has gifted him. I refer to my beloved and
reverend fellow presbyter Petrus. Welcome
him in love, and send him forth to me in
peace, that he may be a messenger to me of
good things.


LETTERS.


243


LETTER, CCIy.!


To the Neocesarcans.?


1. [THERE has beena long silence on both
sides, revered and well-beloved brethren,
just as if there were angry feelings between
us. Yet who is there so sullen and implaca-
ble towards the party which has injured him,
as to lengthen out the resentment which has
begun in disgust through almost a whole life
of man?| ‘This [is happening in our case,
no just occasion of estrangement existing, as
far as I myself know, but on the contrary,
there being, from the first, many strong
reasons for the closest friendship and unity.
The greatest and first is this, our Lord’s
command, pointedly saying, ‘* By this shall
all men know that ye are my disciples if ye
have love one to another.”*] Again, the
apostle clearly sets before us the good of
charity where he tells us that love is the ful-
filling of the law; * and again where he says
that charity is a good thing to be preferred to
all great and good things, in the words,
ες Though I speak with tongues of men and
of angels and have not charity, I am become
as sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal. And
though I have the gift of prophecy and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge ;
and though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have not charity, I
am nothing. And though I bestow all my
goods to feed the poor and though I give my
body to be burnt and have not charity, it
profiteth me nothing.”°® Not that each of
the points enumerated could be performed
without love, but that the Holy One wishes,
as He Himself has said, to attribute to the
commandment super-eminent excellency by
the figure of hyperbole.®

2. |Next, if it tend much towards inti-
macy to have the same teachers, there are
to you and to me the same teachers of
God’s mysteries, and spiritual Fathers, who
from the beginning were the founders of
your Church. I mean the great Greg-
ory, and all who succeeding in order to
the throne of your episcopate, like stars


1 Placed in 375.

2 Newman introduces his extracts from the following letter
with the prefatory remark : "ΤΥ Basil’s Semi-Arian connexions
brought suspicion upon himself in the eyes of Catholic believ-
ers, much more would they be obnoxious to persons attached,
as certain Neocesareans were, to the Sabellian party, who were
in the opposite extreme to the Semi-Arians and their especial
enemies in those times. It is not wonderful, then, that he had
to write to the church in question in a strain like the follow-
ing.” (Ch. of the Fathers. p.98.) The passages in brackets
are Newman’s version. The prime agent in the slandering
of Basil was presumably Atarbius, bishop of Neocesarea.

3 John xiii. 35. 4 Rom. xiii. 10. 51 Cor. xiii. 1-3.

6 The allusion may be to Mark xi. 23, but St. Paul would
probably reply to Basil that each of the points enumerated
might proceed not from love, but from vanity, ambition, or
fanaticism,


rising one after another, have tracked the
same course, so as to leave the tokens of
the heavenly polity most clear to all who
desire them.] And if natural relationships
are not to be despised, but are greatly con-
ducive to unbroken union and _ fellowship,
these rights also exist naturally for you and
me. [Why is it, then, O venerable among
cities, for through you I address the whole
city, that no civil writing comes from you,
no welcome voice, but your ears are open to
those who aim at slander?] Iam therefore
the more bound to groan, the more I perceive
the end they have in view. There is no
doubt as to who is the originator of the
slander." He is known by many evil deeds,
but is best distinguished by this particular
wickedness, and it is for this reason that the
sin is made his name.?- But you must put
up with my plain speaking. You have
opened both ears to my slanderers. You
heartily welcome all you hear without any
enquiry. Not one of you distinguishes be-
tween lies and truth. Who ever suffered for
lack of wicked accusations when strugeling
all alone? Who was ever convicted of lying
in the absence of his victim? What plea
does not sound plausible to the hearers when
the reviler persists that such and such is the
case, and the reviled is neither present nor
hears what is urged against him? Does not
even the accepted custom of this world teach
you, in reference to these matters, that if any
one is to be a fair and impartial hearer, he
must not be entirely led away by the first
speaker, but must wait for the defence of the
accused, that so truth may be demonstrated by
a comparison of the arguments on both sides?
“ὁ Judge righteous judgment.” * This precept
is one of those most necessary for salvation.
3. When I say this Iam not forgetful of
the words of the Apostle, who fled from
human tribunals and reserved the defence of
all his life for the unerring judgment seat,
when he said, ‘*‘ With me it is a very small
thing that I should be judged of you or of
man’s judgment.” * Your ears have been
preoccupied by lying slanders, slanders that :
have touched my coriduct, slanders that have
touched my faith in God. Nevertheless, -
knowing, as I do, that three persons at once
are injured by the slanderer, his victim, his
hearer, and himself; as to my own wrong, I
would have held my tongue, be sure; not
because I despise your good opinion, (how
could I, writing now as I do and earnestly
pleading as I de that I may not lose it?) but


1 τῆς διαβολῆς.
2 7,6. 6 διαβολοςς. The little paronomasia is untranslatable.
8 John vii. 24. #1 Cor. iv.


244


BASIL.


because I see that of the three sufferers the
one who is least injured is myself. It is true
that I shall be robbed of you, but you are
being robbed of the truth, and he who is at
the bottom of all this is parting me from you,
but he is alienating himself from the Lord,
inasmuch as no one can be brought near to
the Lord by doing whatis forbidden. Rather
then for your sakes than for mine, rather
to rescue you from unendurable wrong am
I pleading. For who could suffer a worse
calamity than the loss of the most precious
of all things, the truth?

4. [What say I, brethren? Not that I am
a sinless person; not that my life is not full
of numberless faults. I know myself; and
indeed I cease not my tears for my sins, if
by any means I may be able to appease my
God, and to escape the punishment threatened
against them. But this I say: let him who
judges me, hunt for motes in my eye, if he
can say that his own isclear.] Lown, breth-
ren, that I need the care of the sound and
healthy, and need much of it. If he cannot
say that it is clear, and the clearer it is the
less will he say so — (for it is the part of
the perfect not to exalt themselves; if they
do they will certainly come under the charge
of the pride of the Pharisee, who, while
justifying himself, condemned the publican),
let him come with me to the physician ;
let him not ‘* judge before the time until the
Lord come, who both will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts.”’ Let
him remember the words, “ Judge not, and
ye shall not be judged;”? and ** Condemn
not, and ye shall not be condemned.”* [In
a word, brethren, if my offences admit of
cure, why does not such an one obey the
teacher of the Churches, ἐς Reprove, exhort,
rebuke” ?* If, onthe other hand, my iniquity
be past cure, why does he not withstand me
to the face, and, by publishing my transgres-
sions, deliver the Churches from the mischief
which I bring on them?] Do not put up
with the calumny uttered against me within
the teeth.’ This is the abuse which any slave-
girl from the grindstone might utter; this is
the kind of fine shewing-off you might ex-
pect from any street vagabond; their tongues
are whetted for any slander. But [there are
bishops; let appeal be made to them. There
is a clergy in each of God's dioceses; ® let


τ στον, ας: 8 Luke vi. 37.

2 Matt. vii. 1. 42 Tim. iv. 2.

5 nm? ὀδόντα. Ben. Lat., ἡπέγα dentes.

6 The Greek is παροικία which is used both for what is
meant by the modern “‘ diocese’? and by the modern “ parish.”
Of the sense of diocese instances are quoted among others in
D.C.A.s.v.* Parish,” from Iren.ad Florin. apud Euseb. H.E.
v.20; and Alexand, Alexandrin. Zp. apud Theodoret, H.E.


La:


the most eminent be assembled. Let whoso
will, speak freely, that I may have to deal
with a charge, not a slander.] Let my
secret wickedness be brought into full view;
let me no longer be hated, but admonished
as abrother. It is more just that we sinners
should be pitied by the blessed and the sin-
less, than that we should be treated angrily.
5. [Ifthe fault bea point of faith, let the
document be pointed out tome. Again, let
a fair and impartial inquiry be appointed.
Let the accusation be read ; let it be brought
to the test, whether it does not arise from
ignorance in the accuser, not from blame in
the matter of the writing. For right things
often do not seem such to those who are de-
ficient in accurate judgment. Equal weights
seem unequal when the arms of the balance
are of different sizes.] Men whose sense of
taste is destroyed by sickness, sometimes
think honey sour. A diseased eye does not
see many things which do exist, and notes
many things which do not exist. The same
thing frequently takes’ place with regard to
the force of words, when the critic is inferior
to the writer. The critic ought really to set
out with much the same training and equip-
ment as the author. A man ignorant of
agriculture is quite incapable of criticising
husbandry, and the distinctions between har-
mony and discord can only be adequately
judged by a trained musician. But any one
who chooses will set up for a literary critic,
though he cannot tell us where he went to
school, or how much time was spent in his
education, and knows nothing about letters at
all. Isee glearly that, even in the case of
the words’ of the Holy Spirit, the investiga-
tion of the terms is to be attempted not by
every one, but by him who has the spirit of dis-
cernment, as the Apostle has taught us, in the
differences of gifts; —‘* For to one is given
by the Spirit the word of wisdom ; to another
the word of knowledge by the same Spirit ;
to another faith by the same Spirit ; to another
the gift of healing by the same Spirit; to
another the working of miracles; to another
prophecy; to another discerning of spirits.” ?
If, therefore, my gifts are spiritual, he who
wishes to judge them must shew proof of his
own possession of the gift of “" discerning of
spirits.” If, on the contrary, as he calumni-
ously contends, my gifts are of the wisdom
of this world, let him shew that he is an
adept in this world's wisdom, and I will
submit myself to his verdict. And [let no
one suppose that I am making excuses to


1 τηῖς λόγοις πνεύματος ayiov, the reading of the MSS. Bas.
Sec. and Paris. The commoner reading is λογίοις.
21 Cor, xii. 8-10.


LETTERS.


245


evade the charge. I put it into your hands,
dearest brethren, to investigate for yourselves
the points alleged against me.] Are you so
slow of intelligence as to be wholly depend-
ent upon advocates for the discovery of the
truth? Ifthe points in question seem to you
to be quite plain of themselves, persuade the
jesters to drop the dispute. [If there be
anything you do not understand, put ques-
tions to me, through appointed persons who
will do justice to me; or ask of me explana-
tions in writing. And take all kinds of
pains that nothing may be left unsifted.

6. What clearer evidence can there be ot
my faith, than that I was brought up by my
grandmother, blessed woman, who came
from you? I mean the celebrated Macrina
who taught me the words of the blessed
Gregory ; which, as far as memory had pre-
served down to her day, she cherished her-
self. while she fashioned and formed me,
while yet a child, upon the doctrines of piety.
And when I gained the capacity of thought,
my reason being matured by full age, I
travelled over much sea and land, and whom-
soever [ found walking in the rule of godli-
ness delivered, those I set down as fathers, |
and made them my soul’s guides in my
journey to God. And up to this day, by the
grace of Him who has called me in His holy
calling to the knowledge of Himself, I know
of no doctrine opposed to the sound teaching
having sunk into my heart; nor was my soul
ever polluted by the ill-famed blasphemy of
Arius. If I have ever received into com-
munion any who have come from that teacher,
hiding their unsoundness deep within them,
or speaking words of piety, or, at any rate,
not opposing what has been said by me, it is
on these terms that I have admitted them;
and I have not allowed my judgment con-
cerning them to rest wholly with myself,
but have followed the decisions given about
them by our Fathers. For after receiving
the letter of the very blessed Father Athana-
sius, bishop of Alexandria, which I holdin my
hand, and shew to any one who asks, wherein
he has distinctly declared that any one ex-
pressing a wish to come over from the heresy
of the Arians and accepting the Nicene
Creed, is to be received without hesitation
and difficulty, citing in support of his opinion
the unanimous assent of the bishops of
Macedonia and of Asia; I, considering myself
bound to follow the high authority of such a
man and of those who made the rule, and
with every desire on my own part to win the
‘reward promised to peacemakers, did enroll
in the lists of communicants all who ac-
cepted that creed.


7. [The fair thing would be to judge of
me, not from one or two who do not walk
uprightly in the truth, but from the multi-
tude of bishops throughout the world, con-
nected with me by the grace of the Lord.
Make enquiries of Pisidians, Lycaonians,
Isaurians, Phrygians of both provinces, Ar-
menians your neighbours, Macedonians, Ach-
zans, Illyrians, Gauls, Spaniards, the whole
of Italy, Sicilians, Africans, the healthy part
of Egypt, whatever is left of Syria; all of
whom send letters to me, and in turn receive
them from me.]| From these letters, alike
from all which are despatched from them,
and from all which go out from us to them,
you may learn that we are all of one mind,
and of one opinion. [Whoso shuns com-
munion with me, it cannot escape your
accuracy, cuts himself off from the whole
Church. Look round about, brethren, with
whom do you hold communion? If you will
not receive it from me, who remains to ac-
knowledge you? Do not reduce me to the
necessity of counselling anything unpleasant
concerning a Church so dear to me.] There
are things now which I hide in the bottom of
my heart, in secret groaning over and bewail-
ing the evil days in which we live, in that
the greatest Churches which have long been
united to one another in brotherly love, now,
without any reason, are in mutual opposi-
tion. Do not, oh! do not, drive me to
complain of these things to all who are in
communion with me. Do not force me to
give utterance to words which hitherto I have
kept in check by reflection and have hidden
in my heart. Better were it for me to be re-
moved and the Churches to be at one, than
that God’s people should suffer such evil
through our childish ill-will. [Ask your
fathers, and they will tell you that though
our districts were divided in position, yet in
mind they were one, and were governed by
one sentiment. Intercourse of the people
was frequent; frequent the visits of the
clergy; the pastors, too, had such mutual
affection, that each used the other as teacher
and guide in things pertaining to the Lord. |


LETTER, ον:


To Elpidius the bishop?


Once again I have started the well-beloved
presbytee Meletius to carry my greeting to
you. I had positively determined to spare
him, on account of the weakness which he


1 Placed in 375.

2 Of what see is uncertain. He was in friendly relations
with Basil, and therefore was not in communion with Eusta-
thius of Sebaste. (Letter ccli.)


245


BASIL.


has voluntarily brought upon himself, by
bringing his body into subjection for the sake
of the gospel of Christ. But I have judged
it fitting to salute you by the ministry of such
men as he is, able to supply of themselves all
the shortcomings of my letter, and to become,
alike to writer and recipient, a kind of living
epistle. I am also carrying out the very
strong wish, which he has always had, to see
your excellency, ever since he has had ex-
perience of the high qualities you possess.
So now [have besought him to travel to you,
and through him 1 discharge the debt of the
visit I owe you, and beseech you to pray for
me and for the Church of God, that the Lord
may grant me deliverance from the injuries
of the enemies of the Gospel, and to pass my
life in peace and quict. Nevertheless, if
you in your wisdom, think it needful that
we should travel to the same spot, and meet
the rest of our right honourable brother
bishops of the sea board regions, do you
yourself point out a suitable place and time
where and when this meeting may take place.
Write to our brethren to the end that each
and all may, at the appointed time, leave the
business they may have in hand, and may be
able to effect something for the edification of
the Churches of God, do away with the pain
which we now suffer from our mutual sus-
picions, and establish love, without which
the Lord Himself has ordained that obedience
to every commandment must be of none
effect,


LETTER CCVI.'
To Elpidius the bishop. Consolatory.


Now, most of all, do I feel my bodily in-
firmity, when I see how it stands in the way
of my soul’s good. Had matters gone as I
hoped, I should not now be speaking to you
by letter or by messenger, but should in my
own person have been paying the debt of
affection and enjoying spiritual advantage
face to face. Now, however, I am so situated
that I am only too glad if I am able even to
move about in my own country in the ne-
cessary visitation of parishes in my district.
But may the Lord grant to you both strength
and a ready will, and to me, in addition to
my eager desire, ability to enjoy your society
when I am in the country of Comana. I am
afraid lest your domestic trouble may be some
hindrance to you. For I have learnt of your
affliction in the loss of your little boy. Toa
grandfather his death cannot but be grievous.
On the other hand to a man who has attained
to so high a degree of virtue, and alike from


1 Placed in 375.


his experience of this world and his spiritual
training knows what human nature is, it is
natural that the removal of those who are
near and dear should not be wholly intoler-
able. The Lord requires from us what He
does not require from every one. The com-
mon mass of mankind lives by habit, but the
Christian’s rule of life is the commandment of
the Lord, and the example of holy men of old,
whose greatness of soul was, above all, ex-
hibited in adversity. To the end, then, that
you may yourself leave to them that come
after you an example of fortitude and of
genuine trust in what we hope for, show that
you are not vanquished by your grief, but are
rising above your sorrows, patient in affliction,
and rejoicing in hope. Pray let none of these
things be a hindrance to our hoped for meet-
ing. Children, indeed, are held blameless
on account of their tender age; but you and
I are under the responsibility of serving the
Lord, as He commands us, and in all things
to be ready for the administration of the
affairs of the Churches. For the due dis-
charge of that duty the Lord has reserved
great rewards for faithful and wise stewards.


LETTER, ον"


To the clergy of Neocesarea.


You all concur in hating me. To aman
you have followed the leader of the war
against me.* I was therefore minded to
say not a word to any one. I determined
that I would write no friendly letter; that I
would start no communication, but keep my
sorrow in silence to myself. Yet it is wrong
to keep silence in the face of calumny; not
that by contradiction we may vindicate our-
selves, but that we may not allowa le to
travel further and its victims to be harmed.
I have therefore thought it necessary to put
this matter also before you all, and to write
a letter to you, although, when I recently
wrote to all the presbyterate in common, you
did not do me the honour to send mea reply.
Do not, my brethren, gratify the vanity of
those who are filling your minds with per-
nicious opinions. Do not consent to look
lightly on, when, to your knowledge, God’s
people are being subverted by impious teach-
ing. None but Sabellius the Libyan*® and
Marcellus the Galatian* have dared to teach
and write what the leaders of your people
are attempting to bring forward among you


1 Placed in 375. 2 7.6. Atarbius of Neocesarea. —

8 Basil is described as the earliest authority for making
Sabellius an African by birth. (D.C.B. iv. 569.) There is no
contemporary authority for the statement.

4¢.e, of Ancyra.


LETTERS.


247


as their own private discovery. They are
making a great talk about it, but they are
perfectly powerless to give their sophisms
and fallacies even any colour of truth.. In
their harangues against me they shrink from
no wickedness, and persistently refuse to
meet me. Why? Is it not because they
are afraid of being convicted for their own
wicked opinions? Yes; and in their attacks
upon me they have become so lost to all
sense of shame as to invent certain dreams
to my discredit while they falsely accuse my
teaching of being pernicious. Let them take
upon their own heads all the visions of the
autumn months; they can fix no blasphemy
on me, for in every Church there are many
to testify to the truth.

2. When they are asked the reason for
this furious and truceless war, they allege
psalms and a kind of music varying from
the custom which has obtained among you,
and similar pretexts of which they ought to
be ashamed. We are, moreover, accused
because we maintain men in the practice of
true religion who have renounced the world
and all those cares of this life, which the
Lord likens to thorns that do not allow the
word to bring forth fruit. Men of this kind
carry about in the body the deadness of
Jesus; they have taken up their own cross,
and are followers of God. I would gladly
give my life if these really were my faults,
and if I had men with me owning me as
teacher who had chosen this ascetic life.
I hear that virtue of this kind is to be found
now in Egypt, and there are, peradventure,
some men in Palestine whose conversation
follows the precepts of the Gospel. I am
told too that some perfect and blessed men
are to be found in Mesopotamia. We, in
comparison with the perfect, are children.
But if women also have chosen to live the
Gospel life, preferring virginity to wedlock,
leading captive the lust of the flesh, and
living in the mourning which is called blessed,
they are blessed in their profession wherever
they are to be found. We, however, have few
instances of this to show, for with us people
are still in an elementary stage and are be-
ing gradually brought to piety. If any
charges of disorder are brought against
the life of our women I do not undertake to
defend them. One thing, however, I do
say and that is, that these bold hearts, these
unbridled mouths are ever fearlessly uttering
what Satan, the father of lies, has hitherto
been unable to say. I wish you to know
that we rejoice to have assemblies of both
men and women, whose conversation is in
heaven and who have crucified the flesh with


the affections and lusts thereof; they take no
thought for food and raiment, but remain un-
disturbed beside their Lord, continuing night
and day in prayer. Their lips speak not of the
deeds of men : they sing hymns to God contin-
ually, working with their own hands that they
may have to distribute to them that need.

3. Now as to the charge relating to the
singing of psalms, whereby my calumniators
specially scare the simpler folk, my reply is
this. The customs which now obtain are
agreeable to those of all the Churches of God.
Among us the people go at night to the house
of prayer, and, in distress, affliction, and
continual tears, making confession to God,
at last rise from their prayers and begin to
sing psalms. And now, divided into two
parts, they sing antiphonally with one an-
other, thus at once confirming their study of
the Gospels,’ and at the same time produc-
ing for themselves a heedful temper and a
heart free from distraction. Afterwards they
again commit the prelude of the strain to one,
and the rest take it up; and so after passing
the night in various psalmody, praying at
intervals as the day begins to dawn, all. to-
gether, as with one voice and one _ heart,
raise the psalm of confession to the Lord,
each forming for himself his own expressions
of penitence. If it 1s for these reasons that
you renounce me, you will renounce the
Egyptians; you will renounce both Libyans,
Thebans, Palestinians, Arabians, Phoeni-
cians, Syrians, the dwellers by the Euphra-
tes; in a word all those among whom vigils,
prayers, and common psalmody have been
held in honour.

4. But, it is alleged, these practices were
not observed in the time of the great Greg-
ory. My rejoinder is that even the Lit-
anies®? which you now use were not used in
his time. I do not say this to find fault with
you; for my prayer would be that every one
of you should live in tears and continual
penitence. We, for our part, are always
offering supplication for our sins, but we pro-
pitiate our God not as you do, in the words
of mere man, but in the oracles of the Spirit.
And what evidence have you that this custom
was not followed in the time of the great
Gregory? You have kept none of his cus-
toms up to the present time.* Gregory dil
not cover his head at prayer. How could

τῶν λουΐων, of. note on Theodoret, p. 155.

2The Ben. note observes that in this passage Litanies do
not mean processions or supplications, but penitential prayers.
The intercessory prayers which occur in the liturgy of St.
Basil, as in the introductory part of other Greek liturgies, are
not confined to quotations from Scripture.

8This reproach appears to be in contradiction with the
statement in the De Sfrritu Sancto, ὃ 74 (page 47), that the


Church of Neocesarea had rigidly preserved the traditions of
Gregory. The Ben. note would remove the discrepancy by


248
he? He was a true disciple of the Apostle
who says, “" Every man praying or prophesy-
ing, having his head covered, dishonoureth
his head.” ' And ‘¢a man indeed ought not
to cover his head forasmuch as he is the
image of God.”* Oaths were shunned by
Gregory, that pure soul, worthy of the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost, content with
yea and nay, in accordance with the com-
mandinent of the Lord Who said, ‘‘I say
unto you swear not at all.” 7 Gregory could
not bear to call his brother a fool,* for he
stood in awe of the threat of the Lord.
Passion, wrath, and bitterness never pro-
ceeded out of his mouth. Railing he
hated, because it leads not to the kingdom
of heaven. Envy and arrogance had been shut
out of that guileless soul. He would never
have stood at the altar before being recon-
ciled to his brother. A lie, or any word
designed to slander any one, he abominated,
as one who knew that lies come from the
devil, and that the Lord will destroy all that
utter .a dies® , «If. you have imone of (these
things, and are clear of all, then are you
verily disciples of the disciple of the Lord.
If not, beware lest, in your disputes about
the mode of singing psalms, you are strain-
ing at the gnat and setting at naught the
greatest of the commandments.

I have been driven to use these expres-
sions by the urgency of my defence, that
you may be taught to cast the beam out of
your own eyes before you try to remove other
men’s motes. Nevertheless, I am conceding
all, although there is nothing that is not
searched into before God. Only let great
matters prevail, and do not allow innovations
in the faith to make themselves heard. Do not
disregard the hypostases. Do not deny the
name of Christ. Do not put a wrong mean-
ing on the words of Gregory. If you do
so, as long asI breathe and have the power
of utterance, I cannot keep silence, when I
see souls being thus destroyed.


LEVIES ‘CCVEHT?


To Eulanctus.


You have been long silent, though you
have very great power of speech, and are


confining the rigid conservatism to matters of importance.
In these the Neocesareans would tolerate no change, and
allowed no monasteries and no enrichment of their liturgies
with new rites. ‘‘Titanies,” however, are regarded as com-
paratively unimportant innovations. The note concludes:
Neque enim secum tpse pugnat Pasilius, cum Neocesarienses
taudat in libro De Spiritu Sancto, quod Gregorit tnstituta
arctissime teneant, hic autem vituperat quod ea omnino reli:
querint. *Illic enim respicit ad exteriora instttuta, hic autem
ad virtutum exemplar, convicti et tracundie fugam, odium
juris jurandi et mendacit.

11 Cor. Xi. 4. 3 Matt. v. 34.


Ps. ¥. 6) dake,
21 Cor. xi. 7. # cf. Matt. v. 22.


6 Placed in 375.


BASIL.


well trained in the art of conversation and
of exhibiting yourself by your eloquence.
Possibly it is Neocasarea which is_ the
cause of your not writing to me. I suppose
I must take it as a kindness if those who
are there do not remember me, for, as J am
informed by those who report what they
hear, the mention made of me is not kind.
You, however, used to be one of those who
were disliked for my sake, not one of those
who dislike me for the sake of others. I
hope this description will continue to fit you,
that wherever you are you will write to me,
and will have kindly thoughts of me, if you
care at all for what is fair and right. It is
certainly fair that those who have been first
to show affection should be paid in their
own coin.


LETTER. CCir?
Without address. .


Ir is your lot to share my distress, and to
do battle on my behalf. Herein is proof of
your manliness. God, who ordains our
lives, grants to those who are capable of
sustaining great fights greater opportunity
of winning renown. You truly have risked
your own life as a test of your valour in
your friend’s behalf, like gold in the furnace.
I pray God that other men may be made
better; that you may remain what you are,
and that you will not cease to find fault with
me, as you do, and to charge me with not
writing often to you, as a wrong on my part
which does you very great injury. This
is an accusation only made by a friend.
Persist in demanding the payment of such
debts. 1 am not so very unreasonable in
paying the claims of affection.


GETTER ‘CCX.


To the notables of Neocesarea.


I am really under no obligation to publish
my own mind to you, or to state the reasons
for my present sojourn where 1 am; it is not
my custom to indulge in self advertisement,
nor is the matter worth publicity. Iam not,
I think, following my own inclinations; lam
answering the challenge of your leaders. I


| have always striven to be ignored more ear-


nestly than popularity hunters strive after
notoriety. But, I am told, the ears of every-
body in your town are set a thrilling, while


1 Plaged in 375.

2 Placed in 375, the year after the composition of the Ye
Spirttu. Sancto. It apparently synchronizes with Letler
ccxxiii., in which Basil more directly repels those calumnies of
the versatile Eustathius of Sebaste which he had borne in
silence for three years. On Annesi, from which he writes,
and the occasion of the visit, see Prolegomena.


~


LETTERS:


249


certain tale-mongers, creators of lies, hired for
this very work, are giving you a history of
me and my doings. I therefore do not think
that I ought to overlook your being exposed
to the teaching of vile intention and foul
tongue; I think that I am bound to tell you
myself in what position Iam placed. From
my childhood 1 have been familiar with this
spot, for here I was brought up by my
grandmother; ' hither I have often retreated,
and here I have spent many years, when
endeavouring to escape from the hubbub of
public affairs, for experience has taught me
that the quiet and solitude of the spot are
favourable to serious thought. Moreover
as my brothers? are now living here, I
have gladly retired to this retreat, and have
taken a brief breathing time from the press
of the labours that beset me, not as a centre
from which I might give trouble to others,
but to indulge my own longing.

2. Where then isthe need of having re-
course to dreams and of hiring their inter-
preters, and making me matter for talk over
the cups at public entertainments? Had
slander been launched against me in any
other quarter, I should have called you to
witness to prove what I think, and now I ask
every one of you to remember those old days
when I was invited by your city to take
charge of the education of the young, and
a deputation of the first men among you
came to see me.* Afterwards, when you all
crowded round me, what were you not ready
to give? what not to promise? Nevertheless
you were not able to keep me. How then
could I, who at that time would not listen
when you invited me, now attempt to thrust
myself on you uninvited? How could I, who
when you complimented and admired me,
avoided you, have been intending to court
you now that you calumniate me? Nothing
of the kind, sirs; 1 am not quite so cheap.
No man in his senses would go on board a
boat without a steersman, or get alongside
a Church where the men sitting at the helm


1 Macrina, at her residence at Annesi.

2 cf. Ep. ccxvi., where he speaks of going to the house of
his brother Peter near Neocesarea. One of the five brothers
apparently died young, as the property of the elder Basil was
at his death, before 340, divided into nine portions, Ζ.6. among
the five daughters and tour surviving sons, the youngest,
Peter, being then an infant. (Greg. Nyss. Vita Mac. 186.)
Naucratius, the second son, was killed by an accident while
hunting, c. 2357. Gregory of Nyssa must, therefore, be referred
to in the text, if by ““ brothers ” is meant brothers in blood.
Was it to Peter’s * cottage”? or some neighbouring dwelling
that Gregory fled when he escaped from the police of the
Vicar Demosthenes, in order not to obey the summons of
Valens to his synod at Ancyra? Is the cottage of Peter the
“some quiet spot” of Ep. ccxxv.? The plural ἀδελφῶν might
be used conventionally, or understood to include Peter and a
sister or sisters.

3 2,6. when he was resident at Cesarea in his earlier man-
hood. If Letter ccclviii. (from Libanius to Basil) refers to
this period. it would seem that for a time Basil did undertake
school work.


are themselves stirring up tempest and storm.
Whose fault was it that the town was all full
of tumult, when some were running away
with no one after them, and others stealing
off when no invader was near, and all the
wizards and dream-tellers were flourishing
their bogeys? Whose fault was it else? Does
not every child know that it was the mob-
leaders’? The reasons of their hatred to me
it would be bad taste on my part to recount;
but they are quite easy for you toapprehend.
When bitterness and division have come to
the last pitch of savagery, and the explana-
tion of the cause is altogether groundless and
ridiculous, then the mental disease is plain,
dangerous indeed to other people’s comfort,
but greatly and personally calamitous to the
patient. And there is one charming point
about them. Torn and racked with inward
agony as they are, they cannot yet for very
shame speak out about it. The state they
are in may be known not only from their
behaviour to me, but from the rest of their
conduct. Ifit were unknown, it would not
much matter. But the veritable cause of
their shunning communication with me may
be unperceived by the majority among you.
Listen; and I will tell you.

3. There is going on among you a move-
ment ruinous to the faith, disloyal to the
apostolical and evangelical dogmas, disloyal
too to the tradition of Gregory the truly
great,’ and of his successors up to the blessed
Musonius, whose teaching is still ringing in
your ears.2- For those men, who, from fear
of confutation, are forging figments against
me, are endeavouring to renew the old mis-
chief of Sabellius, started long ago, and extin-
guished by the tradition of the great Gregory.
But do you bid goodbye to those wine-laden
heads, bemuddled by the swelling fumes that
mount from their debauch, and from me who
am wide awake and from fear of God cannot
keep silence, hear what plague is rife among
you. Sabellianism is Judaism* imported
into the preaching of the Gospel under the
guise of Christianity. For if a man calls
Father Son and Holy Ghost one thing of
many faces,* and makes the hypostasis of the
three one,’ what is this but to deny the ever-
lasting pre-existence of the Only begotten?
He denies too the Lord’s sojourn among men
in the incarnation,° the going down into hell,
the resurrection, the judgment; he denies
also the proper operations of the Spirit. And

17 cor

a Nintaotifteay Hp. at Nesdeuasea; Wha died ἃς 408. af ἢ
sais ae De Sp. S.§ 77, p. 49 and Ep. δἰ ξεῖν Ῥ. 220.

ἕν πρᾶγμα πολύπροσωπον. Another MS. reading is πολυ-


ὦνυμον, ‘of many names.”


5 cf. note on p. 195. 6 οἰκονομικήν.


250


BAS, .”


I hear that even rasher innovations than
those of the foolish Sabellius are now vent-
ured on among you. It is said, and that on
the evidence of ear witnesses, that your clever
men go to such an extreme as to say that
there is no tradition of the name of the Only-
begotten, while of the name of the adversary
there is; and at this they are highly delighted
and elated, as though it were a discovery of
their own. For it is said, ‘**I came in my
Father’s name and ye received me not; if
another shall come in his own name, him ye
will receive.” ! And because it is said, ‘* Go
ye and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost,”? it is obvious, they
urge, that the name is one, for it is not ‘* in
the zames,” but ‘* in the name.”

4. I blush so to write to you, for the men
thus guilty are of my own blood;* and I
groan for my own soul, in that, like boxers
fighting two men at once, I can only give
the truth its proper force by hitting with
my proofs, and knocking down, the errors of
doctrine on the right and on the left. On one
side I am attacked by the Anomean: on the
other by the Sabellian. Do not, I implore
you, pay any attention to these abominable
and impotent sophisms. Know that the name
of Christ which is above every name is His
being called Son of God, as Peter says,
‘¢ There is none other name under heaven
given among men, whereby we must be
saved.’’* And as to the words ** I came in
my Father’s name,” it is to be understood
that. He so says describing His Father as
origin and cause of Himself.’ And if it is said
‘¢ Go and baptize in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost,”
we must not suppose that here one name is
delivered to us. For just as he who said
Paul and Silvanus and Timothy mentioned
three names, and coupled them one to the
other by the word ““ and,” so He who spoke
of the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,”
mentioned three, and united them by the
conjunction, teaching that with each name
must be understood its own proper mean-
ing; for the names mean things. And no
one gifted with even the smallest particle of
intelligence doubts that the existence belong-
ing to the things is peculiar and complete in
itself. For of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
there is the same nature and one Godhead ;
but these are different names, setting forth to
us the circumscription and exactitude of the
meanings. For unless the meaning of the


1John v.43. Slightlv varied. 2 Matt. xxviii. 19.
8 The allusion is supposed to be to Atarbius. cf. Letter
Ixv, 4 Acts iv. 12. 5 cf. De Sp. S. § 44, p. 27.


distinctive qualities of each be unconfounded,
it is impossible for the doxology to be ade-
quately offered to Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.

If, however, they deny that they so say,
and so teach, my object is attained. Yet I
see that this denial is no easy matter, because
of our having many witnesses who heard
these things said. But let bygones be by-
gones; let them only be sound now. If they
persist in the same old error I must proclaim
your calamity even to other Churches, and
get letters written to you from more bishops.
In my efforts to break down this huge mass of
impiety now gradually and secretly growing,
I shall either effect something towards the
object I have in view; or at least my present
testimony will clear me of guilt in the judg-
ment day.

δι They have already inserted these
expressions in their own writings. They
sent them first to the man of God, Mele-
tius,' bishop, and after receivirtg from him a
suitable reply, like mothers of monsters,
ashamed of their natural deformities, these
men themselves brought forth and bring up
their disgusting offspring in appropriate
darkness. They made an attempt too by let-
ter on my dear friend Anthimus, bishop of
Tyana,* on the ground that Gregory had said
in his exposition of the faith® that Father and
Son are in thought two, but in hypostasis
one.* The men who congratulate themselves


1 Meletius of Antioch.

2Tyana, at the north of Mount Taurus, is the city which
gave a distinctive name to Apollonius the Thaumaturge.
That Basil should speak in kindly and complimentary terms
of Anthimus is remarkable, for from few contemporaries did
he suffer more. It was the quarrel in which Anthimus attacked
and plundered a train of Basil’s sumpter mules, and Gregory
of Nazianzus fought stoutly for his friend, that led to Basil’s
erecting Sasima into a bishopric, as a kind of buffer see
against his rival metropolitan. (Greg. Naz., Or. xliii. 356, Ep.
xxxi, and Carm.i.8.) See Prolegomena.

3 The ἔκθεσις τῆς πίστεως Of Gregcry Thaumaturgus. cf.
Ep. cciv. and the De Sp. Scto.§ 74. On the genuineness of
the ἔκθεσις, vide D.C. Biog. i. 733. cf. Dorner’s Christologie
i. 737. It is given at length in the Life of Greg. Thaumat.
by Gregory of Nyssa, and is found in the Latin Psalter,
written in gold, which Charlemagne gave to Adrian I. Bp.
Bull’s translation is as follows: — °

‘* There is one God, Father of Him who is the living Word,
subsisting Wisdom and Power and Eternal Impress, Perfect
begotten of the Perfect, Father of the only begotten Son.
There is one Lord, Alone of the Alone, God of God, Impress
and Image of the Godhead, the operative Word; Wisdom
comprehensive of the system of the universe, and Power pro-
ductive of the whole creation; true Son of true Father, Invis-
ible of Invisible and Incorruptible of Incorruptible, and
Immortal of Immortal, and Eternal of Eternal. And there is
one Holy Ghost, who hath His being of God, who hath ap-
peared through the Son, Image of the Son, Perfect of the
Perfect; Life, the cause of all them that live; Holy Fountain,
Holiness, the Bestower of Sanctification, in whom is mani-
fested God the Father, who is over all and in all, and God the
Son, who is through all. A perfect Trinity, not divided nor
alien in glory and eternity and dominion.”

4 The Ben. note refuses to believe that so Sabellian an ex-
pression can have been used by Gregory. Basil’s explanation
is that it was used in controversy with a heathen on another
subject, loosely and not dogmatically. The words are said not
to be found in any extant document attributed to Gregory,
whether genuine or doubtful. But they may be matched in
some of the expressions of Athanasius. cf. ἢ. 195. Ath., Tom,
ad Af.§4 and Hom. in Terem. viii. 96.


LETTERS.


251


on the subtilty of their intelligence could |


not perceive that this is said not in reference
to dogmatic opinion, but in controversy
with Zlian. And in this dispute there are
not a few copyists’ blunders, as, please God,
I shall shew in the case of the actual ex-
pressions used. But in his endeavour to
convince the heathen, he deemed it needless
to be nice about the words he employed;
he judged it wiser sometimes to make con-
cessions to the character of the subject who
was being persuaded, so as not to run counter
to the opportunity given him. This explains
how it is that you may find there many
expressions which now give great support
to the heretics, as for instance ‘* creature”?
and *‘ thing made” * andthelike. But those
who ignorantly criticise these writings refer to
the question of the Godhead much that is
said in reference to the conjunction with
man; as is the case with this passage which
they are hawking about. For it is indis-
pensable to have clear understanding that,
as he who fails to confess the community of
the essence or substance falls into polytheism,
so he who refuses to grant the distinction of
the hypostases is carried away into Judaism.
For we must keep our mind stayed, so to
say, on certain underlying subject matter,
and, by forming a clear impression of its
distinguishing lines, so arrive at the end
desired. For suppose we do not bethink us
of the Fatherhood, nor bear in mind Him
of whom this distinctive quality is marked
off, how can we take in the idea of God the
Father? For merely to enumerate the
differences of Persons? is insufficient; we
must confess each Person* to have a natural
existence in real hypostasis. Now Sabellius
did not even deprecate the formation of the
persons without hypostasis, saying as he did
that the same God, being one in matter,°
was metamorphosed as the need of the
moment required, and spoken of now as
Father, now as Son, and now as Holy Ghost.
The inventors of this unnamed heresy are
renewing the old long extinguished error;
those, I mean, who are repudiating the
hypostases, and denying the name of the
Son of God. They must give over uttering
iniquity against God,*® or they will have to
wail with them that deny the Christ.

6. I have felt compelled to write to you in
these terms, that you may be on your guard
against the mischief arising from bad teach-
ing. If we may indeed liken pernicious
teachings to poisonous drugs, as your drearn-
tellers have it, these doctrines are hemlock


5 τῷ UTOKELLEeVvw.


OPPs. lxxv. 5, L425.


3 προσώπων.
4 πρόσωπον.


1 κτίσμα.
2 ποίημα.


and monkshood, or any other deadly to man.

It is these that destroy souls; not my words,

as this shrieking drunken scum, full of the

fancies of their condition, make out. If they
had any sense they ought to know that in
souls, pure and cleansed from all defilement,

the prophetic gift shines clear. In a foul

mirror you cannot see what the reflexion is,

neither can a soul preoccupied with cares of

this life, and darkened with the passions of

the lust of the flesh, receive the rays of the

Holy Ghost. Every dream is not a prophecy,

as says Zechariah, ** The Lord shall make

bright clouds, and give them showers of

fain, «ὦν ἢ for mie idels."lave> spoken
vanity and the diviners have told false’
dreams.” ὁ Those who, as Isaiah says, dream

and love to sleep in their bed? forget that an

operation of error is sent to ** the children of
disobedience.” * And there is a lying spirit,

which arose in false prophecies, and deceived
Ahab.* Knowing this they ought not to have
been so lifted up as to ascribe the gift of

prophecy to themselves. ‘They are shewn to
fall far short even of the case of the seer
Balaam; for Balaam when invited by the
king of Moab with mighty bribes brooked
not to utter a word beyond the will of God,

nor to curse Israel whom the Lord cursed
not.’ If then their sleep-fancies do not tally
with the commandments of the Lord, let
them be content with the Gospels. The
Gospels need no dreams to add to their
credit. The Lord has sent His peace to us,

and left us a new commandment, to love one
another, but dreams bring strife and division
and destruction of love. Let them therefore
not give occasion to the devil to attack their
souls in sleep; nor make their imaginations

of more authority than the instruction of

salvation.


LETTER CCXI.®
To Olympius.”


Truty when I read your excellency’s
letter I felt unwonted pleasure and cheerful-
ness ; and when I met your well-beloved sons,
I seemed to behold yourself. They found
me in the deepest affliction, but they so be-
haved as to make me forget the hemlock,
which your dreamers and dream mongers
are carrying about to my hurt, to please the
people who have hired them. Some letters
I have already sent; others, if you like, shall
follow. I only hope that they may be of
some advantage to the recipients.


1 Zens χει, 2: 53. Eph, ii. 2.
2 cf. Is. Ivi. to. 41 Kings xxii, 22.
1 of, Letters iv., Xii., xiii., cXxxi.


5 Num. xxii. 11.


6 Placed in 375.


252


BASIL,


LETPER (CCXII:'
To Hilarius.’


I. You can imagine what 1 felt, and in
what state of mind I was, when I came to
Dazimon and found that you had left a few
days before my arrival. From my boyhood
I have held you in admiration, and, therefore,
ever since our old school days, have placed
a high value on intercourse with you. But
another reason tor my doing so is that nothing
is so precious now as a soul that loves the
truth, and is gifted with a sound judgment in
practical affairs. This, I think, is to be found
sin you. I see most men, as in the hippo-
drome, divided into factions, some for one
side and some for another, and shouting with
their parties. But you are above fear,
flattery, and every ignoble sentiment, and so
naturally look at truth with an unprejudiced
eye. AndI see that you are deeply interested
in the affairs of the Churches, about which
you have sent me a letter, as you have said
in your last. I should like to know who
took charge of the conveyance of this earlier
epistle, that I may know who has wronged
me by its loss. No letter from you on this
subject has yet reached me.

2. How much, then, would I not have
given to meet you, that I might tell you all
my troubles? When one is in pain it is, as
you know, some alleviation, even to describe
it. How gladly would I have answered
your questions, not trusting to lifeless letters,
but in my own person, narrating each par-
ticular. The persuasive force of living words
is more efficient and they are not so suscep-
tible as letters to attack and to mis-represen-
tation. For now no one has left anything
untried, and the very men in whom I put
the greatest confidence, men, who when I
saw them among others, I used to think
something more than human, have received
documents written by some one, and have
sent them on, whatever they are, as mine,
and on their account are calumniating me to
the brethren as though there is nothing now
that pious and faithful men ought to hold in
greater abhorrence thah my name. From
the beginning it has been my object to live
unknown, to a degree not reached by any
one who has considered human infirmity ;
but now, just as though on the other hand it
had been my purpose to make myself noto-
rious to the world, I have been talked about
all over the earth, and I may add all over the
sea too. For men, who go to the last limit of


2 An old schoolfellow of Basil’s, of whom nothing seems
to be known but what is gathered from this :etter,


ane ae
impiety, and are introducing intothe Churches


the godless opinion of Unlikeness,’ are wag-
ing war againstme. Those too who hold the
via media,” as they think, and, though they
start from the same principles, do not follow
out their logical consequences, because they
are so opposed to the view of the majority,
are equally hostile to me, overwhelming me
to the utmost of their ability with their re-
proaches, and abstaining from no insidious
attacks against me. But the Lord has made
their endeavours vain.

Is not this a grievous state of things?
Must it not make my life painful? 1 have at
all events one consolation-in my troubles, my
bodily infirmity. This I am sure will not
suffer me to remain much longer in this mis-
erable life. No more on this point. You
too 1 exhort, in your bodily infirmity. to bear
yourself bravely and worthy of the God Who
has called us. If He sees us accepting our
present circumstances with thanksgiving, He
will either put away our troubles as He did
Job’s, or will requite us with the glorious
crowns of patience in the life to come.


LETTER “CCXAIIt?


Without address.


1. May the Lord, Who has brought me
prompt help in my afflictions, grant you the
help of the refreshment wherewith you have
refreshed me by writing to me, rewarding
you for your consolation of my humble self
with the real and great gladness of the Spirit.
For I was indeed downcast in soul when I
saw ina great multitude the almost brutish
and unreasonable insensibility of the people,
and the inveterate and ineradicable unsatis-
factoriness of their leaders. But I saw your
letter; I saw the treasure of love which it
contained; then I knew that He Who or-
dains all our lives had made some sweet
consolation shine on me in the bitterness of


17.e,the Anomeans. Ontheuse of the word dogma for an
heretical tenet, cf. note on p. 41. ,

2The Ben. note remarks that at first sight Eustathius of
Sebasteia seems to be pointed at, for in Letter cxxviii. Basil
speaks of him as occupying a contemptible half-and-half posi-
tion. But, continues the note: S7 res attentius consideretur,
non Eustathium proprie hoc loco, sed generatim eosdem
hereticos, guos contra liber De ρόαι Sancto scriptus est,
perspicuum ertt notart. Nam medius ille Eustathii status in
co positus erat, guod nec catholicus potentioribus Arianis
catholicis vidert vellet. Nondum aperti cum Arianis con-
junctus, nec probare que ipsi a Basilio proponebantur. At
guos hic commemorat Basilius, hi catholice doctrine bellum
apertum tn diaerant, et quamvis dissimilitudinis impietatem
fugere viderentur, tisdem tamen, ac Anomei, principiis
stabant. Hoc ets exprobat Basilius tn ltbro De Spiritu
Sancto, cap. 2,ubt impias eorum de Filio ac Spiritu sancto
nugas ex principtis Aetit deductas esse denonstrat, idem
heretict_ non destierunt nefarta Basillii expzllendi consilia
intre. Eorum convicia in Basilium, instdias et peat
molitiones, furorem ac bellum tnexptabile, vide tn libro De
Spiritu Sancto, num. 13, 25) 34152, 00, 99; 75+

8 Placed in 375.


LETTERS:


253


my life. I therefore salute your holiness in
return, and exhort you, as is my wont, not
to cease to pray for my unhappy life, that I
may never, drowned in the unrealities of
this world, forget God, ‘* who raiseth up the
poor out of the dust;”’ that I may never be
lifted up with pride and fall into the con-
demnation of the devil;? that I may never be
found by the Lord neglectful of my steward-
ship and asleep; never discharging it amiss,
and wounding the conscience of my fellow-
servants; ° and, never companying with the
drunken, suffer the pains threatened in God’s
just judgment against wicked stewards. 1
beseech you, therefore, in all your prayers
to pray God that I may be watchful in all
things; that I may be no shame or disgrace
to the name of Christ, in the revelation of
the secrets of my heart, in the great day of
the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ.
2. Know then that I am expecting to be
summoned by the wickedness of the heretics
to the court, in the name of peace. Learn
too that on being so informed, this bishop *
wrote to me to hasten to Mesopotamia, and,
after assembling together those who in that
country are of like sentiments with us, and
are strengthening the state of the Church, to
travel in their company to the emperor.
But perhaps my health will not be good
enough to allow me to undertake a jour-
ney in the winter. Indeed, hitherto I have
not thought the matter pressing, unless
you advise it. I shall therefore await your
counsel that my mind may be made up.
Lose no time then, I beg you, in making
known to me, by means of one of our trusty
brethren, what course seems best to the di-
vinely guided intelligence of your excellency.


LE ITER, CCXIV.’


To Count Terentius.®


1. Wuen I heard that your excellency
had again been compelled to take part in
public atiairs, I was straightway distressed
(for the truth must be told) at the thought
of how contrary to your mind it must be
that you, after once giving up the anxieties
of official life, and allowing yourself leisure
for the care of your soul, should again be
forced back into your old career. But then
I bethought me that peradventure the
Lord has ordained that your lordship should
again appear in public from this wish to

4 Maran (Vit. Bas. vi.) conjectures this bishop to be Mele-
tius, and refers to the beginning of Letter ccxvi. with an ex-
pression of astonishment that Tillemont should refer this


letter to the vear 373.


5 Placed in 375. 6 cf, Letters xcix. and cv.


grant the boon of one alleviation for the
countless pains which now beset the Church
in our part of the world. I am, moreover,
cheered by the thought that I am about to
meet your excellency once again before I de-
part this life.

2. Buta further rumour has reached me
that you are in Antioch, and are transacting
the business in hand with the chief authori-
ties. And, besides this, I have heard that the
brethren who are of the party of Paulinus
are entering on some discussion with your
excellency on the subject of union with us;
and by ‘*us” I mean those who are sup-
porters of the blessed man of God, Meletius.'
[ hear, moreover, that the Paulinians are
carrying about a letter of the Westerns,’
assigning to them the episcopate of the
Church in Antioch, but speaking under a
false impression of Meletius, the admirable
bishop of the true Church of God. I am
not astonished at this. They * are totally ig-
norant of what is going on here; the others,
though they might be supposed to know,
give an account to them in which party is
put before truth; and it is only what one
might expect that they should either be igno-
rant of the truth, or should even endeavour
to conceal the reasons which led the blessed
Bishop Athanasius to write to Paulinus.
But your excellency has on the spot those
who are able to tell you accurately what
passed between the bishops in the reign of
Jovian, and from them I beseech you to get
information.* I accuse no one; I pray that
I may have love to all, and ‘* éspecially unto
them who are of the household of faith;”®
and therefore I congratulate those who have
received the letter from Rome. And, al-
though it is a grand testimony in their
favour, I only hope it is true and confirmed
by facts. But I shall never beable to per-
suade myself on these grounds to ignore
Meletius, or to forget the Church which is
under him, or to treat as small, and of little
importance to the true religion, the questions
which originated the division. I shall never
consent to give in, merely because somebody
is very much elated at receiving a letter from


1 On the divisions at Antioch, cf. Theod., H.E, iii. 2. Basil
was no doubt taking the wise course in supporting Meletius,
whose personal orthodoxy was unimpeachable. But the irre-
concilable Eustathians could not forgive him his Arian nomi-
nation,

2This description might apply to either of the two letters
written by Damasus to Paulinus on the subject of the admis-
sion to communion of Vitalius, bishop of the Apollinarian
schism at Antioch, (Labbe, Cozc. ii. 864 and goo, and Theod.
H.E.v.11.) The dates may necessitate its being referred to
the former. 3 7.e.the Westerns.

4cf. Letter cclviii, and the Pro/egomena to Athanasius in
this edition, p. lxi. The events reterred to took place in the
winter of 363, when Athanasius was at Antioch, and in the
early part of 364 on his return to Alexandria.

5 Gal, vi. 10.


254


BASIL.


men.! Even if it had come down from
heaven itself, but he does not agree with the
sound doctrine of the faith, I cannot look
upon him as in communion with the saints.
Consider well, my excellent friend,
that the falsifiers of the truth, who have in-
troduced the Arian schism as an innovation on
the sound faith of the Fathers, advance no
other reason for refusing to accept the pious
opinion of the Fathers than the meaning of the
homoousion which they hold in their wick-
edness, and to the slander of the whole faith,
alleging our contention to be that the Son is
consubstantial in hypostasis. If we give
them any opportunity by our. being carried
away by men who propound these sentiments
and their like, rather from simplicity than
from malevolence, there is nothing to pre-
vent our giving them an_ unanswerable
ground of argument against ourselves and
confirming the heresy of those whose one
end is in all their utterances about the

Church, not so much to establish their own
position as to calumniate mine. What more
serious calumny could there be? What bet-
ter calculated to disturb the faith of the
majority than that some of us could be
shewn to assert that there is one hypostasis
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? We dis-
tinctly lay down that there is a difference of
Persons; but this statement was anticipated
by Sabellius, who affirms that God is one by
hypostasis, but is described by Scripture in
different Persons, according to the require-
ments of each individual case; sometimes
under the name of Father, when there is oc-
casion for this Person; sometimes under the
name of Son when there is a descent to
human interests or any of the operations of
the cconomy;* and sometimes under the
Person of Spirit when the occasion demands
such phraseology. If, then, any among us
are shewn to assert that Father, Son and
Holy Ghost are one in substance,*® while we
maintain the three perfect Persons, how
shall we escape giving clear and incontro-
vertible proof of the truth of what is being
asserted about us?

4. The non-identity of hypostasis and
ousia is, 1 take it, suggested even by our
western brethren, where, from a suspicion of
the inadequacy of their own language, they
have given the word ozs/a in the Greek, to
the end that any possible difference of mean-
ing might be preserved in the clear and un-
confounded distinction of terms. If you ask
me to state shortly my own view, I shall state
in a letter from Rome. cf. Prolegomena.


2 Vide notes, pp. 7 and 12. On Sabellius, cf. note on Letter
cCXxXxvi. 8 τὸ ὑποκείμενον.


that ousia has the same relation to hypostasis
as the common has to the particular. Every
one of us both shares in existence by the
common term of essezce (ousia) and by his
own properties is such an one and such an
one. In the same manner, in the matter
in question, the term owsza is common, like
goodness, or Godhead, orany similar attri-
bute ; while hypostasis is contemplated in the
special property of Fatherhood, Sonship, or
the power to sanctify. If then they describe
the Persons as being without hypostasis,! the
statement is fer se absurd; but if they con-
cede that the Persons exist in real hypostasis,
as they acknowledge, let them so reckon them
that the principle of the homoousion may
be preserved in the unity of the Godhead,
and that the doctrine preached may be the
recognition of true religion, of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, in the perfect and complete
hypostasis of each of the Persons named.
Nevertheless, there is one point which I should
like to have pressed on your excellency, that
you and all who like you care for the truth,
and honour the combatant in the cause of true
religion, ought to wait for the lead to be
taken in bringing about this union and peace
by the foremost authorities in the Church,
whom I count as pillars and foundations of
the truth and of the Church, and reverence
all the more because they have been sent away
for punishment, and have been exiled far
from home. Keep yourself, I implore you,
clear of prejudice, that in you, whom God
has given me asa staff and support in all
things, I may be able to find rest.’


LETTER CEXxVS
To the Presbyter Dorotheus.


I Took the earliest opportunity of writing
to the most admirable Count Terentius, think-
ing it better to write to him on the subject in
hand by means of strangers, and_ being
anxious that our very dear brother Acacius
shall not be inconvenienced by any delay. I
have therefore given my letter to the govern-
ment treasurer, who is travelling by the im-
perial post, and I have charged him to shew
the letter to you first. I cannot understand how
it is that no one has told you that the road to
Rome is wholly impracticable in winter, the
country between Constantinople and our own
regions being full of enemies. If the route
by sea must be taken, the season will be

1 ἀνυπόστατα.

2 On the point treated of in this letter, cf. note on p. 5 and
Letter xxxvili. p. 137. But in the De S.S. cap. 38 (p. 23) St.
Basil himself repudiates the assertion of three ‘‘ original


hypostases,” when he is apparently using ὑπόστασις in the
Nicene sense. 3 Placed in 375.


LETTERS.


255


favourable; if indeed my God-beloved
brother Gregory ! consents to the voyage and
to the commission concerning these matters.
For my own part, I do not know who can
go with him, and am aware that heis quite
inexperienced in ecclesiastical affairs. With
aman of kindly character he may get on
very well, and be treated with respect, but
what possible good could accrue to the cause
by communication between a man _ proud
and exalted, and therefore quite unable to
hear those who preach the truth to him from
a lower standpoint, and a man like my
brother, to whom anything like mean servility
is unknown?


LETTER CCXVI.?


To Meletius, bishop of Antoch.


Many other*® journeys have taken me
from home. I have been as far as Pisidia
to settle the matters concerning the brethren
in Isauria in concert with the Pisidian
bishops. Thence I journeyed into Pontus,
for Eustathius had caused no small disturbance
at Dazimon, and had caused there a consider-
able secession from our church. I even went
as far as the home of my brother Peter,* and,
as this is not far from Neoceesarea, there was
occasion of considerable trouble to the Neo-
cesareans, and of much rudeness to myself.
Some men fted when no one was in pursuit.
And I was supposed to be intruding uninvited,
simply to get compliments from the folk
there. As soon as I got home, after con-
tracting a severe illness from the bad
weather and my anxieties, I straightway re-
ceived a letter from the East to tell me that
Paulinus had had certain letters from the
West addressed to him, in acknowledgement
of a sort of higher claim; and that the Anti-
ochene rebels were vastly elated by them,
and were next preparing a form of creed, and
offering to make its terms a condition of union
with our Church. Besides all this it was re-
ported to me that they had seduced to their
faction that most excellent man Terentius.
I wrote to him at once as forcibly as I could,
to induce him to pause; and I tried to point
out their disingenuousness.


17.e. of Nyssa, an unsuitable envoy to Damascus,

2 Placed in 375.

3 Onthis word other the Ben. note grounds the argument
that Meletius had proposed a journey which Basil had not
undertaken, and hence that the unnamed bishop of Letter
cexiii. is Meletius; and further that the fact of the bishop not
being named in ccxiii., and the obscurity of this and of other
letters, may indicate the writer’s hesitation to put particulars in
his letters which might be more discreetly left to be conveyed
by word of mouth.

47.e. the settlement on the Iris, where Peter had succeeded
Basil as Head.


ΠΤ ΤΕ CCXVIT,


To Amphilochius, on the Canons.'


On my return from a long journey (for
I have been into Pontus on ecclesiastical
business, and to visit my relations) with my
body weak and ill, and my spirits considera-
bly broken, I took your reverence’s letter
into my hand. No sooner did I receive the
tokens of that voice which to me is of all voices
the sweetest, and of that hand that I love so
well,than 1 forgot all my troubles. And if I
was made so much more cheerful by the receipt
of your letter, you ought to be able to con-
jecture at what value I price your actual
presence. May this be granted me by the
Holy One, whenever it may be convenient to
you and you yourself send me an invitation.
And if you were to come to the house at
Euphemias it would indeed be pleasant for
me to meet you, escaping from my vexations
here, and hastening to your unfeigned affec-
tion. Possibly also for other reasons I may
be compelled to go as far as Nazianzus by
the sudden departure of the very God-beloved
bishop Gregory. How or why this has
come to pass, so far I have no information.’
The man about whom 1 had spoken to your
excellency, and whom you expected to be
ready by this time, has, you must know,
fallen ill of a lingering disease, and is more-
over now suffering from an affection of the
eyes, arising from his old complaint and from
the illness which has now befallen him, and
he is quite unfit to do any work. I have no
one else with me. It is consequently better,
although the matter was left by them to me,
for some one to be put forward by them. And
indeed one cannot but think that the ex-
pressions were used merely as a necessary
form, and that what they really wished was
what they originally requested, that the per-
son selected for the leadership should be one
of themselves. If there is any one of the
lately baptized,? whether Macedonius ap-
prove or not, let him be appointed. You
will instruct him in his duties, the Lord,


1 The third canonical letter, written on Basil’s return from
Pontus, in 375.

2 This is the sudden disappearance of Gregory from Nazi-
anzus at the end of 375, which was due at once to his craving
for retirement and his anxiety not to complicate the appoint-
ment of a successor to his father (who died early in 374) in the
see of Nazianzus. He found a refuge in the monastery of
Thecla at the [saurian Seleucia. (Carm. xi. 549.)

5 The Ben. note appositely points out that any astonishment,
such as expressed by Tillemont, at the consecration of a neo-
phyte, is quite out of place, in view of the exigencies of the
times and the practice of postponing baptism. St. Ambrose
at Milan and Nectarius at Constantinople were not even
“‘neophytes,’”? but were actually unbaptized at the time of
their appointment to their respective sees. ‘If there is any
one among the lately baptized,’’ argues the Ben. note, is tanta-
mount to saying ‘If there is any one fit to be bishop.”


256


BASIL.


Who in all things codperates with you,
granting you His grace for this work also.

LI. As to the clergy, the Canons have
enjoined without making any distinction
that one penalty is assigned for the lapsed,—
ejection from the ministry, whether they be
in orders! or remain in the ministry which
is conferred without imposition of hands.

LII. The woman who has given birth to
a child and abandoned it in the road, if she
was able to save it and neglected it, or
thought by this means to hide her sin, or was
moved by some brutal and inhuman motive,
is to be judged as in a case of murder. If,
on the other hand, she was unable to pro-
vide for it, and the child perish from expos-
ure and want of the necessities or life, the
mother is to be pardoned.

LIII. The widowed slave is not guilty of
a serious fall if she adopts a second marriage
under colour of rape. She is not on this
ground open to accusation. It is rather the
object than the pretext which must be taken
into account, but itis clear that she is exposed
to the punishment of digamy.?

LIV. I know that I have already written
to your reverence, so far as I can, on the
distinctions to be observed in cases of invol-
untary homicide,’ and onthis point I can say
no more. It rests with your intelligence to
increase or lessen the severity of the punish-
ment as each individual case may require.

LV. Assailantsof robbers, if they are out-
side, are prohibited from the communion of
the good thing.* If they are clerics they are
degraded from their orders. For, it is said,
ςς All they that take the sword shall perish
with the sword.” ®

LVI. The intentional homicide, who has
afterwards repented, will be excommuni-
cated from the sacrament® for twenty years.
The twenty years will be appointed for him
as follows: for four he ought to weep, standing


1 ἐίτε ἐν βαθωυῷ. This is understood by Balsamon and
Zonaras to include Presbyters, Deacons, and sub-deacons;
while the ministry conferred without imposition of hands
refers to Readers, Singers, Sacristans, andthelike. Alexius
Aristeaus ranks Singers and Readers with the higher orders,
and understands by the lower, keepers of the sacred vessels,
candle-lighters, and chancel door keepers. The Ben. note
inclines to the latter view on the ground thatthe word * re-
main’? indicates a category where there was no advancetoa
higher grade, as was the case with Readers and Singers.

2 cf. Can. XXX. p. 239.

37.e.in Canon viii. p. 226, and Canon xi. ἢ. 228.

4 Here reading, punctuation, and sense are obscure. The
Ben. Ed. have ἔξυ μὲν ὄντες, τῆς κοινωνίας εἴργονται, and render
‘St sint quidem laict,a bont communtone arcentur.” But
ἔξ. ὄντες, Stunding alone, more naturally means non-Christians.
Balsamon and Zonaras in the Pandects have ἔξω μὲν ὄντες τῆς
Ἔ ««λητίας εἰργονται τῆς κοινωνίας TOU ἀγαθοῦ.

5 Matt. xxvi. 52.

δ ἁγιάσματι. The Ben. Ed. render Sacramento, In the
Sept. (¢.¢. Amos vii. 13) the word =sanctuary. In patristic
usage both 5. and P. are found for the Lord’s Supper, or the
consecrated elements; e.g. ἁγίασμα in Greg. Nyss., Ep.Canon.
Can.v. The plural as inthis place ‘*freguentius.” (Suicer
§.v.)


outside the door of the house of prayer, be-
seeching the faithful as they enter in to offer
prayer in his behalf, and confessing his own
sin. After four years he will be admitted
among the hearers, and during five years
will go out with them. During seven years
he will go out with the kneelers,’ praying.
During four years he will only stand with
the faithful, and will not take part in the
oblation. On the completion of this period
he will be admitted to participation of the
sacrament.

LVII. The unintentional homicide will
be excluded for ten years from the sacrament.
The ten years will be arranged as follows:
For two years he will weep, for three years
he will continue among the hearers; for
four he will be a kneeler; and for one he
will only stand. Then he will be admitted
to the holy rites.

LVIII. The adulterer will be excluded
from the sacrament for fifteen years. During
four he will be a weeper, and during five a
hearer, during four a kneeler, and for two
a stander without communion.

LIX. The fornicator will not be admitted
to participation in the sacrament for seven
years ;” weeping two, hearing two, kneeling
two, and standing one: in the eighth he will
be received into communion.

LX. The woman who has professed
virginity and broken her promise will com-
plete the time appointed in the case of


1 μετὰ τῶν ἐν ὑποπτώσει. The ὑποπίπτοντες or substrati con-
stituted the third and chief station in the oriental system of
penance, the first and second being the προσκλαίοντες, flentes
or weepers, and the ἀκηοώμενος, audlentes, or hearers. nthe
Western Church it is the substrati who are cominonly referred
to as being in penitence, and the Latin versions of the Canons
of Ancyra by Dionysius Exiguus and Martin of Braga render
ὑποπίπτοντες aud vromracts by panitentes and paenttentia. In
Basil’s Canon xxii. p. 238, this station is specially stylcd μετά-
νοια. cf. D C.A.ii.1593. ““ Μετάνοια notat panitentiam eorum
gut ob delicta sua in ecclesfa ἐπιτιμίοις ἐσωφρονίζοντο (Zonaras,
Ad. Can.v. Conc. Antioch, p. 327), quigue dicebantur oi ἐν
μετανοιᾳ ovt-s. Chrysostom, //om. iii. 1m Epist.ad Eph.in S,
Cena, communione clamabat κήρυξ, ὅσοι ἐν μετανοίᾳ ἀπέλθετε
πάντες." Suicer s.v.

2cf. Can. xxii. p.228. The Ben. note is “" Laborant Bal-
samon et Zonaras in hoc canone conciliando cum vicesimo
secundo, atque td cause afferunt, cur tn vicesimo secundo
guatuor anni, septem tn altero decernantur, quod Basilius tn
vicesimo secundo antigua Patrum placita sequatur, suam tn
altero propriam sententiam exponat. Eundem hunc canonem
Alextus Aristenus, ut clarum et perspicuum, negat explica-
tione indigere. WVidebat nimtrum doctissinus scriptor dupli-
cem a Basilio distingui fornicationem, leviorem alteram,
alteram graviorem levior dicttur, que inter personas
matrimonio solutas committitur: gravior, cum conjugati
hominis libido tn mulierem solutam erumpit. Priort annt
guatuor, septem alteri imponuntur. Manifesta res est ex
canone 21, δὲ conjugati peccatum cum soluta fornicationem
appellat Basilius, ac longtoribus pants coercert, non tamen
instar adultertt, testatur. In canone autem 77 eum qui legiti-
mam uxorem dimittit, et aliam ducit, adulterum quidem esse
ex Domtnt sententia testatur, sed tamen ex canonibus Patrum
annos septem decernit, non quindecim, ut 1» adulierto cum
aliena uxore commisso, Secum ergo non pugnatcum fornt-
cationt nunc annos quatuor, nunc septem, adulterio nune
septem, nunc quindectm tndicit, Eamdem in sententiam
videtur acctpiendus canon quartus epistole Sancti Gregorii
Nyssent ad Letotum. Nam cum fornicationt novem annos,
adulterio dvcem et octoinpontt, pravior tila tntelligenda for-
nicatio, guam conjugatur cum soluta committit. Hinc tliam
adulterium videri fatetur his qui accuratius examinant,


LETTERS:


257


adultery in her continence.’ The same rule
will be observed in the case of men who
have professed a solitary life and who lapse.

LXI.. The thief, if he have repented of
his own accord and charged himself, shall
only be prohibited from partaking of the
sacrament for a year; if he be convicted,
for two years. The period shall be divided
between kneeling and standing. Then let him
be held worthy of communion.

LXII. He who is guilty of unseemliness
with males will be under discipline for the
same time as adulterers.

- LXIII. He who confesses his iniquity in
the case of brutes shall observe the same
time in penance.

LXIV. Perjurers shall be excommuni-
cated for ten years; weeping for two, hear-
ing for three, kneeling for four, and standing
only during one year; then they shall be
held worthy of communion.

LXV. He who confesses magic or sor-
cery shall do penance for the time of murder,
and shall be treated in the same manner as
he who convicts himself of this sin.

LXVI. The tomb breaker shall be ex-
communicated for ten years, weeping for
two, hearing for three, kneeling for four,
standing for one, then he shall be admitted.

LXVII. Incest with a sister shall incur
penance for the same time as murder.

LXVIII. The union of kindred within
the prohibited degrees of marriage, if de-
tected as having taken place in acts of sin,
shall receive the punishment of adultery.”

LXIX. The Reader who has intercourse
with his betrothed before marriage, shall be
allowed to read after a year’s suspension,
remaining without advancement. If he has
had secret intercourse without betrothal, he
shall be deposed from his ministry. So too
the minister.?

LXX. The deacon who has been polluted
in lips, and has confessed his commission of
this sin, shall be removed from his ministry.
But he shall be permitted to partake of
the sacrament together with the deacons.
The same holds good in the case of a priest.

1cf. Can. xviii. Augustine (De Bono Viduttatis, n. 14)
represents breaches of the vows of chastity as graver offences
than breaches of the vows of wedlock. The rendering of 77
ὀικονομίᾳ τῆς καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν ζωῆς by continency is illustrated in
the Ben. note by Hermas ii. 4 as well as by Basil, Canon xiv.
and xliv.

2This Canon is thus interpreted by Aristenus, Matrimo-
nium cum propingua legtbus prohibitum eadem ac adulterium
pena castigatur : et cum diverse sint adulterorum pene sic
etiam pro ratione propinquitatis tota res temperabitur. Hinc
duas sorores ducenti vit. annt penitentie trrogantur, ut in
adulterio cum multere libera commisso. non xv. ut in gra-
viore adulterito, or does it mean that incestuous fornication
shall be treated as adultery?

3 By minister Balsamon and Zonaras understand the sub-
deacon. Aristenus understands all the clergy appointe# with-


out imposition of hands. ‘The Ben. ed. approve the latter.
ef. n. on Canon li. p. 256, and Letter liv. p. 157.


If any one be detected in a more serious sin,
whatever be his degree, he shall be deposed. '

LXXI. Whoever is aware of the com-
mission of any oneof the aforementioned sins,
and is convicted without having confessed,
shall be under punishment for the same
space of time as the actual perpetrator.

LXXII. He who has entrusted himself?
to soothsayers, or any such persons, shall be
under discipline for the same time as the
homicide.

LXXIII. He who has denied Christ, and
sinned against the mystery of salvation, ought
to weep all his life long, and is bound to re-
main in penitence, being deemed worthy of
the sacrament in the hour of death, through
faith in the mercy of God.

LXXIV. If, however, each man who
has committed the former sins is made good,
through penitence. he to whom is com-


1QOn the earlier part of this canon the Ben. note says:
“- Balsamon, Zonaras, et Artstenus varia commentantur in
hunc canonem, sed a mente Bastlit multum abludentia. Liquet
enim hoc labtorum peccatum, cut remtssior pana infligitur
ipsa actione, quam Basilius minime tgnoscendam esse judt-
cat, levtus existimari debere. δ γε rattone sanctus Pater in
cap. vi. Isat@ n. 185, p. 516, labtorum peccata actionibus, ut
leviora, oppontt,ac prophete delecta non ad actionem et opera-
tionem erupisse, sed labits tenus constitisse observat. In
ecodem commentario n.170, p. 501,impuritatis peccatum varits
gradibus constare demonstrat, inter guos enumerat ῥήματα
φθοροποιά, verba ad corruptelam apta, ὁμιλίας μαχράς, longas
confabulationes, guibus ad stuprum pervenitur, Ex his per-
spict arbitror peccatum aliquod tn hoc canone designar!, quod
ipsa actione levius sit: nedum ea suspicari liceat, que Basilit
interpretibus in mentem venerunt. Sed tamen cum dico
Basilium in puntendis labtorum peccatis leniorem esse,non
quodlibet turpium sermonum genus. non immunda colloquia
(guomodo enim presbyterits hoc vitio pollutis honorem cathe-
dre religuisset?), sed ejusmodi intelligenda est peccandi
voluntas, que foras quidem aliquo sermone prodit, sed tamen
guominus in actum erumpat, subeunte meliori cogitatione,
reprimitur, Quemadmodum enim peccata, que sola cogita-
tione committuntur, tdcirca leviora esse pronuntiat Basilius,
comment. in /satam n. 115, Ὁ. 449. ef n. 243, Ὁ. 564. ul repressa
est actionis turpitudo; ita hoc loco non, quelibet labiorum
peccata; non calumnias, non blasphemtias, sed ea tantum
lentus tractat, que adeo gravia non erant, vel etiam ob decli-
natam actionts turpitudinem, ut patet ex his verbis, seque eo
usque peccasse confessus est, aliguid tndulgenti@a merere
videbantur.”

On the word καθαιρεθήσεται it is remarked: ‘‘ Jz his canont-
bus quos de clericorum peccatis edidit Basilius, duo videntur
silentio pretermissa. Que@ri enim possit τῷ cur suspensionts
penam soli lectori ac ministro, sive subdtacono, tmponat, dia-
conts autem et presbyteris deposttionem absque ulla prorsus
exceptione tnfligat, nist quod ets communionem cum dataconis
et presbyterts relinguit, st peccatum non tta grave fuerit.
Evrat tamen suspensionis pena tn ipsos presbyteros non inust-
tata, ut patet ex plurimts apostolicts canontbus. tn quibus
presbyteri ac etiam tpst episcopl segregantur, ac postea, st
sese non emendaverint, deponuntur. Forte hec reliquit Basil-
ius episcopo dijudicanda quemadmodum ejusdem arbitrio
permittet in canonibus 74 εἰ 8. ut penitentiea tempus tmminuat,
si bonus evasint is qui peccavit.. 2° ec etiam possit institut
guestio, utrumne in gravissimis quidem criminibus pentten-
tiam publicam depositiont adjecertt. Adhibita ratio in
Canone 3, cur aliquid discriminis clericos tnter et laicos
ponendum sit, non solum ad gravia peccata, sed etiam ad
gravissima pertinet. Ait enim equum esse ut. cum latcr post
penttentiam tn eumdem locum restituantur, clerict vero non
restituantur, liberalius et mittus cum clericis agatur. Nole-
bat ergo clericos lapsos ie Lae penttentiae gradum
percurrere. Sed quemadmodum lapso in fornicationem dia-
cono non statim communtonem reddit, sed ejus converstonem
et morum emendationem probandam esse censit, ut ad eumdem
canonem tertium observavimus, ita dubium esse non potest
guin ad crimints magnitudinem probandi modum et tempus
accommodaverit.

2 Vhe Ben. ed, suppose for the purpose of learning sorcery.
cf. Can. Ixxxiii., where a lighter punishment is assigned to
consulters of wizards.

3 ἐξομολογούμενος. ‘’ The verb in St. Matt. xi. 25 expresses


258


BASIL,


mitted by the loving-kindness of God the
power of loosing and binding‘ will not be
deserving of condemnation, if he become less
severe, as he beholds the exceeding great-
ness of the penitence of the sinner, so as
to lessen the period of punishment, for the
history in the Scriptures informs us that all
who exercise penitence? with greater zeal
quickly receive the loving-kindness of God.°

LXXV. The man who has been polluted
with his ownsister, either on the father’s or the
mother’s side, must not be allowed to enter
the house of prayer, until he has given up
his iniquitous and unlawftl conduct. And,
after he has come to a sense of that fearful
sin, let him weep for three years standing at
the door of the house of prayer, and entreat-
ing the people as they go in to prayer that
each and all will mercifully offer on his be-
half their pravers with earnestness to the
Lord. After this let him be received for
another period of three years to hearing
alone, and while hearing the Scriptures and
the instruction, let him be expelled and not
be admitted to prayer. Afterwards, if he
has asked it with tears and has fallen before
the Lord with contrition of heart and great
humiliation, let kneeling be accorded to
him during other three years. Thus, when
he shall have worthily shewn the fruits of
repentance, let him be received in the tenth
year to the prayer of the faithful without
oblation; and after standing with the faithful
in prayer for two years, then, and not till
then, let him be held worthy of the commun-
ion of the good thing.

LXXVI. The same rule applies to those
who take their own daughters in law.

LXXVII. He who abandons. the wife,
lawfully united to him, is subject by the sen-
tence of the Lord to the penalty of adultery.
But it has been laid down as a canon by our
Fathers that such sinners should weep for a
year, be hearers for two years, in kneeling

! Θὲ an ith the faithful i1
for three years, stand with the faithful in the
thanksgiving and praise, and in this sense was used by many
Christiin writers (Suicer, s.v.). But more generally in the
early Fathers it signifies the whole course of penitential dis-
cipline, the outward act and performance of penance, From
this it came to mean that public acknowledgment of sin which
formed so important a part of penitence. Irenzus (c. Her.
i. 13, § 5) Speaks of an adulterer who, having been converted,
passed her whole life in a state of penitence (ἐξομολογουμένη,
in exomologesi) ; and (78. iii. 4) of Cerdon often coming into
the church and confessing his errors (é£ouoAoyovmevos).”
D.C.A. i. 644.

1 Here we see ‘binding and loosing’? passing from the
Scriptural sense of declaring what acts are forbidden and com-
mitted (Matt. xvi. 19 and xxiii.4. See note of Rev. A. Carr in
Cambridge Bible for Schools) into the later ecclesiastical]
sense of imposing and remitting penalties for sin. The first
regards rather moral obligation, and, as is implied in the force
of the tenses alike in the passages of St. Matthew cited and in
St. John xx. 23, the recognition and announcement of the
divine judgment already passed on sins and sinners; the latter
regards the imposition of disciplinary penalties.


2 τοῦς <£ou0A0yMmoUMEVOUS.
3 e.g. according to the Ben. note, Manasseh and Hezekiah.


seventh; and thus be deemed worthy of the
oblation, if they have repented with tears.’

LXXVIII. Let the same rule hold good
in the case of those who marry two sisters,
although at different times.?

LXXIX. Men who rage after their step-
mothers are subject to the same canon as
those who rage after their sisters.°

LXXX. On polygamy the Fathers are
silent, as being brutish and altogether in-
human. The sin seems to me worse than
fornication. It is therefore reasonable that
such sinners should be subject to the canons ;
namely a year’s weeping, three years kneel-
ing and then reception.‘

LXXXI. During the invasion of the bar-
barians many men have sworn heathen oaths,
tasted things unlawfully offered them in
magic temples and so have broken their
faith in God. Let regulations be made in
the case of these men in accordance with the
canons laid down by our Fathers.’ Those


1 The Ben. note points out that St. Basil refers to the repu-
diation of a lawful wife for some other cause than adultery, It
remarks that though Basil does not order it to be punished as
severely as adultery there is no doubt that he would not allow
communion before the dismissal of the unlawful wife. It pro-
ceeds “ ἡ μα autem difficilius est statuere, quid de matrimonio
post ejectam uxorem adulteram contracto senserit. Ratum a
Basilio habitum fuisse eJusmodi matrimonium pronuntiat
Aristenus. Atque td quidem Bastlius, conceptis verbis non
declarat; sed tamen videlur hac in rea santort ac meliort
sententia discesstsse. Nam τὸ maritum injuste dimissum
ab alto matrimonio non excludit, ut vidimus in canontbus
9 et 35. Porro non videtur jure dimittentt denegassc,
guod tnjuste dimisso concedebat. 2° Cum jubeat uxorem
adulteram efict, vix dubtum est quin matrimonium adulterio
wvorts futsset mariti, ac multo durtor, guam uxorts
conditio, st nec adulteram retinere, necaliam ducere inlegrum
Suisset.

2 of..Letter C)x. p. 212.

3 The Ben. note is Prima specie non omnino perspicuum
est utrum sorores ex utrogue parente intelligat, an tantum ex
alterutro. Namcum in canone 79 eos qui suas nurus acctptunt
non severius puntat, quam cut cum sorore ex matre vel ex
patre rem habent, forte vidert posset tdem statuere de tis qui tn
novercas insaniunt, Sedtamen multo probabilius est eamdem
ilis penam tmpont, ac tis qui cum sorore ex utroqgue parenté
contaminantur. Non enim distinctione utitur Basilius ut {72
Canone 75; nec mirum st peccatum cum noverca gravius
guam cum nuru, ob factam patri injuriam, judicavit.

47.e. probably only into the place of standers. Zonaras
and Balsamon understand by polygamy a fourth marriage;
trigamy being permitted (cf. Canon 1. p. 240) though discour-
aged. The Ben. annotator dissents, pointing out that in
Canon iv. Basil calls trigamy, polygamy, and quoting Gregory
of Nazianzus ( Ova?.31) as calling a third marriage παρανομία.
Maran confirms this opinion by the comparison of the impo-
sition on polygamy of the same number of years of penance as
are assigned to trigamy in Canon iv. ““ Theodore of Canter-
bury A.D. 657 imposes a penance of seven years on trigamists
but pronounces the marriages valid (Penttential, 116. 1. c. xiv.
§ 3). Nicephorus of Constantinople, A.D. 814, suspends triga-
mists for five years. (Hard. Concil.tom. iv. p.1052.) Herard
of Tours, A.D. Ss8, declares any greater number of wives than
two to be unlawful ( Cap cxi. 7bid, tom.v.p.557). Leo the Wise,
Emperor of Constantinople, was allowed to marry three wives
without public remonstrance, but was suspended from com-
munion by the patriarch Nicholas when he married a fourth.
This led to a council being held at Constantinople, A.D. 920,
which finally settled the Greek discipline on the subject of
third and fourth marriages. It ruled that the penalty for a:
fourth marriage was to be excommunication and exclusion
from the church; for a third marriage, if a man were forty
years old, suspension for five years, and admission to com-
munion thereafter only on Easter day. If he were thirty years
old. suspension for four years, and admission to communion
thereafter only three times a year.” Dict. Christ, Ant: ii. p.
1104.

The Ben. n. thinks that the Fathers of Ancyra are meant,
whose authority seems to have been great in Cappadocia and
the adjacent provinces,


LETTERS.


259


who’ have endured grievous tortures and
have been forced to denials through inability
to sustain the anguish, may be excluded for
three years, hearers for two, kneelers for
three, and so be received into communion.
Those who have abandoned their faith in
God, laying hands on the tables of the de-
mons and swearing heathen oaths, without
undergoing great v iolence, should be excluded
for three years, hearers for two. When thev
have prayed for three years as_ kneelers,
and have stood other three with the faith-
ful in supplication, then let them be received
into the communion of the gcod thing.

LXXXII. As to perjurers, if they have
broken their oaths under violent compulsion,
they are under lighter penalties and may
therefore be received after six years. If they
break their faith without compulsion, let
them be weepers for two years, hearers for
three, pray as kneelers for five, during other
two be received into the communion of prayer
without oblation, and so at last, after giving
proof of due repentance, they shall be restored
to the communion of the body of Christ.

LXXXIII. Consulters of soothsayers and
they who follow heathen customs, or bring
persons into their houses to discover rem-
edies and to effect purification, should fall
under the canon of six years. After weep-
ing a year, hearing a year, kneeling for
three years and standing with the faithful for
a year so let them be received.

LXXXIV. I write all this with a view
to testing the fruits of repentance.’ I do not
decide such matters absolutely by time, but
I give heed to the manner of penance. If
men are in a state in which they find it hard
to be weaned from their own ways and
choose rather to serve the pleasures of the
flesh than to serve the Lord, and refuse to
accept the Gospel life, there is no common
ground between me and them. In the midst
of a disobedient and gainsaying people I have
been taught to hear the words “" Save thy
own soul.”* Do not then let us consent to
perish together with such sinners. Let us
fear the awful judgment. Let us keep before
our eyes the terrible day of the retribution of
the Lord. Let us not consent to perish in
other men’s sins, for if the terrors of the
Lord have not taught us, if so great calami-
ties have not brought us to feel that it is
because of our iniquity that the Lord has
abandoned us, and given us into the hands


of barbarians, that the people have been led |


captive before our foes and given over to
dispersion, because the bearers of Christ’s


1 μετανοίας. cf. note on p. 256; here the word seems to in-
clude both repentance and penance. 2 Gen. xix. 17, 1xx.


name have dared such deeds; if they have
not known nor understood that it is for these
reasons that the wrath of God has come upon
us, what common ground of argument have
[ with them?

But we ought to testify to them day and
night, alike in public and in private. Let
us not consent to be drawn away with them
in their wickedness. Let us above all pray
that we may do them good, and rescue them
from the snare of the evilone. If we cannot
do this, let us at all events do our best to save
our own souls from everlasting damnation.


LETTER CCXVIII.!
To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.


BroTHER 4ELIANUS has himself completed
the business concerning which he came, and
has stood in need of no aid from me. I owe
him, however, double thanks, both for bring-
ing me a letter from your reverencé and for
affording me an opportunity of writing to
you. By him, therefore, I salute your true
and unfeigned love, and beseech you to pray
for me more than ever now, when I stand in
such need of the aid of your prayers. My
health has suffered terribly from the journey
to Pontus and my sickness is unendurable.
One thing I have long been anxious to make
known to you. I do not mean to say that I
have been. so affected by any other cause as
to forget it, but now I wish to put you in
mind to send some good man into Lycia, to
enquire who are of the right faith, for perad-
venture they ought not to be neglected, if
indeed the report is true, which has been
brought to me by a pious traveller from
thence, that they have become altogether
alienated from the opinion of the Asiani,?
and wish to embrace communion with us.
If any one is to go let him enquire at Cory-
dala? for Alexander, the late monk, the
bishop; at Limyra* for Diotimus, and at
Myra " for Tatianus, Polemo,® and Macarius
presbyters; at Patara’ for Eudemus,’ the
bishop; at Telmessus® for Hilarius, the
bishop; at Phelus for Lallianus, the bishop.
Of these and of more besides I have been in-
formed that they are sound in the faith, and

1 Placed in 375.

27,.e, the inhabitants of the Roman province of Asia, cf.
Acts xx. 4. ἀσιανοὶ δὲ Τυχικὸς καὶ Τρόφιμος.

3 Corydalla, now Hadginella, is on the road between Lystra
and Patara. There are ruins of a theatre. £7. Fein, V. 25.

4 Now Phineka.

5so the Ben. ed. Other readings are ἐν Kvpous and ἐν
Nvpots. On Myra cf. Acts xxvii.5, on which Conybeare and
Howson reter to Fellows’ Asa Minor, p. 19} and Spratt and
Forbes’'s Lycia.

6 Afterwards bishop of Myra, and as such at Constantinople
381, Labbe 1, 665.


tcf. Acts Xxi. τὶ 8 At Constantinople in 381.
® Now Macri, where the ruins are remarkable.


260


BASIL.


I have been grateful to God that even any in
the Asian region should be clear of the here-
tic’s pest. If, then, it be possible, let us in
the meanwhile make personal enquiry about
them. When we have obtained information,
I am for writing a letter, and am anxious to
invite one of them to meet me. God grant
that all may go well with that Church at
Iconium, which is so dear to me. Through
you I salute all the honourable clergy and all
who are associated with your reverence.


LEGIER CCxIxXS


To the clergy of Samosata.


Tue Lord ordereth “all things in meas-
ure and weight,” * and brings on us the
temptations which do not exceed our power
to endure them,’ but tests all that fight in the
cause of true religion by affliction, not suffer-
ing them to be tempted above that they are
able to bear.‘ He gives tears to drink in
great measure® to all who ought to show
whether in their affections they are preserv-
ing their gratitude to Him. Especially in
His dispensation concerning you has He
shown His loving-kindness, not suffering
such a persecution to be brought on you by
your enemies as might turn some of you
aside, or cause‘you to swerve from the faith
of Christ. He has matched you with adver-
saries who are of small importance and easy
to be repelled, and has prepared the prize
for your patience in your victory over them.
But the common enemy of our life, who, in
his wiles, strives against the goodness of
God, because he has seen that, like a strong
wall, you are despising attack from without,
has devised, as I hear, that there should
arise among yourselves mutual offences and
quarrels. These indeed, at the outset, are
insignificant and easy of cure; as time goes
on, however, they are increased by conten-
tion and are wont to result in irremediable
mischief. I have, therefore, undertaken to
exhort you by this letter. Had it been possi-
ble, 1 would have-come myself and suppli-
cated you in person. But this is prevented
by present circumstances, and so, in lieu of
supplication, I hold out this letter to you,
that you may respect my entreaty, may put
a stop to your mutual rivalries, and may
soon send me the good news that all cause
of offence among you is at an end.

2. I am very anxious that you should

2 Wisd. xi. 20. eof, 1 Cor: x..13.

6 cf. Homer of Ἔρις, 21. iv. 442:


nT ὀλίγη μὲν πρῶτα κορύσσεται, αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα
» a 3 ΄ ΄ Ν » » ΄
οὐρανῷ ἐστήριξε κάρη καὶ ἐπὶ χθονὶ βαίνει.


5 cf. Ps. Ἰχχχνοι


know that he is great before God who hum-
bly submits to his neighbour and submits to
charges against himself, without having
cause for shame, even though they are not
true, that he may bring the great blessing of
peace upon God’s Church.

I hope that there will arise among you
a friendly rivalry, as to who shall first be
worthy of being called God’s son, after win-
ning this rank for himself because of his
being a peacemaker. A letter has also been
written to you by your very God-beloved
bishop as to the course which you ought to
pursue. He will write again what it belongs
to him to say. But I too, because of its
having been already allowed me to be near
you, cannot disregard your position. Soon
the arrival of the very devout brother Theo-
dorus the sub-deacon, and his report that
your Church is in distress and disturbance,
being deeply grieved and much pained at
heart, I could not endure to keep silence. I
implore you to fling away all controversy
with one another, and to make peace, that
you may avoid giving pleasure to your op-
ponents and destroying the boast of the
Church, which is now noised abroad through-
out the world, that you all, as you are ruled
by one soul and heart, so live in one body.
Through your reverences I salute all the
people of God, both those in rank and office
and the rest of the clergy. I exhort you
to keep your old character. I can ask for
nothing more than this because by the exhibi-
tion of your good works you have anticipated
and made impossible any improvement on
them.


LETTER CCXX.!


To the Bereans.


Tue Lord has given great consolation to
all who are deprived of personal intercourse
in allowing them to communicate by letter.
By this means, it is true, we cannot learn
the express image of the body, but we can
learn the disposition of the very soul. Thus
on the present occasion, when I had received
the letter of your reverences, I at the same
moment recognised you, and took your love
towards me into my heart, and needed no
long time to create intimacy with you. The
disposition shewn in your letter was quite
enough to enkindle in me affection for the
beauty of your soul. And, besides your letter,
excellent as it was, I had a yet plainer
proof of how things are with you from


1 Placed in 375.


2 The Syrian Berea, Aleppo, or Haleb. c/. Letter clxxxv.
Pp. 222.


LETTERS.


the amiability of the brethren who have been
the means of communication between us. The
well-beloved and reverend presbyter Acacius,
has told me much in addition to what you
have written, and has brought before my
eyes the conflict you have to keep up day by
day, and the stoutness of the stand you are
- making for the true religion. He has thus
so moved my admiration, and roused in
me so earnest a desire of enjoying the good
qualities in you, that I do pray the Lord that
a time may come when [ may know you and
yours by personal experience. He has told
me of the exactitude of those of you who are
entrusted with the ministry of the altar, and
moreover of the harmonious agreement of all
the people, and the generous character and
genuine love towards God of the magistrates
and chief men of your city. I consequently
congratulate the Church on consisting of
such members, and pray that spiritual peace
may be given to you in yet greater abun-
dance, to the end that in quieter times you
may derive enjoyment from your labours in
the day of affliction. For sufferings that are
painful while they are being experienced are
naturally often remembered with pleasure.
For the present I beseech you not to faint.
Do not despair because your troubles follow
so closely one upon another. Your crowns
are near; the help of the Lord is near. Do
not let all you have hitherto undergone go
for nothing; do not nullify a struggle which
has been famous over all the world. Human
life is but of brief duration. ‘* All flesh is
grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as
the “flower of the field... >: . : ° The grass
withereth, the flower fadeth; but the word
of our God shall stand for ever.”' Let us
hold fast to the commandment that abideth,
and despise the unreality that passeth away.
Many Churches have been cheered by your
example. In calling new champions into
the field you have won for yourselves a great
reward, though you knew it not. The Giver
of the prize is rich, and is able to reward
you not unworthily for your brave deeds.


LETTER ΘΟΧΧΙ-
To the Bereans.


You were previously known to me, my
dear friends, by your far-famed piety, and by
_ the crown won by your confession in Christ.
Peradventure one of you may ask in reply who
can have carried these tidings of us so far?
The Lord Himself; for He puts His wor-
shippers like a lamp on a lamp-stand, and


1 Is. xl. 6, 8. 2 Placed in 375.


261


makes them shine throughout the whole
world. Are not winners in the games wont
to be made famous by the prize of victory,
and craftsmen by the skilful design of their
work? Shall the memory of these and others
like them abide for ever unforgotten, and shall
not Christ’s worshippers, concerning whom
the Lord says Himself, Them that honour
me I will honour, be made famous and glo-
rious by Him before all? Shall He not dis-
play the brightness of their radiant splendour
as He does the beams of the sun? But I
have been moved to greater longing for you
by the letter which you have been good
enough to send me, a letter in which, above
and bey ond your former efforts on behalf of
the truth, you have been yet more lavish of
your abounding and vigorous zeal for the
true faith. In all this I rejoice with you,
and I pray with you that the God of the uni-
verse, Whose is the struggle and the arena,
and Who gives the crown, may fill you with
enthusiasm, may make your souls strong,
and make your work such as to meet with
His divine approval.


LETTER CCXXII.1
Zo the people of Chalcis?


TuE letter of your reverences came upon
me in an hour of affliction like water poured
into the mouths of racehorses, inhaling dust
with each eager breath at high noontide in
the middle of the course. Beset by trial
after trial, I breathed again, at once cheered
by your words and invigorated by the
thought of your struggles to meet that which
is before me with unflinching courage. For
the conflagration which has devoured a great
part of the East is already advancing by
slow degrees into our own neighbourhood,
and after burning everything round about us
is trying to reach even the Churches in Cap-
padocia, already moved to tears by the
smoke that rises from the ruins of our neigh-
bours’ homes.*? The flames have almost
reached me. May the Lord divert them by
the breath of His mouth, and _ stay this

1 Placed in 375.

?The Syrian Chaecis, now Kinesrin. Maran Vit. Bas.
Chap. xxxiii. supposes this letter to have been probably carried
with Letter ccxxi. by Acacius.

8 Maran Vit, Bas.1. c. says that these words cannot refer
to the persecution of Valens in Cappadocia in 371, for that
persecution went on between Constantinople and Cappadocia,
and did not start from the East. There need be no surprise,
he thinks, at the two preceding letters containing no mention
of this persecution, because Acacius, who was a native of
Bera, would be sure to report all that he had observed in


Cappadocia. I am not sure that the reference to a kind of
prairie fire spreading from the East does not rather imply a


prevalence of heresy than what is commonly meant by perse-


cution. Meletius, however, was banished from Antioch in 374
and Eusebius from Samosata in’the same year, as graphically


‘described by Theoduret 47. £. iv. 13.


262


BASIL,


wicked fire. Who is such a coward, so un-
manly, so untried in the athlete’s struggles,
as not to be*nerved to the fight by your
cheers, and pray to be hailed victor at your
side? You have been the first to step into the
arena of true religion; you have beaten off
many an attack in bouts with the heretics ;
you have borne the strong hot wind’ of trial,
both you who are leaders of the Church,
to whom has been entrusted the ministry of
the altar, and every individual of the laity,
including those of higher rank. For this in
you is specially admirable and worthy of all
praise, that you are all one in the Lord,
some of you leaders in the march to what is
good, others willingly following. It is for
this reason that you are too strong for the
attack of your assailants, and allow no hold
to your antagonists in any one of your mem-
bers, wherefore day and night I pray the King
of the ages to preserve the people in the
integrity of their faith, and for them to pre-
serve the clergy, like a head unharmed at
the top, exercising its own watchful fore-
thought for every portion of the body under-
neath. For while the eyes discharge their
functions, the hands can do their work as
they ought, the feet can move without trip-
ping, and no part of the body is deprived of
due care. I beseech you, then, to cling to
one another, as you are doing and as you
will do. I beseech you who are entrusted
with the care of souls to keep each and all
together, and to cherish them like beloved
children. I beseech the people to continue
to show you the respect and honour due to
fathers, that in the goodly order of your
Church you may keep your strength and the
foundation of your faith in Christ; that
God’s name may be glorified and the good
eift of love increase and abound. May I, as
I hear of you, rejoice in your progress in
God. If Iam still bidden to sojourn in the
flesh in this world, may I one day see you in
the peace of God. If I be now summoned
to depart this life, may I see you in the radi-
ant glory of the saints, together with all them
who are accounted worthy through patience
and showing forth of good works, with
crowns upon your heads.


LETTER CCXXIIT#


Against Eustathius of Sebasteia.*


1. THERE is a time to keep silence and a
time to speak,* is the saying of the Preacher.


Time enough has been given to silence, and
now the time has come to open my mouth
for the publication of the truth concerning
matters that are, up to now, unknown. The
illustrious Job bore his calamities for a long
time in silence, and ever showed his courage
by holding out under the most intolerable
sufferings, but when he had struggled long
enough in silence, and had persisted in cov-
ering his anguish in the bottom of his heart,
at last he opened his mouth and uttered his
well-known words.’ In my own case this is
now the third year of my silence, and my
boast has become like that of the Psalmist,
‘¢T was as a man that heareth not and in
whose mouth are no reproofs.”? Thus I shut
up in the bottom of my heart the pangs
which I suffered on account of the calumnies
directed against me, for calumny humbles a
man, and calumny makes a poor man giddy.’
If, therefore, the mischief of calumny is so
great as to cast down even the perfect man
from his height, for this is what Scripture
indicates by the word man, and by the poor
man is meant he who lacks the great doc-
trines, as is the view also of the prophet
when he says, ‘‘ These are poor, therefore
they shall not hear;.. οὐ τὸ ΕΠ πες
unto the great men,”* he means by poor
those who are lacking in understanding;
and here, too, he plainly means those who
are not yet furnished in the inner man, and
have not even come to the full measure of
their age; it is these who are said by the
proverb to be made giddy and tossed about.
Nevertheless I thought that I ought to bear
my troubles in silence, waiting for some indi-
cation to come out of them. I did not even
think that what was said against me pro-
ceeded from ill will; I thought it was the
result of ignorance of the truth.. But now I
see that hostility increases with time, and
that my slanderers are not sorry for what
they said at the beginning, and do not take
any trouble to make amends for the past,
but goon and on and rally themselves to-
gether to attain their original object. This
was to make my life miserable and to devise
means for sullying my reputation among the
brethren. I, therefore, no longer see safety
in silence. I have bethought me of the
words of Isaiah: “1 have long time holden
my peace, shall I always be still and refrain
myself? I have been patient like a travail-
ing woman.” ὃ God grant that I may both
receive the reward of silence, and gain some
strength to confute my opponents, and that


1 καύσωνα. cf. Matt. xx. 12.

2 Placed in 375.

8 On the mutual relations of Basil and Eustathius up to this
time, cf. Prolegomena, ὁ Eccles. iii. 7.


Luke xii. 55, and James i. 11.


2 Ps, xxXvili. 14.
3 cf. συκοφαντία περιφέοει cobdv. Eccles. vii. 8, UXX. Ca-
lumnia conturbat sapientem et perdet robur cord?s tllius. Vulg.
@ Jere lV. κεν 5 \sa, xlii. 14, LXX.


1 Job iii. 1, segq.


LETTERS.


thus, by confuting them, I may dry up the
bitter torrent of falsehood that has gushed
out against me. So might I say, ‘*‘ My soul
has passed over the torrent;”* and, ‘If it
had not. been the Lord who was on our side
when men rose up against us, . . . then
they had swallowed us up quick, the water
had drowned us.”’”

2. Much time had I spent in vanity, and
had wasted nearly all my youth in the vain
labour which I underwent in acquiring the
wisdom made foolish by God. Then once
upon a time, like a man roused from deep
sleep, I turned my eyes to the marvellous
light of the truth of the Gospel, and I per-
ceived the uselessness of “" the wisdom of the
princes of this world, that come to naught.” °
I wept many tears over my miserable life,
and I prayed that guidance might be vouch-
safed me to admit me to the doctrines of true
religion. First of all was I minded to make
some mending of my ways, long perverted
as they were ‘by my intimacy with wicked
men. Then I read the Gospel, and I saw
there that a great means of reaching perfec-
tion was the selling of one’s goods, the shar-
ing them with the poor, the giving up of all
care for this life, and the refusal to allow the
soul to be turned by any sympathy to things
of earth. And I prayed that I might find
some one of the brethren who had chosen
this way of life, that with him I might cross
life’s short* and troubled strait. And many
did I find in Alexandria, and many in the
rest of Egypt, and others in Palestine, and in
Ceele Syria, and in Mesopotamia. I admired
their continence in living, and their endur-
ance in toil; 1 was amazed at their persist-
ency in prayer, and at their triumphing over
sleep; subdued by no natural necessity, ever
keeping their souls’ purpose high and free,
in hunger, in thirst, in cold, in nakedness,’
they never yielded to the body; they were
never willing to waste attention on it;
always, as though living ina flesh that was
not theirs, they “shewed in very deed what it
is to sojourn for a while in this life,® and
what to have one’s citizenship and home in
heaven.’ All this moved my admiration. I
called these men’s lives blessed, in that they
did in deed shew that they ‘* bear about in
their body the dying of Jesus.” * And I
prayed that I, too, as far as in me lay, might
imitate them.

3. So when I beheld certain men in my
own country striving to copy their ways, I felt
that I had found a help to my own salvation,

1 Ps, cxxiv. 5, LXX.
2 Ps. cxxiv. 3, 4, LXX.


Oi Cor it. Os


4 Al. deep.


δ᾽ 2 Cor, xi.a7.
tcf. Heb. xi. 13.
ef. Phil. aii. 20,
8 2 Cor. iv. 10.


263


and I took the things seen for proof of things
unseen. And since the secrets in the hearts
of each of us are unknown, 1 held lowliness
of dress to be a sufficient indication of lowli-
ness of spirit; and there was enough to con-
vince me in the coarse cloak, the girdle, and
the shoes of untanned hide.! And though
many were for withdrawing me from their
society, I would not allow it, because I saw
that they put a life of endurance before a
life of pleasure ; and, because of the extraor-
dinary excellence of their lives, I became
an eager supporter of them. And so it
came about that I would not hear of any
fault being found with their doctrines,
although many maintained that their con-
ceptions about God were erroneous, and that
they had become disciples of the champion
of the present heresy, and were secretly
propagating his teaching. But, as I had
never at any time heard these things with
my own ears, I concluded that Hoes who
reported them were calumniators. Then I
was called to preside over the Church. Of
the watchmen and spies, who were given
me under the pretence of assistance and
loving communion, 1 say nothing, lest I
seem to injure my own cause by telling an
incredible tale, or give believers an occasion
for hating their fellows, if I am believed.
This had almost been my own case, had I
not been prevented by the mercy of God.
For almost every one became an object of
suspicion to me, and smitten at heart as
I was by wounds treacherously inflicted, I
seemed to find nothing in any man that I
could trust. But so far there was, never-
theless, a kind of intimacy kept up between
us. Once and again we held discussions on
doctrinal points, and apparently we seemed
to agree and keep together. But they began
to find out that I made the same® statements
concerning my faith in God which they had
always heard from me. For, if other things
in me may move a sigh, this one boast at
least I dare make in the Lord, that never for
one moment have 1 held erroneous concep-
tions about God, or entertained heterodox
opinions, which I have learnt later to change.
The teaching about God which 1 had received
asa boy from my blessed mother and my
grandmother Macrina, I have ever held with
increased conviction. On my coming to
ripe years of reason I did not shift my opin-
ions from one to another, but carried out the


1 With St. Basil’s too great readiness to believe in Eustathius
because of his mean garb contrast Augustine De Serm. Dom.
** Animadvertendum est non in solo rerum corporearum nitore
atque pompa, sed etiam in tpsts sordtbus lutosts esse posse
Jactaniiam, et eo periculosiorem quo sub nomine servitutis
Dei decipit.”


264


principles delivered to me by my parents.
Just as the seed when it grows is first tiny
and then gets bigger but always preserves
its identity, not changed in kind though
gradually perfected in growth, so I reckon the
same doctrine to have grown in my case
through gradually advancing stages. What I
hold now has not replaced what I held at the
beginning. Let them search their own con-
sciences. Let these mcn who have now
made me the common talk on the charge of
false doctrine, and deafened all men’s ears
with the defamatory letters which they have
written against me, so that I am compelled
thus to defend myself, ask themselves if
they have ever heard anything from me,
differing from what I now say, and let them
remember the judgment seat of Christ.

4. Jam charged with blasphemy against
God. Yet it is impossible for me to be con-
victed on the ground of any treatise concern-
ing the Faith, which they urge against me,
nor can I be charged on the ground of the
utterances which [ have from time to time
delivered by word of mouth, without their
being committed to writing, in the churches
of God. Not a single witness has been
found to say that he has ever heard from me,
when speaking in private, anything contrary
totrue religion. Ifthen I am not an unortho-
dox writer, if no fault can be found with my
preaching, if I do not lead astray those who
converse with me in my own home, on what
ground am I being judged? But there is
a new invention! Somebody,! runs the
charge, in Syria has written something in-
consistent with true religion; and twenty
years or more ago you wrote him a letter:
so you ure an accomplice of the fellow, and
what is urged against him is urged against
you. O truth-loving sir, 1 reply, you who
have been taught that lies are the offspring
of the devil; what has proved to you that I
wrote that letter? You never sent; you
never asked; you were never informed by
me, who might have told you the truth.
But if the letter was mine, how do you
know that the document that has come into
your hands now is of the same date as my
letter? Who told you that it is twenty years
old? How do you know that it is a com-
position of the man to whom my letter was
sent? And if he was the composer, and I
wrote to him, and my letter and his com-
position belong to the same date, what proof
is there that I accepted it in my judgment,
and that I hold those views?

5- Ask yourself. How often did you


1 7,6. Apollinarius. cf. Letters cxxx. p. 198, and ccxxiv.


BASIL,


--ἡ


visit me in my monastery on the Iris, when
my very God-beloved brother Gregory was
with me, following the same course of life
as myself? Did you ever hear anything of
the kind? Was there any appearance of
such a thing, small or great? How many
days did we spend in the opposite village, at
my mother’s, living as friend with friend,
and discoursing together night and day?
Did you ever find me holding any opinion of
the kind?) And when we went together to
visit the blessed Silvanus,! did we not talk
of these things on the way? And at Eusi-
noe,” when you were about to set out with
other bishops for Lampsacus,* was not our
discourse about the faith? Were not your
shorthand writers at my side the whole time
while I was dictating my objections to the
heresy? Were not your most faithful dis-
ciples there too? When I was visiting the
brotherhood, and passing the night with
them in their prayers, continually speaking
and hearing of the things pertaining to God
without dispute, was not the evidence which
I gave of my sentiments exact and definite?
How came you then to reckon this rotten
and slender suspicion as of more importance
than the experience of such a length of
time? What evidence of my frame of mind
ought you to have preferred to your own?
Has there been the slightest want of harmony
in my utterances about the faith at Chalce-
don, again and again at Heraclea, and at an
earlier period in the suburb of Czesarea?
Are they not all mutually consistent? I
only except the increase in force of which I
spoke just now, resulting from advance, and
which is not to be regarded as a change from
worse to better, but rather as a filling up of
what was wanting in the addition of know-
ledge. How can you fail to bear in mind
that the father shall not bear the iniquity of
the son, nor the son bear the iniquity of the
father, but each shall die in hisown sin?’ I
have neither father nor son slandered by you ;
I have had neither teacher nor disciple.
But if the sins of the parents must be made
charges against their children, it is far fairer
for the sins of Arius to be charged against his
disciples; and, whoever begat the heretic
Aetius,’ for the charges against the son to
be applied to the father. If on the other


17,6. Silvanus of Tarsus. cf. Letters xxxiv. p. 136, and
Ixvii. p. 164.

21 have not been able to identify Eusinoe. There was an
Eusene on the north coast of Pontus. :

8 7.6. in 364, the year after St. Basil’s ordination as presbyter,
and the publication of his work against Eunomius. The
Council of Lampsacus, at which Basil was not present, repudi-
ated the Creeds of Ariminum and Constantinople (359 and
360), and reasserted the 2d Dedication Creed of Antioch of 341.
Maran dates it 364 (Vt. Bas. x.).

cf. Ezek. xviii. 20. Bs ey Bur Ἐν»


LETTERS,


265


hand it is unjust for any one to be accused
for their sakes, it is far more unjust that I
should be held responsible for the sake of
men with whom 1 have nothing tv do, even
if they were in every respect sinners, and
something worthy of condemnation has been
written by them. I must be pardoned if I
do not believe all that is urged against them,
since my own experience shows me how
very easy it is for accusers to slip into slander.

6. Even if they did come forward to
accuse me, because they had been deceived,
and thought that I was associated with the
writers of those words of Sabellius which
they are carrying about, they were guilty of
unpardonable conduct in straightway attack-
ing and wounding me, when I had done
them no wrong, before they had obtained
plain proof. Ido not like to speak of my-
self as bound to them in the closest inti-
macy; or of them as being evidently not led
by the Holy Spirit, because of their cherish-
ing false suspicions. Much anxious thought
must be taken, and many sleepless nights
must be passed, and with many tears must
the truth be sought from God, by him who is
on the point of cutting himself off from a
brother’s friendship. Even the rulers of
this world, when they are on the point of
sentencing some evil doer to death, draw the
veil aside,’ and call in experts for the exami-
nation of the case, and consume considerable
time in weighing the severity of the law
against the common fault of humanity, and
with many a sigh and many a lament for the
stern necessity of the case, proclaim before
all the people that they are obeying the law
from necessity, and not passing sentence to
gratify their own wishes.” How much
greater care and diligence, how much more
counsel, ought to be taken by one who is on
the point of breaking off from long estab-
lished friendship with a brother! In this
case there is only a single letter and that of
doubtful genuineness. It would be quite im-
possible to argue that it is known by the sig-
nature, for they possess not the original, but
only.a copy. They depend on one single
document and that an old one. It is now


1 ἀφέλκονται. So the Harl. MS. for ἐφέλκονται. On the
sense which may be applied to either verb cf. Valesius on
Am. Marcellinus xviii. 2, whom the Ben. Ed. point out
to be inerror in thinking that Basil’s idea is of drawing a
curtain or veil over the proceedings, and Chrysostom Hom.
Ivi. 22 Matt. ᾿ἘΕπὶ τοῖς δικασταῖς, ὅταν δημοσίᾳ κρινωσι, τὰ Tapa-
πετάσματα συνελκύσαντες οἱ παρεστῶτες πᾶσιν ἀυτοὺς δεικνύουσι.
This meaning of drawing so as to disclose is confirmed by
Basil’s πάνδημοι πᾶσι γίγνονται in this passage and in Hom. in
fs. XXXil.

2 The Ben. note compares the praise bestowed on Candid-
ianus by Gregory of Nazianzus for trying cases in the light
of day (Ep. cxciv.) and Am. Marcellinus xvii. 1, who says of
Julian, Numerium Narconensts paulo ante rectorem, accusa-
tum ut furem, inusitato censorio vigore pro tribunali palam
admissis volentibus audiebat,


twenty years since anything has been written
to that person.’ Of my opinions and con-
duct in the intervening time I can adduce no
better witnesses than the very men who attack
and accuse me.

7. But the real reason of separation is
not this letter. There is another cause of
alienation. I am ashamed to mention it;
and I would have been for ever silent about
it had not recent events compelled me to
publish all their mind for the sake of the
good of the mass of the people. Good men
have thought that communion with me was
a bar to the recovery of their authority.
Some have been influenced by the signature
of a certain creed which I proposed to them,
not that I distrusted their sentiments, I con-
fess, but because I wished to do away with
the suspicions which the more part of the
brethren who agree with me entertained of
them. Accordingly, to avoid anything arising
from that confession to prevent their being
accepted by the present authorities,’ they
have renounced communion with me. This
letter was devised by an after-thought as a
pretext for the separation. A very plain
proof of what I say is, that after they had
denounced me, and composed such com-
plaints against me as suited them, they sent
round their letters in all directions before
communicating with me. Their letter was
in the possession of others who had received it
in the course of transmission and who were
on the point of sending it on seven days before
it had reached my hands. The idea was
that it would be handed from one to another
and so would be quickly distributed over the
whole country. ‘This was reported to me at
the time by those who were giving me clear
information of all their proceedings. But I
determined to hold my tongue until the
Revealer of all secrets should publish their
doings by plain and incontrovertible demon-
stration.


LE PTE CEXXly’
‘To the presbyter Genethlius.


1. I HAVE received your reverence’s letter
and Jam delighted at the title which you
have felicitously applied to the writing
which they have composed in calling it ‘a


. . 5
writing of divorcement.’?* What defence


the writers will be able to make before the


17.¢e, Apollinarius.

2'Though this phrase commonly means the reigning em-
peror, as in Letter |xvi., the Ben. note has no doubt that in
this instance the reference is to Euzoius. In Letter ccxxvi.
§ 3. g v., Basil mentions reconciliation with Euzoius as the
real o»ject of Eustathius’s hostility. Euzoius was now in
high favour with Valens.


8 Placed in 375. 4 Matt. xix. 7.


266


tribunal of Christ, where no excuse will
avail, [am quite unable to conceive. After
accusing. me, violently running me down,
and telling tales in accordance not with the
truth but with what they wished to be true,
they have assumed a great show of humility,
and have accused me of haughtiness for
refusing to receive their envoys. They have
written, as they have, what is all —or nearly
all—for I do not wish to exaggerate, —
lies, in the endeavour to persuade men
rather than God, and to please men rather
than God, with Whom nothing is more
precious than truth. Moreover into the
letter written against me they have intro-
duced heretical expressions, and have con-
cealed the author of the impiety, in order
that most of the more unsophisticated might
be deceived by the calumny got up against
me, and suppose the portion introduced to
be mine. For nothing is said by my ingen-
ious slanderers as to the name of the author
of these vile doctrines, and it is left for the
simple to suspect that these inventions, if not
their expression in writing, is due to me.
Now that you know all this, I exhort you
not to be perturbed yourselves, and to calm
the excitement of those who are agitated.
I say this although I know that it will not
be easy for my defence to. ‘be teceiwed;
because I have been anticipated by the vile
calumnies uttered against me by persons of
influence.

2. Now as to the point that the writings
going the round as mine are not mine at all,
the angry feeling felt against me so confuses
their reason that they cannot see what is
profitable. Nevertheless, if the question were
put to them by yourselves, I do think that
they would not reach such a pitch of obsti-
nate perversity as to dare to utter the lie with
their own lips, and allege the document in
question to be mine. And if it is not mine,
why am I being judged for other men’s
writings? But they will urge that I am in
communion with Apollinarius, and cherish
in my heart perverse doctrines of tltis kind.
Let them be asked for proof. If they are
able to search into a man’s heart, let them
say so; and do you admit the truth of all
that they say about everything. If on the
other hand, they are trying to prove my
being in communion on plain and open
grounds, let them produce either a canonical
letter written by me to him, or by him to
me. Let them shew that I have held inter-
course with his clergy, or have ever received
any one of them into the communion of
prayer. If they adduce the letter written
now five and twenty years ago, written by


BASIL.


layman to layman, and not even this as I
wrote it, but altered (God knows by
whom), then recognise their unfairness.
No bishop is accused if, while he was a lay-
man, he wrote something somewhat incau-
tiously on an indifferent matter ; not anything
concerning the Faith, but a mere word of
friendly greeting. Possibly even my oppo-
nents are known to have written to Jews and
to Pagans, without incurring any blame.
Hitherto no one has ever been judged for
any such conduct as that on which I am
being condemned by these strainers-out of
enats.. God, who knows men’s hearts,
knows that I never wrote these things, nor
sanctioned them, but that I anathematize
all who hold the vile opinion of the con-
fusion of the hypostases, on which point the
most impious heresy of Sabellius has been re-
vived. And all the brethren who have been
personally acquainted with my insignificant
self know it equally well. Let those very
men who now vehemently accuse me, search
their own consciences, and they will own
that from my boyhood I have been far
removed from any doctrine of the kind.

3. If any one enquires what my opin-
ion is, he will learn it from the actual
little document, to which is appended their
own autograph signature. This they wish to
destroy, and they are anxious to conceal their
own change of position in slandering me.
For they do not lke to own that they have
repented of their subscription to the tract I
gave them; while they charge me with
impiety from the idea that no one perceives
that their disruption from me is only a
pretext, while in reality they have departed
from that faith which they have over and
over again owned in writing, before many
witnesses, and have lastly received and sub-
scribed when delivered to them by me.
It is open to any one to read the signatures
and to learn the truth from the document
itself. Their intention will be obvious, if,
after reading the subscription which they
gave me, any one reads the creed which they
gave Gelasius,? and observes what a, vast
difference there is between the two contes-
sions. It would be better for men who so
easily shift their own position, not to examine
other men’s motes but to cast out the beam
in their own eye.* I am making a more
complete defence on every point in another
letter ;* this will satisfy readers who want
fuller assurance. Do you, now that you
have received this letter, put away all
despondency, and confirm the love to me,°*


1 cf. Matt. xxili. 24. 8 cf. Matt. vii.4. Sef. 2 Cor, ii. 8,
2 cf. Letter cxxx. Ρ. τοῦ. 412.¢. Letter ccxxili.


LETTERS.


which makes me eagerly long for union
with you. Verily it is a great sorrow to me,
nod a pain in-my heart that cannot be
assuaged, if the slanders uttered against me
so far prevail as to chill your love and to
alienate us from one another. Farewell.


LETTER CCXXV?


To Demosthenes? as from the synod of
ἥ bishops.


I am always very thankful to God and to
the emperor, under whose rule we live,
when I see the government of my country
put into the hands of one who is not only a
Christian, but is moreover correct in life
and a careful guardian of the laws according
to which our life in this world is ordered.
I have had special reason for offering this
gratitude to God and to our God-beloved
emperor on the occasion of -your coming
‘among us. I have been.aware that some of
the enemies of peace have been about to stir
your august tribunal against me, and have
been waiting to be summoned by your ex-
cellency that you might learn the truth from
me; if indeed your high wisdom condescends
to consider the examination of ecclesiastical
matters to be within your province.* The
tribunal overlooked me, but your excellency,
moved by the reproaches of ' Philochares,
ordered my brother and_ fellow-minister
Gregory to be haled before your judgment
seat. He obeyed your summons; how could
he do otherwise? But he was attacked by
pain in the side, and at the same time, in
consequence of a chill, was attacked by his
old kidney complaint. He has therefore
been compelled, forcibly detained by your
soldiers as he was, to be conveyed to some
quiet spot, where he could have his maladies
attended to, and get some comfort in his in-
tolerable agony. Under these circumstances
we have combined to approach your lordship
with the entreaty that you will feel no anger
at the postponement of the trial. The pub-
lic interests have not in any way suffered
through our delay, nor have those of the


1 Placed in 375. An

2 Vicar of Pontus. It is doubtful whether he is the same
Demosthenes who was at Cesarea with Valens in 371, of
whom the amusing story is told in Theodoret Ai7st. Ecc. iv.
16, on which see note. Ifhe is, it is not difficult to understand
his looking with no friendly eye on Basil and his brother
Gregory. He summoned a synod to Ancyra in the close of 375
to examine into alleged irregularities in Gregory’s consecra-
tion and accusations of embezzlement. The above letter is to
apologize for Gregory’s failing to put in an appearance at
Ancy~a, and to rebut the charges madeagainsthim. Tillemont
would refer Letter xxxiii. to this period. Maran Vit. Bas. xii.
5 connects it with the troubles following on the death of
Ceesavius in 360.

3. Sepe vicarto Basilius tn hac epistola lentter insinuat, res
ecclesiasticas illius Judictt non esse.” Ben, note.


267


Church been injured. If there is any ques-
tion of the wasteful expenditure of money,
the treasurers of the Church funds are there,
ready to give an account to any one who
likes, and to exhibit the injustice of the
charges advanced by men who have braved
the careful hearing of the case before you.
For they can have no difficulty in making
the truth clear to any one who seeks it from
the actual writings of the blessed bishop
himself. If there is any other point of ca-
nonical order which requires investigation,
and your excellency deigns to undertake to
hear and to judge it, it will be necessary for
us all to be present, because, if there has
been a failure in any point of canonical order,
the responsibility hes with the consecrators
and not with him who is forcibly compelled
to undertake the ministry. We _ therefore
petition you to reserve the hearing of the
case for us in our own country, and not to
compel us to travel beyond its borders, nor
force us to a meeting with bishops with
whom we have not yet come to agreement
on ecclesiastical questions.’ I beg you also
to be merciful to my own old age and ill
health. You will learn by actual investiga-
tion, if it please God, that no canonical rule
be it small or great was omitted in the ap-
pointment of the bishop. I pray that under
your administration unity and peace may be
brought about with my brethren; but so
long as this does not exist it is difficult for
us even to mect, because many of our
simpler brethren suffer from our mutual
disputes.


LETTER CCRXVI
To the ascetics under him.


Ir may be that the holy God will grant
me the joy of a meeting with you, for I am
ever longing to see you and hear about you,
because in no other thing do I find rest for
my soul than in your progress and perfection
in the commandments of Christ. But so
long as this hope remains unrealized I feel
bound to visit you through the instrumen-
tality of our dear and God-fearing brethren,
and to address you, my. beloved friends, by
letter. Wherefore I have sent my rev-
erend and dear brother and fellow-worker
in the Gospel, Meletius the presbyter.
He will tell you my yearning affection for
you, and the anxiety of my soul, in that,


1 From Letter ccxxxvii. it would appear that Demosthenes
was now in Galatia, where he had summoned a heretical
synod. The Ben. note quotes a law of Valens of the year 373
(Cod. Theod. ix. tit. i. 10): Ultra provincie terminos accu-
sandt licentia non progrediatur. Opertet enim illic criminum
judicia agitari ubi facinus dicatur admissum, Peregrina
autem judicia presentibus legibus coercemus.

2 Placed in 375.


268


BASIL.


night and day, I beseech the Lord in your
behalf, that | may have boldness in the day
of our Lord Jesus Christ through your sal-
vation, and that when your work is tried by
the just judgment of God you may shine
forth in the brightness of the saints. At the
same time the difficulties of the day cause
me deep anxiety, tor all Churches have been
tossed to and fro, and all souls are being
sifted. Some have even opened their mouths
without any reserve against their fellow
servants. Lies are boldly uttered, and the
truth has been hidden. The accused are
being condemned without a trial, and the
accusers are believed without evidence. I
had heard that many letters are being carried
about against myself, stinging, gibbeting,
and attacking me. for matters about which I
have my defence ready for the tribunal of
truth; and I had intended to keep silence,
as indeed I have done; for now for three
years [ have been bearing the blows of
calumny and the whips of accusation, con-
tent to think that I have the Lord, Who knows
all secrets, as witness of its falsehood. But
I see now that many men have taken my
silence as a corroboration of these slanders,
and have formed the idea that my silence
was due, not to my longsuffering, but to
my inability to open my lips in opposition
to’ the truth. “or these’ reasons* 1 have
attempted to write to you, beseeching your
love in Christ not to accept these partial
calumnies as true, because, as it is written,
the law judges no man unless it have first
heard and known his actions.

2. Nevertheless before a fair judge the
facts themselves are a sufficient demonstra-
tion of the truth. Wherefore, even if I be
silent, you can look at events. The very
men who are now indicting me for heter-
odoxy have been seen openly numbered
with the heretical faction. The very ac-
cusers who condemn me for other men’s
writings, are plainly contravening their
own confessions, given to me by them in
writing. Look at the conduct of the ex-
hibitors of this audacity. It is their invari-
able custom to go over to the party in power,
to trample on their weaker friends, and to
court the strong. The writers of those
famous letters against Eudoxius and all his
faction, the senders of them to all the
brotherhood, the protesters that they shun
their communion as fatal to souls, and would
not accept the votes given for their deposi-
tion, because they were given by heretics, as
they persuaded me then, —these very men,
completely forgetful of all this, have joined


1 97: John vii. 51.


their faction.’ No room for denial is left
them. They laid their mind bare when they
embraced private communion with them
at Ancyra, when they had not yet been
publicly received by them. Ask them, then,
if Basilides, who gave communion to Ecdic-
ius, 15 now orthodox, why when returning
from Dardania, did they overthrow his altars
in the territory of Gangra, and set up their
own tables?* Why have they compasatively
recently * attacked the churches of Amasea
and Zela and appointed presbyters and
deacons there themselves? If they com-
municate with them as oithodox, why do
they attack them as heretical? If they hold
them to be heretical. how is it that they
do not shun communion with them? [5 it
not, my honourable brethren, plain even to
the intelligence of a child, that it is always
with a view to some personal advantage
that they endeavour to calumniate or to
give support? So they have stood off from
me, not because I did not write in reply
(which is alleged to be the main ground of
offence), nor because I did not receive the
chorepiscopi whom they assert they sent.
Those who are trumping up the tale will
render an account to the Lord. One man,
Eustathius,* was scnt and gave a letter to the
court of the vicar, and spent three days in
the city. When he was on the point of going
home, it is said that he came to my house
late in the evening, when I was asleep.
On hearing that I was asleep, he went away ;
he did not come near me on the next day,
and after thus going through the mere form
of discharging his duty to me, departed.
This is the charge under which I am guilty.
This is the sin against which these long-
suffering people have neglected to weigh the
previous service wherein I served them in
love. For this error they have made their
wrath against me so severe that they have
caused me to be denounced in all the
Churches throughout the world — at least,
that is, wherever they could.


1 The events referred to happened ten years before the date
assigned for this letter, when the Semi-Arians summoned
Eudoxius to Lampsacus, and sentenced him to deprivation in
his absence. (Soc. H.E. iv. 2-4; Soz. #.£.vi.7.) On the
refusal of Valens to ratify the deposition and ultimate hanish-
ment of the Anti-Eudoxians, Eustathius went to Rome to
seek communion with Liberius, subscribed the Nicene Con-
fession, and received commendatory letters from Liberius to
the Easterns. Soc. #7.E.iv.12. Eudoxius died in 370.

2QOn the action of Eustathius on this occasion, cf. Letter
ecli. Basilidesis describedas a Paphlagonian. On Ecdicius,
intruded by Demosthenes into the see of Parnassus, cf. Letter
CCXXXVii.

8 So the Ben. ed. for μένοι viv, with the idea that the action
of Eustathius in currying favour with the Catholics of Amasea
and Zela by opposing the Arian bishops occupying those sees,
must have taken place before he had quite broken with Basil.
Tillemont (ix. 236) takes νῦν to mean 375. Amasea and Zela
(in Migne erroneously Zeli. On the name, see Ramsay’s ///s¢.
Geog. Asta M. 260) are both on the Iris. 7

4A choreniscopus; not of course to be confounded with
Eustathius of Sebaste. {


LEFITERS.


269


3. But of course this is not the real cause
of our separation. It was when they found
that they would recommend themselves to
Euzoius ' if they were alienated from me, that
they devised these pretences. The object was
to find some ground of recommendation with
the authorities for their attack upon me. Now
they are beginning to run down even the Ni-
cene Creed, and nickname me Homoouszast,
because in that creed the Only begotten Son is
said to be homooustos with God the Father.
Not that one essence is divided into two
kindred parts; God forbid! This was not
the meaning of that holy and God-beloved
synod; their meaning was that what the
Father is in essence, such is the Son. And
thus they themselves have explained it to us,
in the phrase Light of Light. Now it is the
Nicene Creed, brought by themselves from
the west, which they presented to the Synod at
Tyana, by which they were received.” But


they have an ingenious theory as to changes of


this kind; they use the words of the creed as
physicians use a remedy for the particular
moment, and substitute now one and now an-
other to suit particular diseases. The un-
soundness of such a sophism it is rather for
you to consider than for me to prove. For
*¢the Lord will give you understanding” * to
know what isthe right doctrine, and what the
crooked and perverse. If indeed we are to
subscribe one creed to-day and another to-
morrow, and shift with the seasons, then is the
declaration false of him who said, ‘* One Lord,
one faith, one baptism.”* But if it is true,
then ** Let no man deceive you with [these]
vain words.” They falsely accuse me of in-
troducing novelties about the Holy Spirit.
Ask what the novelty is. I confess what I
have received, that the Paraclete is ranked
with Father and Son, and not numbered
with created beings. We have made profes-
sion of our faith in Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and we are baptized in the name of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Wherefore we
never separate the Spirit from conjunction ἢ
with the Father and the Son. For our
mind, enlightened by the Spirit, looks at the
Son, and in Him, as in an image,. beholds
the Father. And I do not invent names of
myself, but call the Holy Ghost Paraclete ;
nor do 1 consent to destroy His due glory.
These are truly my doctrines. If any one
wishes to accuse me for them, let him accuse
me; let’) my persecutor’ persecute’ me. Let
him who believes in the slanders against me


1 cf, note on ἢ. 265.
2 2.6. after their return from Rome, and another Synod in


Sicily, i in 367.
4 Eph. iy. 5.


8 2 Tim. 11.
5 συνάφεια. Cf. note on p. τος


‘¢ The Lord is


4


be ready for the judgment.
at hand.” ‘* I am careful for nothing.

4. Ifany one in Syria is writing, this is
nothing: te: nies) Wore is) said * By thy
words thou shalt be justified, and by thy
words thou shalt be condemned.”? Let
my own words judge me. Let no one con-
demn me for other men’s errors, nor adduce
letters written twenty years ago in proof that
I would allow communion to the writers of
such things. Before these things were
written, and before any suspicion of this
kind had been stirred against them, I did
write as layman tolayman. I wrote nothing
about the faith in any way like that which
they are now carrying about to calumniate
me. Isent nothing but a mere greeting to re-
turn a friendly communication, for I shun and
anathematize as impious alike all who are
atfected with the unsoundness of Sabellius,
and all who maintain the opinions of Arius.
If any one says that Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost are the same, and supposes one thing
under several names, and one_ hypostasis


described by three persons, I rank such an


one as belonging to the faction of the Jews."
Similarly, if any one says that the Son is in
essence unlike the Father, or degrades the
Holy Ghost into a creature, I anathematize
him, and say that he is coming near to the
heathen error. But it is impossible for the
mouths of my accusers to be restrained by
my letter; rather is it likely that they are
being irritated at my defence, and are get-
ting up new and more violent attacks against
me. Butit is not difficult for your ears to be
guarded. Wherefore, as far as in you lies, do
as I bid you. Keep your heart clear and un-
prejudiced by their calumnies ; and insist on
my rendering an account to meet the charges
laid against me. If you find that truth is on
my side do not vield to lies; if on the other
hand you feel that Iam feeble in defending
myself, then believe my accusers as being
worthy of credit. They pass sleepless nights
to do me mischief. I do not ask this of you.
They are taking to a commercial career, and
turning their slanders against me into a
means of profit. JI implore you onthe other
hand to stop at home, and to lead a decorous
life, quietly doing Christ’s work.* I advise
you to avoid communication with them, for
it always tends to the perversion of their
hearers. I say this that you may keep your
affection for me uncontaminated, may pre-
serve the faith of the Fathers in its integrity,
and may appear approved before the Lord
as friends of the truth.


1 Phil. iv. 5 and 6.


3 cf. Letter Ccx. p. 249.
2 Matt. xii. 37.


4cf.1 ‘Thess. iv. 11.


----- --- τ ς΄ -


Peet eh COXXKVIT:


Consolatory, to the clergy of Colonia.


Wuart is so goodly and honourable before
God and men as perfect love, which, as we
are told by the wise teacher, is the fulfilling
of the law?* I therefore approve of your
warm affection, for your bishop, for, as to an
affectionate son the loss of a good father
is unendurable, so Christ’s Church cannot
bear the departure of a pastor and teacher.
Thus, in your exceeding affection for your
bishop, you are giving proof of a good
and noble disposition. But this your
good will towards your spiritual father is to
be approved so long as it is shewn in reason
and moderation ; once let it begin to overstep
this line, and it is no longer deserving of the
same commendation. In the case of your
very God-beloved brother, our fellow-min-
ister Euphronius, good government has been
shewn by those to whom has been committed
the administration of the Church; they have
acted as the occasion compelled them, to the
gain alike of the Church to which he has
been removed and of yourselves from whom
he has been taken. Do not look at this as
merely of man’s ordaining, nor as having been
originated by the calculations of men who
regard earthly things. Believe that those to
whom the anxious care of the Churches be-
longs have acted, as they have, with the aid
of the Holy Spirit; impress this inception of
the proceedings on your hearts and do your
best to perfect it. Accept quietly and thank-
fully what has happened, with the conviction
that all, who refuse to accept what is ordered
in God’s Churches by the Churches, are re-
sisting the ordinance of God.* Do not enter
into a dispute with your Mother Church at
Nicopolis. Do not exasperate yourselves
against those who have taken the anxious
responsibility of your souls. In the firm es-
tablishment of things at Nicopolis your part
in them may also be preserved; but if some
disturbance affects them, though you have
protectors beyond number, with the head the
heart will be destroyed. It is like men who
live on the riverside; when they see some
one far up the stream making a strong dam
against the current, they know that, in stop-
ping the inrush of the current, he is provid-
ing for their safety. Just so those who have
now undertaken the weight of the care of


the Churches, by protecting the rest, are


1 Placed in 375.

22.e.in Armenia. cf. Letter cxcv. Ὁ. 234. The removal of
Euphronius to Nicopolis was occasioned by the death of
Theodotus and the consecration of Fronto by the Eustathians,
to whom the orthodox Colonians would not submit.

3 Rom, xiii. 10. 4 cf. Rom. xiii. 2.


ig ey bi δῇ


providing for your own security. You will
be sheltered from every storm, while others
have to bear the brunt of the attack. But
you ought also to consider this; he has not
cast you off; he has taken others into his
charge. 1am not so invidious as to compel
the man, who is able to give a share of his
good gifts to others, also to confine his favour
to you, and to limit it to your own city. A
man who puts a fence round a spring, and
spoils the outpour of the waters, is not free
from the disease of envy, and it is just the
same with him who tries to prevent the
further flow of abundant teaching. Let him
have some care for Nicopolis too, and let your
interests be added to his anxieties there. He
has received an addition of labour, but there
is no diminution in his diligence on your be-
half. 1 am really distressed at one thing
that you have said, which seems to me
quite extravagant, namely, that if you cannot
obtain your object, you will betake your-
selves to the tribunals, and put the matter
into the hands of men, the great object of
whose prayers is the overthrow of the
Churches. Take heed lest men, carried
away by unwise passions, persuade you, to
your hurt, to put in any plea before the
courts, and so some catastrophe may ensue,
and the weight of the result fall upon the
heads of those who have occasioned it.
Take my advice. It is offered you in a
fatherly spirit. Consent to the arrangement
with the very God-beloved bishops, which
has been made in accordance with God’s
will. Wait for my arrival. When I am
with you, with God’s help, I will give you
in person all the exhortations which it has
been impossible for me to express in my
letter, and will do my utmost to give you all
possible consolation, not by word but in
deed.


LETIBR CCXxXVill’
To the magistrates of Colonia.


I HAVE received your lordships’ letter,
and offered thanks to God most holy, that
you, occupied as you are with affairs of,
state, should not put those of the Church in
the second place. I am grateful to think that
every one of you has shewn anxiety as though
he were acting in his own private interest,
nay, in defence of his own life, and that you
have written to me in your distress at the re-
moval of your very God-beloved bishop Eu-
phronius. Nicopolis has not really stolen him
from you; were she pleading her cause betore


1 Of the same date as the preceding.


»


: LETTERS.


271


a judge she might say that she was recovering


what is her own. If honourably treated she
will tell you, as becomes an affectionate moth-
er, that she will share with you the Father
who will give a portion of his grace to each of
you: he will not suffer the one to be in any
way harmed by the invasion of their adver-
saries, and at the same time will not deprive
you, the other, of the care to which you have
been accustomed. Bethink you then of the
emergency of the time; apply your best in-
telligence to understand how good govern-
ment necessitates a certain course of action;
and then pardon the bishops who have
adopted this course for the establishment of
the Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Suggest to yourselves what is becoming you.
Your own intelligence needs no instruction.
You know how to adopt the counsels of
those who love you. It is only natural
that you should be unaware of many of the
questions that are being agitated, because of
your being situated far away in Armenia;
but we who are in the midst of affairs and
have our ears dinned every day on all sides
with news of Churches that are being over-
thrown, are in deep anxiety lest the common
enemy, in envy at the protracted peace of
our life, should be able to sow his tares in
your ground too, and Armenia, as well as
other places, be given over to our adversaries
to devour. For the present be still, as not
refusing to allow your neighbours to share
with you the use of a goodly vessel. Ere
long, if the Lord allow me to come to you,
you shall, if it seem necessary to you, receive
yet greater consolation for what has come to
pass.


LETTER CCXXIX.’
To the clergy of Nicopoks.


τ. [Am sure that a work done by one or two
pious men is not done without the codpera-
tion of the Holy Spirit. For when nothing
merely human is put before us, when holy
men are moved to action with no thought of
their own personal gratification, and with
the sole object of pleasing God, it is plain
that it is the Lord Who is directing their
hearts. When spiritually-minded men take
the leadin counsel, and the Lord’s people fol-
low them with consentient hearts, there can
be no doubt that their decisions are arrived
at with the participation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Who poured out His blood for the
Churches’ sake. You are therefore right in
supposing that our very God-beloved brother


1 Placed in 375.


and fellow minister Poeemenius,' who arrived
among you at an opportune moment, and
discovered this means of consoling you, has
been divinely moved. I not only praise his
discovery of the right course to take; I
much admire the firmness with which, with-
out allowing any delay to intervene, so as to
slacken the energy of the petitioners, cr
to give the opposite party an opportunity
of taking precautions, and to set in motion
the counterplots of secret foes, he at once
crowned his happy course with a successful
conclusion. The Lord of His especial grace
keep him and his, so that the Church, as be-
comes her, may remain in a succession in
no way degenerate, and not give place to the
evil one, who now, if ever, is vexed at the
firm establishment of the Churches.

2. I have also written at length to ex-
hort our brethren at Colonia. You, more-
over, are bound rather to put up with their
frame of mind than to increase their irrita-
tion, as though you despised them for their
insignificance, or provoked them to a quarrel
by your contempt. It is only natural for dis-
putants to act without due counsel, and to
manage their own affairs. ill with the object
of vexing their opponents. And no one is
so small as not to be now able to give an
occasion, to those who want an occasion, for
great troubles. I do not speak at random.
I speak from my own experience of my own
troubles. From these may God keep you in
answer to your prayers. Pray also for me,
that I may have a successful journey, and, on
my arrival, may share your joy in your
present pastor, and with you may find con-
solation at the departure of our common
father.’


LETTER CCXXX.?
To the magistrates of Nicopolts.


THE government of the Churches is car-
ried on by those to whom the chief offices in
them have been entrusted, but their hands are
strengthened by the laity. The measures
which lay with the God-beloved bishops
have been taken. ‘The rest concerns you, if
you deign to accord a hearty reception to the
bishop who has been given you, and to make
a vigorous resistance to attacks from outside.
For nothing is so likely to cause discourage-
ment to all, whether rulers or the rest who
envy your peaceful position, as agreement in
affection to the appointed bishop, and firm-
ness in maintaining your ground. They are


1On Pemenius, bishop of Satala in Armenia, cf. p. 1Ss.
2 f.e. Theodotus. cf. Letter cxxi. and cxxx. pp. 193 and 198.
8 Of the same date as the preceding.


272


BASIL.


likely to despair of every evil attempt, if they
see that their counsels are accepted neither
by clergy nor by laity. Bring it about then
that your own sentiments as to the right’ may
be shared by all the city, and so speak to the
citizens, and to all the inhabitants of the dis-
trict, in confirmation of their good senti-
ments, that the genuineness of your love to
God may be everywhere known. I trust
that it may be permitted me one day to visit
and inspect a Church which is the nursing
mother of true religion, honoured by me as
a metropolis of orthodoxy, because it has
from of old been under the government of
men right honourable and the elect of God,
who have held fast to ‘‘ the faithful word as
we have been taught.’’? ‘You have approved
him who has just been appointed as.worthy
of these predecessors, and I have agreed.
May you be preserved by God’s grace. May
He scatter the evil counsels of your ene-
mies, and fix in your souls strength and
constancy to preserve what has been rightly
determined on.


LETTER CCXXXI.?
To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.


I FIND few opportunities of writing to your
reverence, and this causes me no little trouble.
It is just the same as if, when it was in my
power to see you and enjoy your society very
often, I did so but seldom. But it is impos-
sible for me to write to you because so few
travel hence to you, otherwise there is no
reason why my letter should not be a kind of
journal of my life, to tell you, my dear friend,
everything that happens to me day by day.
It is a comfort to me to tell you my affairs,
and I know that you care for nothing more
than for what concerns me. Now, however,
Elpidius * is going home to his own master,
to refute the calumnies falsely got up against
him by certain enemies, and he has asked
me for a letter. I therefore salute your rev-
erence by him and commend to you a man
who deserves your protection, at once for the
sake of justice and for my own sake. Although
I could say nothing else in his favour, yet, be-
cause he has made it of very great impor-
tance to be the bearer of my letter, reckon
him among our friends, and remember me
and pray for the Church.

You must know that my very God-beloved
brother is in exile, for he could not endure
the annoyance caused him by shameless per-

2 ΠΕΣ. Ὁ 27:1 Pais dt, 65 7 Tam. i. 13,2 “Tim, 11. 173 aod
Tit. iii. 8. 8 Placed in 375.


4It is doubtful whether this Elpidius is to be identified
with any other of the same name mentioned in the letters.


sons.’ Doara? is in a state of agitation, for the


fat sea monster ἦ is throwing everything into
confusion. My enemies, as I am informed
by those who know, are plotting against me
at court. But hitherto the hand of the Lord
has been over me. Only pray that I be not
abandoned in the end. My brother is tak-
ing things quietly. Doara has received the
old muleteer.*| She can do no more. The
Lord will scatter the counsels of my enemies.
The one cure for all my troubles present and
to come 15 to set eyes on you. If you possi-
bly can, while I am still alive, do come to
see me. The book on the Spirit has been
written by me, and is finished, as you know.
My brethren here have prevented me from
sending it to you written on paper, and have
told me that they had your excellency’s orders
to engross it on parchment.’ Not, then, to
appear to do anything against your injunc-
tions, I have delayed now, but I will send it
a little later, if only [ find any suitable per-
son to convey it. May you be granted to me
and to God’s Church by the kindness of the
Holy One, in all health and happiness, and
praying for me to the Lord.


LETTER CCXXXII®
To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.


Every day that brings me a letter from
you is a feast day, the very greatest of feast
days. And when symbols of the feast are
brought, what can I call it but a feast of
feasts, as the old law used to speak of Sab-
bath of Sabbaths? I thank the Lord that
you are quite well, and that you have cele-
brated the commemoration of the cconomy
of salvation’ in a Church at peace. I have
been disturbed by some troubles; and have
not been without distress from the fact of my
God-beloved brother being in exile. Pray
for him that God may one day grant him to
see his Church healed from the wounds of


1On the withdrawal of Gregory of Nyssa, cf. note, p. 267.

2Doara was one of the bishoprics in Cappadocia Secunda
under ‘T'yana; now Hadji Bektash. Ramsay, Hist. Geog.
Asia Minor, p. 287.

Ὁ 7.6. Demosthenes. Such language may seem inconsistent
with the tone of Letter ccxxv., but that, it will be remembered,
was an official and formal document, while the present letter
is addressed to an intimate friend. ed

4 Possibly another hit at Demosthenes. The name might
be thought to fit Anthimus, but with him Basil had made
peace. cf. Letter ccx.

5év σωματίῳ, 7.e. in a volume, not on leaves of papyrus, but
in book form, as e.g. the Cod. Alexandrinus inthe B.M. |

6 Placed in 376. Maran, Vit. Bas. xxxv., thinks that this
letter is to be placed cither in the last days of 375, if the
Nativity was celebrated on December 25, or in_the beginning
of 376, if it followed after the Epiphany. The Oriental usage,
up to the end of the fourth century, was to celebrate the
Nativity and Baptism on January 6. St. Chrysostom, in the
homily on the birthday of our Saviour, delivered c. 386, speaks
of the separation of the celebration of the Nativity from that of
the Epiphany as comparatively recent. cf. D.C.A.,1, pp. 361,
617. 7 7.6. the incarnation. cf. pp. 7 and 12, ἢ.


LETIERS:


heretical bites. Do come to see me while
1 am yet upon thisearth. Act in accordance
with your own wishes and with my most
earnest prayers. I may be allowed to be as-
tonished at the meaning of your blessings,
inasmuch as you have mysteriously wished
mea vigorous old age. By your lamps* you
rouse me to nightly toil; and by your sweet
meats you seem to pledge yourself securely
that all my body is in good case. But there is
no munching for me at my time of life, for my
teeth have long ago been worn away by time
and bad health. As to what you have asked
me there are some replies in the document I
send you, written to the best of my ability,
and as opportunity has allowed.


LETTER CCXXXITI.


To Amphilochius, in reply to certain questions.


1. I Know that I have myself heard of
this, and 1 am aware of the constitution of
mankind. What shall I say? The mind is
a wonderful thing, and therein we possess
that which is after the image of the Creator.
And the operation of the mind is wonderful;
in that, in its perpetual motion, it frequently
forms imaginations about things non-existent
as though they were existent, and, is fre-
quently carried straight to the truth. But
there are in it two faculties; in accordance
with the view of us who believe in God, the
one evil, that of the daemons which draws
us on to their own apostasy; and the divine
and the good, which brings us to the
likeness of God. When, therefore, the
mind remains alone and unaided, it contem-
plates small things, commensurate with itself.
When it yields to those who deceive it, it nul-
lifies its proper judgment, and is concerned
with monstrous fancies. Then it considers
wood to be no longer wood, but a god; then
it looks on gold no longer as money, but as
an object of worship.* If on the other hand
it assents to its diviner part, and accepts the
boons of the Spirit. then, so far as its nature
admits, it becomes perceptive of the divine.
There are, as it were, three conditions of life,
and three operations of the mind. Our ways
may be wicked, and the movements of our
mind wicked; such as adulteries, thefts,


1 The reading of the Ben. ed.is λαμπηνῶν The only mean-
ing of Aaumyjvy in Class. Greek is akind of covered carriage,
and the cognate adj, λααπήνικος is used forthe covered waggons
of Numb. vii. 3 in the LXX. But the context necessitates
some such meaning as /amp or candle. Ducange s.v. quotes

ohn de Janua "" Lampene sunt stelle fulgentes.” cf. Ital-
ian Lampana, t.e. lamp.

2 Placed in 376.

3 St. Basil’s words may point either at the worshippers of a
golden image ina shrine in the ordinary sense, or at the state
of things where, as A. H.Clough has it, ‘no golden images
may be worshipped except the currency,’”’


273


idolatries, slanders, strife, passion, sedition,
vain-glory, and all that the apostle Paul enu-
merates among the works of the flesh.! Or
the soul’s operation is, as it were, in a mean,
and has nothing about it either damnable or
laudable, as the perception of such mechan-
ical crafts as we commonly speak of as
indifferent, and, of their own character, in-
clining neither towards virtue nor towards
vice. For what vice is there in the craft of
the helmsman or the physician? Neitherare
these operations in themselves virtues, but
they incline in one direction or the other in
accordance with the will of those who use
them. But the mind which is impregnated
with the Godhead of the Spirit is at once ca-
pable of viewing great objects; it beholds
the divine beauty, though only so far as grace
imparts and its nature receives.

2. Let them dismiss, therefore, these
questions of dialectics and examine the truth,
not with mischievous exactness but with rev-
erence. The judgment of our mind is given us
for the understanding of thetruth. Now our
God is the very truth.’ So the primary func-
tion of our mind is to know one God, but to
know Him so far as the infinitely great can be
known bythe very small. When our eyes are
first brought to the perception of visible
objects, all visible objects are not at once
brought intosight. The hemisphere of heaven
is not bebeld with one glance, but we are sur-
rounded by a certain appearance, though in
reality many things, not to say all things, in
it are unperceived;—the nature of the
stars, their greatness, their distances, their
movements, their conjunctions, their inter-
vals, their other conditions, the actual
essence of the firmament, the distance of
depth from the concave circumference to
the convex surface. Nevertheless, no one
would allege the heaven to be invisible be-
cause of what is unknown; it would be said
to be visible on account of our limited per-
ception of it. It is just the same in the case
of God. If the mind has been injured by
devils it will be guilty of idolatry, or will be
perverted to some other form of impiety.
But if it has yielded to the aid of the Spirit,
it will have understanding of the truth, and
will know God. But it will know Him, as


the Apostle says, in part; and in the life to


come more perfectly. For ‘** when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is
in part shall be done away.”* ‘The judg-
ment of the mind is, therefore, good and
given us for a good end—the perception of
God; but it operates only so far as it can.


1 cf, Gal. V..10, 20, are 8 1 Cor, xiii. 10.
9 ’


3 ἡ αὐτοαλήθεια.


274


bee LER CCXAXXIY?


To the same, in answer to another question.


Do you worship what you know or what
you do not know? If I answer, I worship
what I know, they immediately reply, What
is the essence of the object of worship?
Then, if I confess that I am ignorant of the
essence, they turn on me again and say, So
you worship you know not what. I answer
that the word ἐσ £zow has many meanings.
We say that we know the greatness of God,
His power, His wisdom, His goodness, His
providence over us, and _ the justness of
His judgment; but not His very essence.
The question is, therefore, only put for the
sake of dispute. For he who denies that he


knows the essence does not confess himself
to be ignorant of God, because our idea of


God is gathered from all the attributes which
I have enumerated. But God, he says, is
simple, and whatever attribute of Him you
have reckoned as knowable is of His es-
sence. But the absurdities involved in this
sophism are innumerable. When all these
high attributes have been enumerated, are
they all names of one essence? And is there
the same mutual force in His awtfulness and
His loving-kindness, His justice and His
creative power, His providence and His
foreknowledge, and His bestowal of rewards
and punishments, His majesty and His provi-
dence? In mentioning any one of these do
we declare Hisessence? If they say, yes, let
them not ask if we know the essence of God,
but let them enquire of us whether we know
God to be awful, or just, or merciful. These
we confess that we know. If they say that
essence is something distinct, let them not
put us in the wrong on the score of simplic-
ity. For they confess themselves that there
is a distinction between the essence and
each one of the attributes enumerated. The
operations are various, and the essence
simple, but we say that we know our God
from His operations, but do not undertake
to approach near to His essence. His opera-
tions come down to us, but His essence re-
mains beyond our reach.

2. But, it is replied, if you are ignorant
of the essence, you are ignorant of Himself.
Retort, If you say that you know His
essence, you are ignorant of Himself. A
man who has been bitten by a mad dog,
and sees a dog in a dish, does not really see
any more than is seen by people in good
health; he is to be pitied because he thinks
he sees what he does not see. Do not then


1 Placed in 376.


—


admire him for his announcement, but pity
him for his insanity. Recognise that the
voice is the voice of mockers, when they
say, if you are ignorant of the essence of
God, you worship what you do not know.
I do know that He exists; what His essence
is, T look at as beyond intelligence. How
then amI saved? ‘Through faith. It is faith
sufficient to know that God exists, without


knowing what He is; and ‘*He is a re-
warder of them that seek Him.” !


So know-
ledge of the divine essence involves _per-
ception of His incomprehensibility, and the
object of our worship is not that of which
we comprehend the essence, but of which
we comprehend that the essence exists.

3. And the following counter question
may also be put to them. ‘* No man hath
seen God at any time, the Only-begotten
which is in the bosom of the Father he hath
declared him.”? What of the Father did
the Only-begotten Son declare? His essence
or His power? If His power, we know so
much as He declared to us. If His essence,
tcll me where He said that His essence was
the being unbegotten? * When did Abraham
worship? Was it not when he believed? And
when did he believe? Was it not when
he was called? Where in this place is there
any testimony in Scripture to Abraham’s
comprehending? When did the disciples
worship Him? Was it not when they saw
creation subject to Him? It was from the
obedience of sea and winds to Him that they
recognised His Godhead. Therefore the
knowledge came from the operations, and
the worship from the knowledge. ‘ Be-
lievest thou that Iam able to do this?” ‘I
believe, Lord; ”* and he worshipped Him.
So worship follows faith, and faith is con-
firmed by power. But if you say that the
believer also knows, he knows from what he
believes ; and vice versa he believes from what
he knows. We know God from His power.
We, therefore, believe in Him whois known,
and we worship Him who is believed in.


LETTER CCXXXV.*
To the same, in answer to another question.


1. Wuicn is-first in order, knowledge or
faith? 1 reply that generally, in the case of
disciples, faith precedes knowledge. But,
in our teaching, if any one asserts know-
ledge to come before faith, I make no objec-


1. 1165... Χ1.. ὅ.
2 John i. 18.
8 ἀγεννησία. cf. Prolegomena on the Books against Euno-


mius, and p. 39 ἢ.
4 of. Matt. ix. 28. 5 Placed in 376.


LETTERS.


tion; understanding knowledge so far as is
within the bounds of human comprehension.
In our lessons we must first believe that the
letter @ is said to us; then we learn the
characters and their pronunciation, and last
of all we get the distinct idea of the force of
the letter. But in our belief about God, first
comes the idea that God is. This we gather
from His works. For, as we perceive His
wisdom, His goodness. and all His invisible
things from the creation of the world,’ so
we know Him. So, too, we accept Him as
our Lord. For since Gol is the Creator of
the whole world, and we are a part of the
world, God is our Creator. This knowledge
is followed by faith, and_ this
worship.

2. But the word knowledge has many
meanings, and so those who make sport of
simpler minds, and like to make themselves
remarkable by astounding statements (just
like jugglers who get the balls out of sight
before men’s very eyes), hastily included
everything in their general enquiry. Know-
ledge, I say, has avery wide application,
and knowledge may be got of what a thing
is, by number, by bulk, by force, by its mode
of existence, by the period of its generation,
by its essence. When then our opponents
include the whole in their question, if they
catch us in the confession that we know,
they straightway demand from us knowledge
of the essence; if,on the contrary, they see
us cautious as to making any assertion on
the subject, they affix on us the stigma of
impiety. I, however, confess that I know
what is knowable of God, and that I know
what it is which is beyond my comprehen-
sion.” Soif you ask me if I know what send
is, and [ reply that I do, you will obviously
be slandering me, if you straightway ask me
the number of the sand; inasmuch as your
first enquiry bore only on the form of sand,
while your second unfair objection bore upon
its number. The quibble is just as though
any one were to say, Do you know
Timothy? Oh, if you know Timothy you
know his nature. Since you have acknow-
ledged that you know Timothy, give me an
account of Timothy’s nature. Yes; but I
at the same time both know and do not know
Timothy, though not in the same way and in
the same degree. It is not that I do not
know in the same way in which I do know;
but I know in one way and am ighorant in
one way. I know him according to his
form and other properties; but I am ignorant


1 cf. Rom. i. 20.
_ ΣᾺ various reading gives the sense “ but do not know what
is beyond my comprehension.”


faith by.


275


of his essence. Indeed, in this way too, I
both know, and am ignorant of, myself. I
know indeed who I am, but, so far as I am
ignorant of my essence I do not know myself.

3. Let them tell me in what sense Paul
says, ‘*Now we know in part”; do we
know His essence in part, as knowing parts
of His essence? No. This is absurd; for
God is without parts. But do we know the
Whole essence? How then ** When that
which is perfect is come, then that which is
in part shall be done away.”*® Why are
idolaters found fault with? Is it not because
they knew God and did not honour Him as
God? Why are the ‘‘ foolish Galatians ” #
reproached by Paul in the words, ‘* After that
ye have known God, or rather are known of
God, how turn ye again to the weak and
beggarly elements?” * How was God known
in Jewry? Was it ‘because in Jewry it was
known what His essence is? ‘+ The ox,”
it is said, **‘ knoweth his owner.” ὃ Accord-
ing to your argument the ox knows his lord’s
essence. ‘*And the ass his master’s crib.” °
So the ass knows the essence of the crib, but
‘*Israel doth not know me.” So, according
to you, Israel is found fault with for not
knowing what the essence of God is. ‘* Pour
out thy wrath upon the heathen that have
not known thee,’ that is, who have not
comprehended thy essence. But, I repeat,
knowledge is manifold — it involves per-
ception of our Creator, recognition of His
wonderful works, observance of His com-
mandments and intimate communion with
Him. All this they thrust on one side and
force knowledge into one single meaning,
the contemplation of God’s essence. Thou
shalt put them, it is said, before the testi-
mony and I shall be known of thee thence.®
Is the term, ‘I shall be known of thee,”
instead of, ‘I will reveal my essence” ἢ
‘¢The Lord knoweth them that are his.” ®
Does He know the essence of them that are
His, but is ignorant of the essence of those
who disobey Him? ** Adam knew his wife.” 19
Did he know her essence? It is said of
Rebekah ‘‘ She was a virgin, neither had
any man known her,” “and ‘+ How shall this
be seeing I know not a man?” ” Did no
man know Rebekah’s’ essence? Does
Mary mean ‘*I do not know the essence of
any man” ? Is it not the custom of Scripture
to use the word ‘*know” of nuptial em-


braces? The statement that God shall be
SS ae eg ἀν τὰν τὺ A ἢ


Δι Cor. xiii. 9. * Gal. iv. 9. 7 Ps. Ixxix. 6.
2) Cor xl. τὸν Biss i. 3,
SiGe nee te pl Sr are


ὃ Referred by the Ben. Ed. to Ex. xxv. 21 and 29, The first
clause is apparently introduced from Ex. xvi. 34.

92 Tim. ii. 19. 11 Gen. xxiv. 16.

10 Gen, iv. I, 12 Luke i. 34. >


276


BASIL.


- known from the mercy seat means that He
will be known to His worshippers. And the
Lord knoweth them that are His, means that
on account of their good works He receives
them into intimate communion with Him.


LEPYER' CCXXXVI#
To the same Amphilochius.


1. Enquiry has already frequently been
made concerning the saying of the gospels
as to our Lord “Jesus Christ’s ignorance of
the day and of the hour of the end;? an
objection constantly put forward by the
Anomeeans to the destruction of the glory of
the Only-Begotten, in order to show Him
to be unlike in essence and subordinate in
dignity ; inasmuch as, if He know not all
things, He cannot possess the same nature
nor be regarded as of one likeness with Him,
who by His own prescience and faculty of
forecasting the future has knowledge coex-
tensive with the universe. This “question
has now been proposed to me by your intel-
ligence as a new one. I can give in reply
the answer which 1 heard from our fathers
when I wasa boy, and which on account of
my love for what is good, I have received
without question. I do not expect that it can
undo the shamelessness of them that fight
against Christ, for where is the reasoning
strong enough to stand their attack? It
may, however, suffice to convince all that
love the Lord, and in whom the previous
assurance supplied them by faith is stronger
than any demonstration of reason.

Now ‘*no man” seems to be a general
expression, so that not even one person is
excepted, by. it, ‘but this’ 15. mot its use ‘in
Scripture, as I have observed in the passage
‘there is none good but one, that is, God.” °
For even in this passage the Son does not so
speak to the exclusion of Himself from the
good nature. But, since the Father is the
first good, we believe the words *‘ no man”
to have been uttered with the understood ad-
dition of ** first.” * So with the passage ‘* No
man knoweth the Son but the Father; ”® even
here there is no charge of ignorance against
the Spirit, but only a testimony that know-
ledge of His own nature naturally belongs to
the Father first. Thus also we understand

1 This letter is also dated in 376, and treats of further sub-
jects not immediately raised by the De Spiritu Sancto : How
Christ can be said to be ignorant of the day and the hour; Of
the prediction of Jeremiah concerning Jeconiah; Of an objec-
tion of the Encratites; Of fate; Of emerging in baptism; Of
the accentuation of the word φάγος; Of essence and hyposta-
sis ; Of the ordaining of things neutral and indifferent.

2 Mark xiii. 32,

$Markx.18. 7z.e.in Adv. Eunom. iv. vide Proleg.


¢ The manuscripts at this point are corrupt and divergent.
5 Matt. xi. 27.


‘¢ No man knoweth,” ' to refer to the Father
the first knowledge of things, both present
and to be, and generally to exhibit to men
the first cause. Otherwise how can this pas-
sage fall in with the rest of the evidence of
Scripture, or agree with the common notions
of us who believe that the Only-Begotten
is the image of the invisible God, and image
not of the ‘bodily figure, but of the very God-
head and of the mighty qualities attributed
to the essence of God, image of power,
image of wisdom, as Christ is called ‘the
power of God and the wisdom of God”? ?
Now of wisdom knowledge is plainly a part;
and if in any part He falls short, He is not
an image of the whole; and how can we
understand the Father not to have shewn
that day and that hour —the smallest portion
of the ages —to Him through Whom He
made the ages? How can the Creator of the
universe fall short of the knowledge of the
smallest portion of the things created by
Him? How can He who says, when the
end is near, that such and such signs shall
appear in heaven and in earth, be ignorant
of the end itself? When He says, “" The end
is not yet.” * He makes a definite statement,
as though with knowledge and not in doubt.
Then further, it is plain to the fair enquirer
that our Lord says many things to men, in
the character of man; as for instance, ‘* give
me todrink ” * isa saying of our Lord, expres-
sive of His bodily necessity; and yet the
asker was not soulless flesh. but Godhead
using flesh endued with soul.’ So in the
present instance no one will be carried be-
yond the bounds of the interpretation of true
religion, who understands the ignorance of
him who had received all things according
to the ceconomy," and was advancing with
God and man in favour and wisdom.’

2. It would be worthy of your diligence
to set the phrases of the Gospel side by
side, and compare together those of Matthew
and those of Mark, for these two alone are
found in concurrence in this passage. The
wording of Matthew is ““ οἵ that day and
hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels
of heaven, but my Father only.” ° That of
Mark runs, ‘* But of that day and that hour
knoweth no man, no, not the angels which
are in heaven, neither the Son, but the


1 Matt. xxiv. 35. 3 Matt. xxiv. 6.

ΘΟ, 4.24. 4John i iv.

5cf. Ep_cclxi.2. The reference is to the system of Apolli-
narius, which denied tothe Son a ψυχὴ λογική or reasonable
soul.

6 οἰκονομικῶς, 1.2. according to oe ceconomy of the incarna-
tion. cf. note on p. 7 cf. Luke ii. 52

8 Matt. xxiv. 36. R. V.in this passage inserts ‘‘ Neither the
Son,” on the authority of 8, B.D. Plainly St. Basil knew no
such difference of reading. On the general view taken by the
Fathers on the self-limitation of the Saviour, cf. C. Gore’s
Bampton Lectures (vi. p. 163, and notes 48 and 49, p. 267).


LETTERS.


277


Father.” * What is noticeable in_ these
passages is this; that Matthew says nothing
about the ignorance of the Son, and seems
to agree with Mark as to sense in saying
‘¢but my Father only.” Now I understand
the word ‘only ” to have been used in
contradistinction to the angels, but that the
Son is not included with His own servants
in ignorance.

He could not say what is false Who said,
*¢ All things that the Father hath are Mine,”
but one of the things which the Father hath
is knowledge of that day and of that hour.
In the passage in Matthew, then, the Lord
made no mention of His own Person, as a
matter beyond controversy, and said that the
angels knew not and that His Father alone
knew, tacitly asserting the knowledge of
His Father to be His own knowledge too,
because of what He had said elsewhere,
‘as the Father knoweth me even so know
I the Father,’’* and if the Father has
complete knowledge of the Son, nothing
excepted, so that He knows all knowledge
to dwell in Him, He will clearly be known
as fully by the Son with all His inherent
wisdom and all His knowledge of things to
come. This modification, I think, may be
given to the words of Matthew, “" but my
Father only.” Now as to the words of
Mark, who appears distinctly to exclude the
Son from the knowledge, my opinion is this.
No man knoweth, neither the angels of God;
nor yet the Son would have known unless
the Father had known: that is, the cause
of the Son’s knowing comes from the
Father. To a fair hearer there is no violence
in this interpretation, because the word
‘Sonly”’ is not added as it 15 in Matthew.
Mark’s sense, then, is as follows: of that
day and of that hour knoweth no man, nor
the angels of God; but even the Son would
not have known if the Father had not
known, for the knowledge naturally His was
given by the Father. This is very decorous
and becoming the divine nature to say of the
Son, because He has, His knowledge and His
being, beheld in all the wisdom and glory
which become His Godhead, from Him with
Whom He is consubstantial.

2. As to Jeconias, whom the prophet Jere-
miah declares in these words to have been
rejected from the land of Judah, ‘+ Jeconias was
dishonoured like a vessel for which there
is ΠΟ more use; and because he was cast
out he and his seed; and none shall rise
from his seed sitting upon the throne of
David and ruling in Judah,” * the matter


1 Mark xiii. 32.


3 John x, 15.
2 John xvi. 15.


4 Jer. xxii, 28-30, LXX.


is plain and clear. On the destruction of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, the kingdom
had been destroyed, and there was no longer
an hereditary succession of reigns as before
Nevertheless, at that time, the deposed de-
scendants of David were living in captivity.
On the return of Salathiel and Zerubbabel
the supreme government rested to a greater
degree with the people, and the sovereignty
was afterwards transferred to the priesthood,
on account of the intermingling of the
priestly and royal tribes; whence the Lord,
in things pertaining, to God, is both King
and High Priest. Moreover, the royal ‘ribs
did not fail until the coming of the Christ;
nevertheless, the seed of Jeconias sat no
longer upon the throne of David. Plainly
it is the royal dignity which is described by
the ‘term ‘‘ throne.” You remember: the
history, how all Judza, Idumza, Moab.
both the neighbouring regions of Syria and
the further countries up to Mesopotamia,
and the country on the other side as far as
the river of Egypt, were all tributary to
David. If then none of his descendants
appeared with a sovereignty so wide, how
is not the word of the prophet true that no
one of the seed of Jeconias should any longer
sit upon the throne of David, for none of
his descendants appears to have attained
this dignity. Nevertheless, the tribe of
Judah did not fail, until He for whom it was
destined came. But even He did not sit
upon the material throne. The kingdom
of Judea was transferred to Herod, the
son of Antipater the Ascalonite, and his
sons who divided Judza into four prin-
cipalities, when Pilate was Procurator and
Tiberius was Master of the Roman Em-
pire. It is the indestructible kingdlom which
he calls the throne of David on which
the Lord sat. He is the expectation of the
Gentiles' and not of the smallest division
of the world, for it is written, ** In that day
there shall be a root of Jesse which shall
stand for an ensign of the people; to it
shall the Gentiles seek.” ? ‘‘I have called
thee (Ta eoboneg covenant of the people
for a light of the Gentiles ” ;* and thus then
God remained a priest, although Ine) did
not receive the sceptre of Judah, and King
of all the earth; so the blessing of Jacob

was fulfilled, and in Him‘ “shall all the
nations of ‘les earth be blessed,” and all the
nations shall call the Christ blessed.

4. And as to the tremendous question
put by the facetious Encratites, why we do


1 Gen. xlix. 10.
2Is.xi.10, The LXX. is καὶ ὁ ἘΣΤΟΝ ἐν ἄρχειν ἐθνῶν.
815. xlii. 6, and 2 Kings vii. 13. 4 Gen. xxii. 18.


278


MEST:


not eat everything? Let this answer be given,
that we turn with disgust from our excre-
ments. As far as dignity goes, to us flesh
is grass; but as to distinction between what
is and what is not serviceable, just as in
vegetables, we separate the unwholesome
from the wholesome, so in flesh we dis-
tinguish between that which is good and
that which is bad for food. Hemlock is
a vegetable, just as vulture’s flesh is flesh ;
yet no one in his senses would eat henbane
nor dow’s flesh unless he were in very great
straits. If he did, however, he would not
sin,

. Next as to those who maintain that
human aflairs are governed by fate, do not
ask information from me, but stab them with
their own shafts of rhetoric. The question
is too long for my present infirmity. With
regard to emerging in baptism —TI do not
know how it came into your mind to ask
such a question, if indeed you understood im-
mersion to fulfil the figure of the three days.
It is impossible for any one to be immersed
three times, without emerging three times.

We write the word φάγος paroxytone.'

6. The distinction between οὐσία and
ὑπόστασις 15. the same as that between the
general and the particular; as, for instance,
between the animal and the particular man.
Wherefore, in the case of the Godhead, we
confess one essence or substance so as not
to give a variant definition of existence,
but we confess a particular hypostasis, in
order that our conception of Father, Son
and Holy Spirit may be without confusion
and clear.? If we have no distinct per-
ception of the separate characteristics,
namely, fatherhood, sonship, and _ sancti-
fication, but form our conception of God
from the general idea of existence, we
cannot possibly give a sound account of our
faith. We must, therefore, confess the faith
by adding the particular to the common.
The Godhead is common; the fatherhood
particular. We must therefore combine the
two and say, ‘* I believe in God the Father.”
The like course must be pursued in the
confession of the Son; we must combine the
particular with the common and say ‘I
believe in God the Son,” so in the case of
the Holy Ghost we must make our utter-
ance conform to the appellation and say ‘in
God* the Holy Ghost.” Hence it results


1 Amphilochius’s doubt may have arisen from the fact that
φαγός, the Doric form of φηγός, the esculent oak of Homer, is
oxytone.

2 «ὁ agiyxutos,” unconfounded, or without confusion, is the
title of Dialogue 71. of Theodoret. cf. p. 195 n.

’ The Benedictine note is Videtur tn Harleano codice
scriplum prima manu εἰς tov θεόν Their reading is εἰς τὸ
θεῖον πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον. cf. Ep. viii., § 2, where no variation


that there is a satisfactory preservation of the
unity by the confession of the one Godhead,
while in the distinction of the individual
properties regarded in each there is the
confession of the peculiar properties of the
Persons. On the other hand those who
identify essence or substance and _ hypostasis
are compelled to confess only three Persons,’
and, in their hesitation to speak of three
hypostases, are convicted of failure to avoid
the error of Sabellius, for even Sabellius
himself, who in many places confuses the
conception, yet, by asserting that the same
hypostasis changed its form? to meet the
needs of the moment, does endeavour to
distinguish persons.

7. Lastly as to your enquiry in what
manner things neutral and indifferent are
ordained for us, whether by some chance
working by its own accord, or by the
righteous providence of God, my answer
is this: Health and sickness, riches and
poverty, credit and discredit, inasmuch as
they do not render their possessors good,
are not in the category of things naturally
good, but, in so far as in any way they
make life’s current flow more easily, in each
case the former is to be preferred to its con-
trary, and has a certain kind of value. To
some men these things are given by God
for stewardship’s sake,? as for instance to
Abraham, to Job and such like. To inferior
characters they are a challenge to improve-
ment. For the man who persists in un-
righteousness, after so goodly a token of love
from God, subjects himself to condemnation
without defence. The good man, however,


of MSS. is noted and 2. cxli, both written before he was
bishop. cf. Proleg. Gregory of Nazianzus, Or. xlili., explains
the rationale οἵ St. Basil’s use of the word ** God,” of the Holy
Ghost; alike in his pubiic and private teaching he never shrank
trom using it, whenever he could with impunity, and his opin-
ions were perfectly well known, but he sought to avoid the
sentence of exile at the hands of the Arians by its unnecessary
obtrusion, He never uses itin his homily De Fide, and the
whole treatise De Sprritu Sancto, while it exhaustively vindi-
cates the doctrine, ingeniously steers clear of the phrase.

πρόσωπα. ᾿

2The Ben. Edd. note “ Existimat Combefisius verbum
μετασχημυατίζεσθαι sic reddendum esse, in varias formas mutari.
Sed id non dicebat Sabellius. Hoc tantum dicebat, ut legimus
in Epist. ccxiv. Unum quidem hypostasi Deum esse, sed
sub diversis personis a Scripturare presentari. According to
Dante the minds of the heresiarchs were to Scripture as bad
mirrors, reflecting distorted images; and, in this sense,
μετασχηματίζειν might be applied rather to them.


“¢ Si fe Sabellio ed Arrio e quegli stolti,
Che furon come spade alle scritture,
In render torti li diritti voltt.”
Par. xiii. 123 (see Cary’s note).

8 ἐξ οἰκονομίας. In Ep, xxxi. Basil begins a letter to Euse-
bius of Samosata: “The dearth has not yet left us, we are
therefore compelled still to remain in the town, either for
stewardship’s sake or for sympathy with the afflicted.” Here
the Benedictines’ note is Sepe apud Basilium οἰκονομία dict-
tur id quod pauperibus distribuitur. Vituperat in Comment.
in Isa. presules qui male partam peuniam accipiunt vel ad
SUOS USUS, ἢ ἐπὶ λόγῳ τῆς TOV πτωχευόντων ἐν TH ᾿Εκκλησίᾳ
ο' κονοιίας, vel per causam distribuendi pauperibus Ecclesia.
In Epistola 92 Orientales inter mala Eccteste twllud etiam
deplorant quodambitiost presules οἰκονοα ας TTwXwV, PeCunlas
pauperibus destinatas in suos usus convertant,


LETIERS.


279.


neither turns his heart to wealth when he
has it, nor seeks after it if he has it not.
He treats what is given him as given him
not for his selfish enjoyment, but for
wise administration. No one in his senses
runs after the trouble of distributing other
people’s property, unless he is trying to get
the praise of the world, which admires and
envies anybody in authority.

Good men take sickness as athletes take
their contest, waiting for the crowns that are
to reward their endurance. To ascribe the
dispensation of these things to any one else
is as inconsistent with true religion as it is
with common sense.


bE TER UCCXXXVIL'
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.


1. I Born wrote to your reverence by the
vicar of Thrace, and sent other letters by
one of the officers of the treasury of Philip-
popolis, who was starting from our country
into Thrace, and begged him to take them
on his departure. But the vicar never re-
ceived my letter, for while I was visiting my
diocese,” he came into town in the evening
and started early in the morning, so that the
church officers did not know of his coming,
and the letter remained at my house. The
treasurer, too, on account of some unex-
pected and urgent business, set out without
seeing me or taking my letters. No one
else could be found; so 1 remained, sorry at
not being able to write to you and at not
receiving any letter from your reverence.
Yet I was wishful, were it possible, to tell
you all that happens to me day by day. So
many astonishing things happen as to need
a daily narrative, and you may be sure that
I would have written one, unless my mind
had been diverted from its purpose by the
pressure of events.

2. The first and greatest of my troubles
was the visit of the Vicar. As to whether he
is a man really heretically minded I do not
know; for I think that he is quite unversed
in doctrine, and has not the slightest interest
or experience in such things, for I see him
day and night busy, both in body and soul,
in other things. But he is certainly a friend
of heretics; and he is not more friendly to
them than he is ill-disposed to me. He has
summoned a synod of wicked men in mid-
winter in Galatia. He has deposed Hyp-
sinus and set up Ecdicius in his _ place.‘


1 Placed in 376.

3 παροικία. cf. Ὁ. 163, Nn.

4 7 δι. αἱ Parnassus. Parnassus is placed by Ramsay at a
ford a few miles higher up the Halys than Tchikin Aghyl.
(Ast, Geog. of Asia Minor, p. 255.)


8.7.6. at Ancyra.


| He has ordered the removal of my brother


on the accusation of one man, and _ that
one quite insignificant. Then, after being
occupied for some little time about the
army, he came to us again breathing rage
and slaughter,’ and, in one sentence, deliv-
ered all the Church of Czesarea to the
Senate. He: settled for several days at
Sebaste, separating friends from foes,’
calling those in communion with me sen-
ators, and condemning them to the public
service, while he advanced the adherents of
Eustathius. He has ordered a second synod
of bishops of Galatia and Pontus to be
assembled at Nyssa.* They have submitted,
have met, and have sent to the Churches a
man of whose character I do not like to
speak; but your reverence can well under-
stand what sort of a man he must be who
would put himself at the disposal of such
counsels of men.* Now, while I am thus
writing, the same gang have hurried to
Sebaste to unite with Eustathius, and, with
him, to upset the Church of Nicopolis. For
the blessed Theodotus has fallen asleep.
Hitherto the Nicopolitans have bravely and
stoutly resisted the vicar’s first assault; for
he tried to persuade them to receive Eusta-
thius, and to accept their bishop on his
appointment. But, on seeing them un-
willing to yield, he is now trying, by yet
more violent action, to eflect the. establish-
ment of the bishop whom it has _ been
attempted to give them.’ There is, more-
over, said to be some rumoured expectation
of a synod, by which means they mean to


summon. me to receive them into com-
munion, or to be friendly with them. Such
is the position of the Churches. As to my


own health, I think it better to say nothing.
I cannot bear not to tell the truth, and by
telling the truth I shall only grieve you.


LEVER CCXXXVILL
To the presbyters of Nicopolis.’


I HAVE received your letter, my reverend
brethren, but it told me nothing that I did
not already know. for the whole country
round about was already full of the report


icf. Acts ix. 1.

2 φυλοκρινῶν. The word occurs also in the De Sp. ,5. § 74,
and in Letter cciv. § 2. Another reading in this place is φιλο-
κρινῶν, ‘ picking out his friends.”

3 Mansi iii. soz. The fruitlessness of Ancyra necessitated
a second. On Gregory’s deposition and banishment, see Greg.
Nyss., De Vit Macr. ii. 192, and £p. xviii. and xxii. Also
Greg. Naz., Ep. cxlii.

4 Tillemont supposes this to refer to some one sent on a
visitation to the Churches. The Ben. note prefers to apply it
to the unknown intruder into the see of Nyssa, of whom Basil
speaks with yet greater contempt in Letter ccxxxix.

5 7.6, Fronto. 6 Placed in 376.

7 On the appointment of Fronto to succeed ‘Theodotus,


280


announcing the disgrace of that one among
you who has fallen, and through lust of vain
glory has brought on himself very shameful
dishonour, and has through his self-love lost
the rewards promised to faith. Nay, through
the just hatred of them that fear the Lord,
he misses even that contemptible little glory
for lust of which he has been sold to im-
piety. By the character he has now shown
he has very plainly proved, concerning all
his life, that he has never at any time lived
in hope of the promises laid up for us by the
Lord, but, in all his transactions of human
affairs, has used words of faith and mockery
of piety, all to deceive every one whom he
met. But how are you injured? Are you
any worse off for this than you were before?
One of your number has fallen away, and if
one or two others have gone with him, they
are to be pitied for their fall, but, by God’s
grace, your body is whole. The _ useless
part has gone, and what is left has not suf-
fered mutilation. You are haply distressed
that you are driven without the walls, but
you shall dwell under the protection of the
God of Heaven,’ and the angel who watches
over the Church has gone out with you. So
they lie down in empty places day by day,
bringing upon themselves heavy judgment
through the dispersion of the people. And,
if in all this there is sorrow to be borne, I
trust in the Lord that it will not be without
its use to you. Therefore, the more have
been your trials, look for a more perfect
reward from your just Judge. Do not take
your present troubles ill. Do not lose hope.
Yet a little while and your Helper will come
to you and will not tarry.’


LETTER CCXXXIX.’
Lo Lusebius, bishop of Samosata.


1. THe Lord has granted me the priv-
ilege of now saluting your holiness by our
beloved and very reverend brother, the pres-
byter Antiochus, of exhorting you to pray
for me as you are wont, and offering in our
communication by letter some consolation
for our long separation. And, when you
pray, [ ask you to beg from the Lord this as
the first and greatest boon, that I may be
delivered from vile and wicked men, who
have gained such power over the people that
now 1 seem to see, indeed, a repetition of
the events of the taking of Jerusalem.* For
the weaker grow the Churches the more does
men’s lust for power increase. And now

1 Ps. xci. 1, LXX. 2'Hab. ii. 3. 8 Placed in 376.


_ * Ἰουδαϊκῆς ἁλώσεως, which the Ben. note is no doubt right
in referring to the events of 70.


BASIL.


the very title of bishop has been conferred
on wretched slaves, for no servant of
God would choose to come forward in op-
position to claim the see ; —no one but miser-
able fellows like the emissaries of Anysius
the creature of Euippius, and of Ecdicius
of Parnassus: whoever has appointed him ἢ
has sent into the Churches a poor means of
aiding his own entry into the life to come.

They have expelled my brother from Nyssa,
and into his place have introduced hardly a
man—a mere scamp?” worth only an obol
or two, but, so far as regards the ruin of the
faith, a match for those who have put him
where he is.

At the town of Doara they have brought
shame upon the poor name of bishop, and
have sent there a wretch, an orphans’ domes-
tic, a runaway from his own masters, to
flatter a godless woman, who formerly used
George as she liked, and now has got this
fellow to succeed him.

And who could properly lament the occur-
rences at Nicopolis? That unhappy Fronto
did, indeed, for a while pretend to be on the
side of the truth, but now he has shame-
fully betrayed both the faith and himself,
and for the price of his betrayal has got a
name of disgrace. He imagines that he has
obtained from these men the rank of bishop;
in reality he has become, by God’s grace, the
abomination of all Armenia. But there is
nothing that they will not dare; nothing
wherein they are at a loss for worthy accom-
plices. But the rest of the news of Syria
my brother knows better, and can tell you
better, than I.

2. The news of the West you know
already, on the recital of brother Dorotheus.
What sort of letters are to be given him on
his departure? Perhaps he will travel with
the excellent Sanctissimus, who is full of
enthusiasm, journeying through the East, and
collecting letters and signatures from all the
men of mark.? What ought to be written by
them, or how I can come to an agreement
with those who are writing, I do not know.
If you hear of any one soon travelling my
way, be so good as to let me know. Iam
moved to say, as Diomede said,

‘‘ Would God, Atrides, thy request were yet to under-


take;


. ». he’s proud enough.” *


Really lofty souls, when they are courted,


1The sudden change from the vaguer plural marks the
strong contempt of the writer for the individual pointed at.

2The paronontiasia in ἄνδρα and ἀνδράποδον is untranslat-
able.

3 Sanctissimus, the envoy of Damasus, seems to have paid
two visits to the East. For letters of introduction given him
by Basil, see Letters cxx., ccxxi., ccxxv., ccliv., cxxxii., and
ccliii, 4 Homer, J/, ix. 694-5 (Chapman).


ΕΚ;


281


get haughtier than ever. If the Lord be
propitious to us, what other thing do we
need? If the anger of the Lord lasts on,
what help can come to us from the frown of
the West? Men who do not know the
truth, and do not wish to learn it, but are
prejudiced by false suspicions, are doing
now as they did in the case of Marcellus,’
when they quarrelled with men who told
them the truth, and by their own action
strengthened the cause of heresy. Apart
from the common document, I should like
to have written to their Corypheus —
nothing, indeed, about ecclesiastical affairs,
except gently to suggest that they know
nothing of what is going on here, and will
not accept the only means whereby they
might learn it. I would say, generally, that
they ought not to press hard on men who
are crushed by trials. They must not take
dignity for pride. Sin only avails to produce
enmity against God.


LETTER ‘CCXL.*
To the Presbyters of Nicopolts.


t. You have done quite right in sending
me a letter, and in sending it by the hands of
one who, even if you had not written, would
have been perfectly competent to give me
considerable comfort in all my anxieties, and
an authentic report as to the position of
affairs. Many vague rumours were contin-
ually reaching me, and therefore I was
desirous of getting information on many
points from some one able to give it through
accurate knowledge. ‘Touching all these I
have received a satisfactory and intelligent
narrative from our well-beloved and honour-
able brother Theodosius the presbyter. I
now write to your reverences the advice
which I give myself, for in many respects our
positions are identical; and that not only at
the present moment, but in times gone by too,
as many instances may prove. Of some of
these we possess records in writing; others
we have received through unwritten recol-
lection from persons acquainted with the
facts. We know how, for the sake of the
name of the Lord, trials have beset alike in-


dividuals and cities that have put their trust |


in Him. Nevertheless, one and all have
passed away, and the distress caused by the
days of darkness has not been everlasting.
For just as when hail-storm and flood, and
all natural calamities, at once injure and de-
stroy things that have no strength, while they
are only themselves affected by falling on the


1 οὐ. Letter \xix. p. 165. 2 Placed in 376.


strong, so the terrible trials set in action
against the Church have been proved feebler
than the firm foundation of our faith in
Christ. The hail-storm has passed away;
the torrent has rushed over its bed; clear sky
has taken the place of the former, and the
latter has left the course without water and
dry, over which it travelled, and has disap-
peared in the deep. So, too, in a little while
the storm, now bursting upon us, will cease to
be. But this will be on the,condition of our
being willing not to look to the present, but to
gaze in hopeat the future somewhat further off.

2. Is the trial heavy, my brethren? Let
us endure the toil. No one who shuns the
blows and the dust of battle wins a crown.
Are those mockeries of the devil, and the
enemies sent to attack us, insignificant? They
are troublesome because they are his minis-
ters, but contemptible because God has in
them combined wickedness with weakness.
Let us beware of being condemned for crying
out too loud over a little pain. Only one
thing is worth anguish, the loss of one’s own
self, when for the sake of the credit of the
moment, if one can-really call making a
public disgrace of one’s self credit, one has
deprived one’s self of the everlasting reward
of the just. You are children of confessors;
you are children of martyrs ; you have resisted
sin unto blood.' Use, each one of you, the
examples of those near and dear to you to
make you brave for true religion’s sake. No
one of us has been torn by lashes;? no one
of us has suffered confiscation of his house;
we have not been driven into exile ; we have
not suffered imprisonment. What great suffer-
ing have we undergone, unless peradventure
it is grievous that we have suffered nothing,
and have not been reckoned worthy of the
sufferings of Christ?* Butif youare grieved
because one whom I need not name occupies
the house of prayer, and you worship the
Lord of heaven and earth in the open air,
remember that the eleven disciples were shut
up in the upper chamber, when they that
had crucified the Lord were worshipping in
the Jews’ far-famed temple. Peradventure,
Judas, who preferred death by hanging to
life in disgrace, proved himself a better man
than those who now meet universal condem-
nation without a blush.

2. Only do not be deceived by their lies


1 cf. Heb. xii. 4.

23 κατεξάνθη. cf. the use of καταξαίνω (—=card or comb) in
the Letter of the Smyrneans on the Martyrdom of Polycarp,
§ 2, ‘* They were so torn by lashes that the mechanism of their
flesh was visible, even as faras the veins and arteries.” cf.
note, p. 2, on the difference between the persecution of the
Catholics by*Valens and that of the earlier Christians by
earlier emperors, though exile and confiscation were suffered
in Basil's time.


Sof. Acts v.41.


282


BASIL.


when they claim to be of the right faith.
They are not Christians, but traffickers in
Christ,’ always preferring their profit in this
life to living in accordance with the truth.
When they thought that they should get this
empty dignity, they joined the enemies of
Christ: now that they have seen the indigna-
tion of the people, they are once more for
pretending orthodoxy. I do not recognise as
bishop —I would not:count among Christ’s
clergy > —amanwho has been promoted to a
chief post by polluted hands, to the destruc-
tion of the faith. This is my decision. If
you have any part with me, you will doubt-
less think as I do. If you take counsel on
your own responsibility, every man is master
of his own mind, and I am innocent of this
blood.* I have written thus, not because I
distrust you, but that by declaring my own
mind I may strengthen some men’s hesita-
tion, and prevent any one from being pre-
maturely received into communion, or after
receiving the laying on of hands of our
enemies, when peace is made, later on, try-
ing to force me to enroll them in the ranks of
the sacred ministry. Through you I salute the
clergy of the city and diocese, and all the
laity who fear the Lord.


EETTER CCXLaS
To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.


IT is not to increase your distress that I am
so lavish of painful topics in my letters to
your excellency. My object is to get some
comfort for myself inthe lamentations which
are a kind of natural means of dispersing
deep-seated pain whenever they are produced,
and further to rouse you, my great-hearted
friend, to more earnest prayer on behalf of
the Churches. We know that Moses prayed
continually for the people; yet, when his
battle with Amalek had begun, he did not
let down his hands from morning to evening,
and the uplifting of the hands of the saint
only ended with the end of the fight.


LEV PERICCKLIL*
To the Westerns.®


1. THe Holy God has promised a happy


issue out of all their infirmities to those that


1 χριστέμποροι. cf. the use of the cognate subst. χριστεμ
ποοία in the letter of Alexander of Alexandria in Theodoret,
Ecc. Hist.i. 3. χριστέμπορος occurs in the Didache, ὃ 12, and
in the Pseud. I[g.,¢.2.,ad Mag. ix.

Ziepevor. cf. note in Letter liv. Ὁ. 157.

3 cf. Matt. iv. 24. 4 Placed in 376. 5 Placed in 376.

6 This and the following letter refer to the earlier of two
missions of Dorotheus to the West. In the latter he carried
Letter cclxiii. The earlier was successful at least to the
extent of winning sympathy. Maran (Vit. Bas. cap. xxxv.)


trust in Him. We, therefore, though we
have been cut off in a mid-ocean of troubles,
though we are tossed by the great waves
raised up against us by the spirits of wicked-
ness, nevertheless hold out in Christ Who
strengthens us. We have not slackened the
strength of our zeal for the Churches, nor, as
though despairing of our salvation, while
the billows in the tempest rise above our
heads, do we look to be destroyed. On the
contrary, we are still holding out with all
possible earnestness, remembering how even
he who was swallowed by the sea monster,
because he did not despair of his life, but
cried to the Lord, was saved. ‘Thus too
we, though we have reached the last pitch
of peril, do not give up our hope in God.
On every side we see His succour round
about us. For these reasons now we turn
our eyes to you, right honourable brethren.
In many an hour of our affliction we have
expected that you would be at our side; and
disappointed in that hope we have said to
ourselves, ‘‘I looked for some to take pity and
there was none; and for comforters but I
found none.” ὁ Our sufferings are such as to
have reached the confines of the empire; and
since, when one member suffers, all the
members suffer,’ it is doubtless right that
your pity should be shown to us who have
been so long in trouble. Fort hat sympathy,
which we have hoped you of your charity
feel for us, is caused less by nearness of place
than by union of spirit.

2. Howcomes it to pass then that we have
received nothing of what is due to us by the
law of love; no letter of consolation, no
visit from brethren? This is now the thir-
teenth year since the war of heresy began
against us.° In this the Churches have
suffered more tribulations than all those
which are on record since Christ’s gospel
was first preached.* I am unwilling to de-


places it not earlier than the Easter of 376, and objects to the
earlier date assigned by Tillemont.

1 Ps, eax. 20. 21 Cor. xii. 26.

8 Valens began the thirteenth year of his reignin the March
of 376, and this fact is one of Maran’s reasons for placing this
letter where he does. Tillemont reckons the thirteen years
from 361 to 374, but Maran points out that if the Easterns had
wanted to include the persecution of Constantius they might
have gone farther back, while even then the lull under Julian
would have broken the continuity of the attack. Vit. Bas.
XXXV. q note on p. 48.

4 A rhetorical expression not to be taken literally. Some
of the enormities committed under Valens, e.g. the alleged
massacre of the Orthodox delegates off Bithynia in 370 (Soz.
vi. 14, Theod. iv. 21), would stand out even when matched
with the cruelties perpetrated under Nero and Diocletian, if
the evidence for them were satisfactory. cf. Milman, “7152.
Christ. iii. 45. The main difference between the earlier perse-
cutions, conventionally reckoned as ten, and the persecution
of the Catholics by Valens, seems to be this, that while the
former were a putting in force of the law against a re/igto
non licita, the latter was but the occasional result of the per-
sonal spite and partizanship of the imperial heretic and his
courtiers. Valens would feel bitterly towards a Catholic who
thwarted him. Basil could under Diocletian hardly have died
in his bed as archbishop of Cesarea,


LETTERS.


283.


scribe these one by one, lest the feebleness of
my narrative should make the evidence of
the calamities less convincing. It is more-
over the less necessary for me to tell you of
them, because you have long known what
has happened from the reports which will
have reached you. The sum and substance
of our troubles is this: the people have left
the houses of prayer and are holding con-
gregations in the wildernesses. It is a sad
sight. Women, boys, old men, and _ those
who are in other ways infirm, remain in the
Open air, in heavy rain, in the snow, the
gales and the frost of winter as well as in
summer under the blazing heat of the sun.
All this they are suffering because they refuse
to have anything to do with the wicked
leaven of Arius.

3. How could mere words give you any
clear idea of all this without your being
stirred to sympathy by personal experience
and the evidence of eyewitnesses? We
implore you, therefore, to stretch out a help-
ing hand to those that have already been
stricken to the ground, and to send messen-
gers to remind us of the prizes in store for
the reward of all who patiently suffer for
Christ. <A ‘voice that we are used to is
naturally less able to comfort us than one
which sounds from afar, and that one
coming from men who over all the world
are known by God’s grace to be among the
noblest; for common report everywhere
represents you as having remained stead-
fast, without suffering a wound in your
faith, and as having kept the deposit of the
apostles inviolate. This is not our case.
There are among us some who, through
lust of glory and that puffing up which is
especially wont to destroy the souls of
Christian men, have audaciously uttered
certain novelties of expression with the
result that the Churches have become like
cracked pots and pans and have let in the
inrush of heretical impurity. But do you,
whom we love and long for, be to us as
surgeons for the wounded, as trainers for
the whole, healing the limb that is dis-
eased, and anointing the limb that is sound
for the service of the true religion.


LETTER CCXLITYI.'


Zo the bishops of Italy and Gaul concerning
the condition and confusion of the Churches.


1. To his brethren truly God-beloved
and very dear, and fellow ministers of like
mind, the bishops of Gaul and Italy, Basil,


1 Placed in 376.


bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia. Our Lord
Jesus Christ, Who has deigned to style the
universal Church of God His body, and has
made us individually members one of an-
other, has moreover granted to all of us to
live in intimate association with one -an-
other, as befits the agreement of the mem-
bers. Wherefore, although we dwell far
away from one another, yet, as regards
our close conjunction, we are very near.
Since, then, the head cannot say to the feet,
I have no need of you,’ you will not, I
am sure, endure to reject us; you will, on
the contrary, sympathize with us in the
troubles to which, for our sins, we have
been given over, in proportion as we re-
joice together with you in your glorying in
the peace which the Lord has bestowed on
you. Ere now we have also at another
time invoked your charity to send us suc-
cour and sympathy; but our punishment
was not full, and you were not suffered to
rise up to succour us. One chief object of
our desire is that through you the state of
confusion in which we are situated should
be made known to the emperor of your
part of the world.’ If this is difficult, we
beseech you to send envoys to visit and
comfort us in our affliction, that you may
have the evidence of eyewitnesses of those
sufferings of the East which cannot be told
by word of mouth, because language is in-
adequate to give a clear report: of οιιῦ
condition.

2. Persecution has come upon us, right
honourable brethren, and persecution in the
severest form. Shepherds are persecuted
that their flocks may be scattered. And
the worst of all is that those who are being
treated ill cannot accept their sufferings in
proof of their testimony, nor can the people
reverence the athletes as in the army of
martyrs, because the name of Christians is
applied to the persecutors. ‘The one charge
which is now sure to secure severe punish-
ment is the careful keeping of the traditions
of the Fathers. For: this the pious are
exiled from their homes, and are sent away
to dwell in distant regions. No reverence
is shown by the judges of iniquity to the
hoary head, to practical piety, to the life
lived from boyhood to old age according
to the Gospel. No malefactor is doomed
without proof, but bishops have been con-
victed on calumny alone, and are consigned
to penalties on charges wholly unsupported
by evidence. Some have not even known
who has accused them, nor been brought


Ἔα Cor ΧΙ. 2 3
2 2.6. Gratian, who succeeded Valentinian I.in 3753...


284


before any tribunal, nor even been falsely
accused at all. They have been appre-
hended with violence late at night, have
been exiled to distant places, and, through
the hardships of these remote wastes, have
been given over to death.’ The rest is
notorious, though I make no mention of it;
—the flight of priests; the flight of deacons;
the foraying of all the clergy. Either the
image must be worshipped, or we are de-
livered to the wicked flame of whips.” The
laity groan; tears are falling without ceas-
ing in public and in private; all are mutu-
ally lamenting their woes. No one’s
heart is so hard as to lose a father, and bear
the bereavement meekly. There is a sound
of them that mourn in the city—a sound
in the fields, in the roads, in the deserts.
But one voice is heard from all that utter
sad and piteous words. Joy and spiritual
gladness are taken away. Our feasts are
turned into mourning.? Our houses of
prayer are shut. The altars of the spiritual
service are lying idie. Christians no longer
assemble together; teachers no longer pre-
side. The doctrines of salvation are no
longer taught. We have no more solemn
assemblies, no more evening hymns, no
more of that blessed joy of souls which
arises in the souls of all that believe in
the Lord at communions, and the impart-
ing of spiritual boons.* We may well
say, ‘‘ Neither is there at this time prince,
or prophet, or reader, or offering, or in-
cense, or place to sacrifice before thee, and
to find mercy.” ®

2. We are writing to those who know
these things, for there is not a region of
the world which is ignorant of our calam-
ities. Do not suppose that we are using
these words as though to give information,
or to recall ourselves to your recollection.
We know that you could no more forget
us than a mother forget the sons of her
womb.® But all who are crushed by any
weight of agony find some natural allevia-
tion for their pain in uttering groans of
distress, and it is for this that we are doing
as we do. We get rid of the load of our
grief in telling you of our manifold misfor-
tunes, and in expressing the hope that you
may haply be the more moved to pray for
us, and may prevail on the Lord to be re-
Sk ul SU ES le a le ΕΟ aL


1 For the midnight banishment, cf. the story of the expul-
sion of Eusebius from Samosata in Theod., iv. 13. Of death
foliowing on exile Basil did not live to sce the most Signal in-
stance — that of Chrysostom in 407.

2 cf. Dan. iii.10. The whips seem as rhetorical as the image
and the flame, 3 Amos vili. 10.

femme ταῖς σύναξεσι καὶ TH κοινωνίᾳ τῶν πνευματικῶν χαρισ-
μάτων.


5 Song of the Three Children, 14.


67s. xlix:' 15.


BASIL.


conciled to us. And if these afflictions had
been confined to ourselves, we might even
have determined to keep silence, and_ to
rejoice in our sufferings for Christ’s sake,
since **the sufferings of this present time
are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us.” ' But
at the present time we are alarmed, lest the
mischief growing day by day, like a flame
spreading through some burning wood,
when it has consumed what is close at
hand, may catch distant objects too. The
plague of heresy is spreading, and there is
ground of apprehension lest, when it has
devoured our Churches, it may afterwards
creep on even so far as to the sound porticn
of your district.” Peradventure it is because
with us iniquity has abounded that we have
been first delivered to be devoured by the
cruel teeth of the enemies of God. But the
gospel of the kingdom began in our regions,
and then went forth over all the world.
So, peradventure —and this is most prob-
able —the common enemy of our souls, is
striving to bring it about. that the seeds ‘of
apostasy, originating in the same quarter,
should be distributed throughout the world.
For the darkness of impiety plots to come
upon the very hearts whereon the ‘ light
of the knowledge” of Christ has shone.*®

4. Reckon then, as true disciples of the
Lord, that our sufferings are yours. We are
not being attacked forthe sake of riches. or
glory, or any temporal advantages. We
stand in the arena to fight for our common
heritage, for the treasure of the sound faith,
derived from our Fathers. Grieve with us,
all ye who love the brethren, at the shutting
of the mouths of our men of true religion,
and at the opening of the bold and_ blasphe-
mous lips of all that utter unrighteousness
against God.* The pillars and foundation
of the truth are scattered abroad. We,
whose insignificance has allowed of our
being overlooked, are deprived of our right
of free speech. Doye enter into the strug-
gle, for the people’s sake. Do not think
only of your being yourselves moored in a
safe haven, where the grace of God gives you
shelter from the tempest of the winds of wick-
edness. Reach out a helping hand to the
Churches that are being buffeted by the
storm, lest, if they be abandoned, they suffer
complete shipwreck of the faith. Lament
for us, in that the Only-begotten is being
blasphemed, and there is none to offer con-
tradiction. The Holy Ghost is being set at

1 Rom. viii. 18.

2 παοοικία. ‘The word seems here to have a wider sense


even than that of ‘* diocese.’


3 cf. 2 Cor. iv. 6. “cf. Ps. Ixxiii. 8, LXX.


LETTERS.


nought and he who is able to confute the
érror has been sent into exile. Polytheism
has prevailed. Our opponents own a great
God and a small God. *: Son” is no longer
a name of nature, but is looked upon as a
title of some kind of honour. The Holy
Ghost is regarded not as complemental of
the Holy Trinity, nor as participating in the
divine and blessed Nature, but as in some
sort one of the number of created beings, and
attached to Father and Son, at mere hap-haz-
ard and as occasion may require. ** Oh that
my head were waters, and mine eyes a foun-
tain of tears,’’* and I will weep many days for
the people who are being driven to destruc-
tion by these vile doctrines. The ears of the
simple are being led astray, and have now
got used to heretical impiety. The nurslings
of the Church are being brought up in the
doctrines of iniquity. What are they to do?
Our opponents have the command of bap-
tisms; they speed the dying on their way ;
they visit the sick; they console the sorrow-
ful; they aid the distressed; they give suc-
cour of various kinds; they communicate the
mysteries. All these things, as long as the
performance of them is in their hands, are so
many ties to bind the people to their views.


The result will be that in a little time, even if


some liberty be conceded to us, there is small
hope that they who have been long under the
influence of error will be recalled to recogni-
tion of the truth.

5. Under these circumstances it would
have been well for many of us to have trav-
elled to your reverences, and to have individ-
ually reported each his own position. You
may now take as a proof of the sore straits in
which we are placed the fact that we are not
even free to travel abroad. For if any one


leaves his Church, even for a very brief


space, he will leave his people at the mercy
of those who are plotting their ruin. By
God’s mercy instead of many we have sent
one, our very reverend and beioved brother
the presbyter Dorotheus. He is fully able
to supply by his personal report whatever
has been omitted in our letter, for he has
carefully followed all that has occurred, and
is jealous of the right faith. Receive him in


1 Jer. ix. 1.

2 I suggest this rendering of ποοπομπαὶ τῶν ἐξοδευόντων with
hesitation, and feel no certainty about the passage except that
the Ben. tr., “" deductiones proficiscentium,” and its defence in
the Ben. note, is questionable. The escortofa bishop on a jour-
ney is quite on a different plane from the ministrations which
Basil has in mind. προπομπαὶ is used by Chrysostom of
funerals, and Combefis explains ‘‘ excedentium deducte fune
bres, deducta funera;’’ but the association of ideas seems to
necessitate some reference to the effect of vicious teaching’ on
the living. There may be an indirect allusion to the effect on
the friends at a funeral, but to take ἐξοδευόντων to mean * the
dying’ seems the simplest. ἐξοδευθείς is used of Sisera in
Judges v. 27, LXX. cf. p.180n., where perhaps this rendering
might be substituted, and Canon Bright on Canon xiii of Nicza.


285


peace, and speedily send him back to us,
bringing us good news of your readiness to
succour the brotherhood.


LETTER . CCXLIV.'
To Patrophilus, bishop of Aga?


1. I HAVE read, and read with pleas-


ure, the letter which you have sent by Strat-


egius the presbyter. How should I not so
read it, written as it is by a wise man, and
dictated by a heart which has learned to ob-
serve the universal love taught by the com-
mandment of the Lord? Possibly I am not
unaware of the reasons which have hitherto
kept you silent. You have been, as it were,
amazed and astounded, at the idea of the
change in the notorious Basil. Why, ever
since he was a boy he did such and such ser-
vice to such an one; at such and such times
he did such and such things; he waged war
against foes innumerable for the sake of his
allegiance to one man; now he has become
a totally different character; he has ex-
changed love for war; he is all that you
have written; so you naturally shew consid-
erable astonishment at the very unexpected
turn of affairs. And if you have found some
fault, I do not take it ill. Iam not so be-
yond correction as to be amazed at the affec-
tionate rebukes of my brothers. Indeed so
far was I from being vexed at your letter that
it really almost made me laugh to think that
when there were, as I thought, so many
strong causes already existing to cement our
friendship, you should have expressed such
very great astonishment at the trifles which
have been reported to you. So truly have
you suffered the fate of all those who omit to
enquire into the nature of circumstances, and
give heed to the men who are being dis-
cussed ; of all who do not examine into the
truth, but judge by the distinction of persons,
in forgetfulness of the exhortation ** Ye shall
not respect persons in judgment.” ὃ

2. Nevertheless, since God in judgment
of man does not accept persons, I will not
refuse to make known to you the defence
which I have prepared for the great tribunal.
On my side, from the beginning, there has
been no cause of quarrel, either small or
great; but men who hate me, for what rea-
son is best known to themselves (I must
not say a word about them), incessantly ca-


1 Placed in 376. :
5.“ Aigaiai is the more correct form.”? Ramsay, 7715 ὲ. Geog.
A.M.116. Inthe gulf of Issus, now Ayas. St. Julianus, son
of a senator of Anazarbus, is said to have suffered there.
(Basil, Menol. and, possibly, Chrysost., Hom. in Ful. Mart.)
$ Deut: 1. 17.


286


lumniated me. I cleared myself again and
again of slanders. There seemed no end to
the matter, and no good came of my con-
tinual defence, because I was far away, and
the authors of the false statements, being on
the spot, were able by their calumnies against
me to wound a susceptible heart, and one
which has never learnt to keep one ear open
for the absent. When the Nicopolitans, as
you yourself are partly aware, were asking
for some proof of faith, I determined to have
recourse to the written document.’ I thought
that I should fulfil two objects at once; I
expected both to persuade the Nicopolitans
not to think ill of the man,’ and to shut the
mouths of my calumniators, because agree-
ment in faith would exclude slander on both
sides. Indeed the creed had been drawn up,
and it was brought from me, and signed.
After it had been signed, a place was ap-
pointed for a second meeting, and another
date fixed, so that my brethren in the diocese
might come together and be united with one
another. and our communion for the future
be genuine and sincere. I, for my part,
arrived at the appointed time, and, of the
brethren who act with me, some were on the
spot, and others were hurrying thither, all
joyous and eager as though on the high road
to peace.* Couriers and a letter from my-
self announced my arrival; for the spot ap-
pointed for the reception of those who were
assembling was mine. But nobody appeared
on the other side; no one came in advance;
no one to announce the approach of the ex-
pected bishops. So those who had been
sent by me returned with the report of the
deep dejection and the complaints of those
who were assembled, as though a new creed
had been promulgated by me. They were
moreover said to be for deciding, that they
certainly would not suffer their bishop to go
over to me. Then came a messenger bring-
ing me a letter hastily drawn up, and con-
taining no mention of the points originally
agreed on. My brother ‘Theophilus,* a man
worthy of all respect and honour at my hands,
sent one of his adherents, and made certain
announcements, which he thought it not im-
proper for him to utter, nor unbecoming in
me to hear. He did not condescend to
write, not so much because he was afraid of
being convicted on written evidence, as be-
cause he was anxious not to be compelled to
address me as bishop. Assuredly his lan-
guage was violent, and came from a heart
vehemently agitated. Under these circum-


Basil, and


τ δ. the formula proposed to Eustathius Ὁ
others, and


signed in 373 by him with Fronto, Severus, an
appearing as Letter CXXV. 8 cf. Letter cxxx.
2 7,6. Eustathius. 4 Theophilus of Castabala.


BASIL.


stances I departed abashed and depressed, .


not knowing what to answer to my ques-
tioners. ‘Then, without any long interval of
time, there was the journey into Cilicia,’ the
return thence, and forthwith a letter repudi-
ating communion with me.’

3. The cause of the rupture was the al-
legation that I wrote to Apollinarius and was
in communion with the presbyter Diodorus.
I never regarded Apollinarius as an enemy,
and for some reasons I even respect him.
But I never so far united myself to him as to
take upon me the charges against him; in-
deed I have myself some accusations to bring
against him after reading some of his books.
I do not know that I ever asked him for a
book on the Holy Spirit, or received it on
his sending. Iam told that he has become
a most copious writer, but I have read very
few of his works.* I have not even time to
investigate such matters. Indeed I shrink
from admitting any of the more recent
works, for my health does not even allow of
my reading the inspired Scriptures with dil-
igence and as I ought. What, then, is it
to me, if some one has written something
displeasing to somebody else? Yet if one
man is to render an account on behalf of
another, let him who accuses me for Apol-
linarius’ sake defend himself to me for the
sake of Arius his own master and of Aetius
his own disciple. I never learnt anything
from, nor taught anything to this man whose
guilt is laid at my door. Diodorus, as a
nursling of the blessed Silvanus, I did re-
ceive from the beginning: I love him now
and respect him on account of his grace of
speech, whereby many who meet him are
made the better men.*

4. At this letter I was affected in such a
manner as might be expected, and astounded
at so sudden and pleasant a change. I felt
quite unable to reply. My heart could hardly
beat; my tongue failed me, and my hand
grew numb. I felt like a poor creature (for
the truth shall be told; yet it is pardonable) ;
I all but fell into a state of misanthropy; I
looked on every one with suspicion and
thought that there was no charity to be found


1¢f, Letter cxxx. The journey of Eustathius to Cilicia
was the occasion of his presenting an Arian creed to a certain
Gelasius.

2 cf. Letter ccxxvi. The letter of repudiation was conveyed
by Eustathius the chorepiscopus.

8 Fragments of Apollinarius are extant in the works of
Theodoret and Gregory of Nyssa, and in Mai’s Script. Vet.
Nov. col. vii., and Spicil. Rom. x.2. cf. Thomasius, Christ.
Dogm.451. cf. Ep cclxiii. p. 302.

4 Diodorus, now presbyter of Antioch, did not become
bishop of Tarsus till about the time of Basil’s death. On his
services to the Church at Antioch, cf. Theod., ,....Ε. ii. το. and
Soc., H.£. vi. 8. The controversy as to his alleged Nestorian-
ism belongs to a later date. On the relations between Dio-
dorus and Apollinarius, cf. Dorner, Christ. i. pp. 976 and
1022.


LETTERS.


287


in mankind. Charity seemed a mere specious
word, serving as a kind of decoration to
those who use it, while no such sentiment
was really to be found in the heart of man.
Could it really be that one who seemed to
have disciplined himself from boyhood to
old age, could be so easily brutalized on
such grounds, without a thought for me,
without any idea that his experience of by-
gone years ought to have more weight than
this wretched slander? Could hereally, like
an unbroken colt as yet untaught to carry his
rider properly, on some petty suspicion rear
and uuseat his rider and fling to the ground
what was once his pride? If so, what must
be thought of the rest with whom I had no
such strong ties of friendship, and who had
given no such proofs of a well trained life?
All this I turned over in my soul and contin-
ually revolved in my heart, or, shall I rather
say my heart was turned over by these things
fighting and pricking me at the recollection
of them? I wrote no answer; not that I
kept silence from contempt; do not think it
of me my brother, for I am not defending
myself to men but I speak before God in
Christ. I kept silence fr m utter inability to
say a word commensurate with my grief.

5. While I was in this position another
letter came to me, addressed to a certain
Dazizas, but in: reality written to all the
world. This is obvious from its very rapid
distribution, for in a few days it was delivered
all over Pontus, and was travelling about
Galatia; indeed it is said that the carriers
of this good news traversed Dithynia, and
reached the Hellespont itself. What was
written against me to Dazizas* you are very
well aware, for they do not reckon you as so
far beyond the bounds of their friendship as
to have left you alone undistinguished by this
honour. However, if the letter has not
reached you, I will send it to you. In it you
will find me charged with craft and treach-
ery, with corruption of Churches and with
ruin of souls. ‘The charge which they think
the truest of all is, that I made that exposition
of the faith for secret and dishonest reasons,
not to do service to the Nicopolitans, but
with the design of disingenuously extracting
a confession from them. Of all this the
Lord is Judge. What clear evidence can
there be of the thoughts of the heart? One
thing I do wonder at in them, that after sign-
ing the document presented by me, they
show so much disagreement, that they con-
fuse truth and falsehood to satisfy those who


are accusing them, quite forgetful that their


1In Letter cxxxi. the name appears as Dazinas, or Dexi-
nas. Iu this place the MSS. agrce in the form Dazizas.


written confession of the Nicene Creed is
preserved at Rome, and that they with their
own hand delivered to the council at Tyana
the document brought from Rome which is
in my hands, and contains the same creed.
They forgot their own address, when they
came forward and bewailed the deceit by
which they had been tricked into giving their
adhesion to the document drawn up by the
faction of Eudoxius,’ and so bethought them
of the defence for that error, that they should
go to Rome? and there accept the creed of
the Fathers, that so they might make amends,
for the mischief they had done the Church by
their agreement in evil, by their introduction
of something better. Now the very’ men
who undertook long journeys for the faith’s
sake, and made all these fine speeches, are
reviling me for walking craftily, and for
playing the plotter under the cloke of love.
It is plain from the Letter, now bcing carried
about, that they have condemned the faith
of Nicea. They saw Cyzicus, and came
home with another creed.°

6. But why say anything of mere verbal
inconsistency? ‘The practical proofs of their
change of position aflorded by their conduct
are far stronger. They refused to yield to
the sentence of fifty bishops passed against
them.* They declined to resign the govern-
ment of their Churches although the number
of bishops assenting to the decree for their
deposition was so many, on the alleged
eround that they were not partakers of the
Holy Ghost, and were not governing their
Churches by the grace of God, but had
clutched their dignity by the aid “of human
power, ancl through lust of vain glory. Now
they are for receiving the men consecrated by
these same persons as bishops. I should like
you to ask them in my stead, (although they
despise all mankind, as bercit of ey es, ears,
te common serise), to perceive the incon-
sistency of their conduct, what sentiments
they do really entertain in their own hearts.
How can there be two bishops, one deposed
by Euippius,® and the other consecrated by
him? Both arethe actions of the same man.
Had he not been endowed with the grace
bestowed upon Jeremiah to pull down and
build again, to root out and to plant,® he
certainly would not have rooted the one out
and planted the other. Grant him the one
and you must grant him the other. Their


1? The Creed of Ariminum,

2 Eustathius, Silvanus, and Theophilus went to Rome after
the Lamps acene Council of 36s.

8 The Synod οἵ Tyana had been ready to recognise the
Eustathians as Catholics in 374. The Semi-Arian Council of
Cyzicus was held in 375 or 376 (Mansi iii. 469).

4 7.6. at Constantinople in 360.

5 of, Letter ccxxviii. 6 cf. Jer. i. 10.


288


one object, as it seems, is everywhere to look
to their own advantage, and to regard every
one who acts in accordance with their own
wishes as a friend, while they treat any one
who opposes them as an enemy, and spare no
calumny to run him down.’

. What measures are they now taking
against the Church? For the shiftiness of
their originators, shocking; for the apathy
of all who are affected by them, pitiable.
By a respectable commission the children and
grandchildren of Euippius have been sum-
moned from distant regions to Sebasteia,
and to them the people have been entrusted.”
They have taken possession of the altar.
They have been made the leaven of that
Church. I am persecuted by them as a
Homoousiast. Eustathius, who brought the
Homoousion in the script from Rome to
Tyana, although he was not able to get
admitted into their much to be coveted com-
munion, either because they feared, or re-
spected the authority of, the large numer of
persons who had agreed in condemning him,
is now in intimate alliance with them. I
only hope that I may never have time enough
on my hands to tell of all their doings —
who were gathered together, how each one
had been ordained, and from what kind of
earlier life each arrived at his present dignity.
I have been taught to pray ‘‘ that my mouth
may not utter the works of the men.” * If you
enquire you will learn these things for your-
self, and, if they are hidden from you, they
will not assuredly continue hidden from
the judges.

S. I will not, however, omit to tell you,
my dear friend, in what a state I have been.
Last year I suffered from a very violent
fever, and came near to the gates of death.
When, by God’s mercy, I was restored, I
was distressed at coming back to life, as I
bethought me of all the troubles before me.
I considered with myself for what reason,
hidden’ in the depths of the wisdom of God,
yet further days of life in the flesh had been
allowed me. But when I heard of these
matters 1 concluded that the Lord wished
me to see the Churches at rest after the storm
which they had previously suffered from the


1 The Ben. note on this passage suegests that the reference
to Jeremiah is an argument supposed to be put forward by
Eustathius, and immediately answered by Basil, but there
seems no necessity for this. Basil says nothing for or against
the powers of the bishops who condemned Eustathius; he
only points out the inconsistency of Eustathius in accepting
their powers to ordain when it suited his purpose, while he
refused to admit their authority to depose. It is enough for
Basil’s argument that Eustathius treated him as having
authority. On Basil’s own views as to the validity of heretical
ordination, cf. Canon i., Letter clxxxviii.

2 /,.e, bishons and presbyters whose spiritual descent is to
be traced to Euippias, v/z.: Eustathius and his clergy. Over
what sce Euippius presided is unknown,

’ Ps, xvii, 3 and 4, LXX.


BASIE.


alienation of the men in whom, on account
of their fictitious gravity of character, every
confidence had been placed. Or peradventure
the Lord designed to invigorate my soul, and
to render it more vigilant for the future, to
the end that, instead of giving heed to men,
it might be made perfect through those pre-
cepts of the Gospel which do not share in the
changes and chances of human seasons and
circumstances, but abide for ever the same,
as they were uttered by the blessed lips that
cannot lie.’

9. Menare like clouds, shifting hither and
thither in the sky with the change of the
winds.” And of all men who have ever come
within my experience these of whom I am
speaking are the most unstable. As to the’
other business of life, those who have
lived with them may give evidence; but as
to what is within my own knowledge, their
inconsistency as regards the faith, I do not
know that Ihave ever myself observed it or
heard from any one else, of anything like it.
Originally they were followers of Arius;
then they went over to Hermogenes, who
was diametrically opposed to the errors of
Arius, as is evinced by the Creed originally
recited by him at Nicewa.* Hermogenes,
fell asleep, and then they went over to Euse-
bius, the coryphzus, as we know on per-
sonal evidence, of the Arian ring. Leaving
this, for whatever reasons, they came home
again, and once more concealed their Arian
sentiments. After reaching the episcopate,
to pass by what occurred in the interval, how
many creeds did they put forth? One at
Ancyra;* another at Seleucia ;° another at
Constantinople, ὅ the famous one; another at
Lampsacus,’ then that of Nike in Thrace ;°
and now again the creed of Cyzicus.* Of
this last I know nothing, except that I am
told that they have suppressed the homoou-
sion, and are supporting the “ke zz essence,
while they subscribe with Eunomius the blas-

1Contrast the famous appeal of Antigone in Soph., 451. 454
to the eternal principles of right and wrong; ov yap τι νῦν ye
καχθὲς, ἀλλ᾽ ἀεί ποτε ζῆ ταῦτα κοὐδεὶς οἶδεν ἐξ ὅτου φάνη. The
Christian saint can make the more personal reference to the
ἀψευδὲς στόμα. 2 cf. Jude 12.

3cf. Letter Ἰχχχὶ. p.172. Hermogenes was bishop of
Cesarea, in which see he preceded Dianius. He acted as sec-
retary at Nicea, when yet a deacon. ** The actual creed was
written out and read, perhaps in consideration of Hosius’
ignorance of Greek, by Hermogenes.”’ (Stanley, Lastern
Church, p. 140, ed. 1862.)

4 In 358, when the ὁμοιούσιον was accepted.

5In 359, when the Semiarians supported the Antiochene
Dedication Creed of 341.

6 In 360, when the Acacians triumphed, and Eustathius with
other Semiarians was deposed. The Creed of Ariminum, as
revised at Nike, was accepted.

7 In 3604, when the Creeds of Ariminum and Constantinople
were condemned by the Semiarians, and the Dedication Creed
was reaffirmed.

8 The Creed of Nike in Thrace was the Creed of Ariminum
revised, and it seems out of order to mention it after Lampsa-
cus.


9In 375 or 6. This is the formula referred to in Letter
ccli. 4, as the latest. On the variety of Creeds, cf. p. 48, n.


i}


LETTERS.


289


phemies against the Holy Spirit. Although
all of the creeds which I have enumerated may
not be opposed to one another, yet they alike
exhibit the inconsistency of the men’s minds,
from their never standing by the same words.
I have said nothing as to countless other
points, but this that [do say is true. Now
that they have gone over to you, I beg you
to write back by the same man, I mean our
fellow presbyter Strategius, whether you
have remained in the same mind towards me,
or whether you have been alienated in con-
sequence of your meeting them. For it was
not likely that they would be silent, nor that
you yourself, after writing to me as you have,
would not use free speaking to them too. If
you remain in communion with me, it is
well; it is what I would most earnestly pray
for. If they have drawn you over to them,
itis sad. How should separation from such
a brother not be sad? If in nothing else, at
least in bearing losses like this, we have been
considerably tried at their hands.


ἘΠ CCXLv.”


To Theophilus the Bishop.’


Ir is some time since I received your
letter, but I waited to be able to reply by
some fit person; that so the bearer of my
answer might supply whatever might be
wanting in it. Now there has arrived our
much beloved and very reverend brother
Strategius, and I have judged it well to
make use of his services, both as knowing
my mind and able to convey * news of me with
due propriety and reverence. Know, there-
fore, my beloved and honoured friend, that I
highly value my affection for you, and am
not conscious. so far as the disposition of my
heart goes, of having at any time failed in it,
although I have had many serious causes
of reasonable complaint. But I have de-
cided to weigh the good against the bad,
as in a balance, and to add my own mind
where, the better inclines. Now changes
have been made by those who should least
of all have allowed anything of the kind.
Pardon me, therefore, for I have not changed
my mind, if I have shifted my side, or rather
I should say, I shall still be on the same
side, but there are others who are continu-
ally changing it, and are now openly desert-
ing to the foe. You yourself know what a
value I put on their communion, so long as


1 Placed in 376.

27.e. of Castabala, who had ‘accompanied Eustathius to
Rome, and was closely associated with him. cf. p. 198,

ὃ διακομίσαι. Two MSS. have διακονῆσαι.


they were of the sound party. If now I re-
fuse to follow these, and shun all who think
with them, I ought fairly to be forgiven. I
put truth and my own salvation before
everything.


LETTER: ΟΟΥΧΤ
To the Nicopolitans.


I am filled with distress at seeing evil on
the high road to success, while you, my rev-
erend friends, are faint and failing under con-
tinuous calamity. But when again I bethink
me of.the mighty hand of God, and reflect
that He knows how to raise up them that are


broken down, to love the just, to crush the


proud and to put down the mighty from their
seats, then again my heart grows lighter by
hope, and I know that through your prayers
the calm that the Lord will show us will come
soon. Only grow not weary in prayer, but
in the,present emergency strive to give to all
a plain example by deed of whatever you
teach by word.


LETTER, CCXLVIL,?
To the Nicopolitans.


WHEN [ had read the letter of your holi-
nesses, how did I not groan and lament that I
had heard of these further troubles, of blows
and insults inflicted on yourselves, of destruc-
tion of homes, devastation of the city, ruin
of your whole country, persecution of the
Church, banishment of priests, invasion of
wolves, and scattering of flocks. But I have
looked to the Lord in heaven, and have
ceased to groan and weep, because I am
perfectly well assured, as I hope you know
too, that help will speedily come and that
you will not be for ever forsaken. What we
have suffercd, we have suffered for our
sins. But our loving Lord will show us His
own aid for the sake of His love and pity
for the Churches. Nevertheless, I have
not omitted to beseech men in authority in
person. I have written to those at court,
who love us, that the wrath of our ravening
enemy may be stayed. I think, moreover,
that from many quarters condemnation may
fall upon his head, unless indeed these
troublous times allow our public men no
leisure for these matters.*


1 Placed in 376. 2 Placed in 376.

3 It is rare to find in Basil’s letters even so slight an allusion
as this to the general affairs of the empire. At or about the
date of this letter the Goths, hitherto kept in subjection by
the legions of Valens, were being driven south by the Huns
and becoming a danger to the empire. Amm. Marc. xxxi. 4.
Turbido instantium studio, orbis Romani pernictes ducebatur.


290


BASIL.


Pet ER tCCALVIMG
To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconitum.


So far as my own wishes are concerned 1
am grieved at living at such a distance from
your reverence. But, as regards the peace
of your own life, I thank the Lord Who has
kept you out of this conflagration which has
specially ravaged my diocese. For the just
Judge has sent me, in accordance with my
works, a messenger of Satan,? who is
buffeting me * severely enough, and is vigor-
ously defending the heresy. Indeed to such
a pitch has he carried the war against us,
that he does not shrink even from shedding
the blood of those who trust in God. You
cannot fail to have heard that a man of the
name of Asclepius,* because he would not
consent to communion with Doeg,’ has died
under the blows inflicted on him by them, or
rather, by their blows has been translated
into life. You may suppose that the rest of
their doings are of a piece with this; the
persecutions of presbyters and teachers, and
all that might be expected to be done by
men abusing the imperial authority at their
own caprice. But, in answer to your
prayers, the Lord will give us release from
these things, and patience to bear the weight
of our trials worthily of our hope in Him.
Pray write frequently to me of all that con-
cerns yourself. If you find any one who can
be trusted to carry you the book that I have
finished, be so kind as to send for it, that so,
when I have been cheered by your approval,
I may send it on to others also. By the grace
of the Holy One may you be granted to me
and to the Church of the Lord in good health,
rejoicing in the Lord, and praying for me.


LETTER. CCXLIX,’


Without address. Commendatory.


I CONGRATULATE this my brother, in being
delivered from our troubles here and in ap-
proaching your reverence. In choosing a
good life with them that fear the Lord he
has chosen a good provision for the life to
come. I commend him to your excellency
and by him I beseech you to pray for my
wretched life, to the end that I may be de-
livered from these trials and begin to serve the
Lord according to the Gospel.

1 Placed in 376. 2 cf, 2 Cor. xii. 7.

3 The word κατακονδυλΐίζω here used (it occurs in A®schines)
is a synonym, Slightly strengthened, for the κολαφίζω of St.
Paul. St. Basil seems plainly to have the passage quoted in
his mind.

41 have failed to find further mention of this Asclepius.


An Asclepius of Cologne is commemorated on June 30.
5 of. 1 Sam. xxi. 18. 5 Placed in 376.


LETTER) (OGL
To FPatrophilus, bishop of Aige.


THERE has been some delay in my receiv-
ing your answer to my former letter; but it
has reached me through the well-beloved
Strategius, and I have given thanks to the
Lord for your continuance in your love to
me. What you have now been kind enough
to write on the same subject proves your
good intentions, for you think as you ought,
and you counsel me to my gain. But I see
that my words will be extending too far, if I
am to reply to everything written to me by
your excellency. I therefore say no more
than this, that, if the blessing of peace goes
no further than the mere name of peace, it is
ridiculous to go on picking out here one and
there another, and allow them alone a share
in the boon, while others beyond number are
excluded from it. But if agreement with
mischievous men, under the appearance of
peace, really does the harm an enemy might
do to all who consent to it, then only con-
sider who those men are who have been
admitted to their companionship, who have
conceived an unrighteous hatred against me;
who but men of the faction not in commu-
nion with me. There is no need now for me
to mention them by name. They have been
invited by them to Sebasteia; they have
assumed the charge of the Church; they
have performed service at the altar ; they have
given of their own bread to all the peo-
ple, being proclaimed bishops by the clergy
there, and escorted through all the district
as saints and in communion. If one must
adopt the faction of these men, it is absurd
to begin at the extremities, and not rather to
hold intercourse with those that are their
heads.” If then we are to count heyetic and
shun no one at all, why, tell me, do you
separate yourself from the communion of
certain persons? But if any are. to be
shunned, let me be told by these people who
are so logically consistent in everything, to
what party those belong whom they have
invited over from Galatia to join them? If
such things seem greivous to you, charge
the separation on those who are responsible
for it. If you judge them to be of no im-
portance, forgive me for declining to be of
the leaven of the teachers of wro ng doctrine.*
Wherefore, if you will, have no more to do
with those specious arguments, but with all


1 Placed in 376.

2 7.6. with Euzoius, Eudoxius, and the more pronounced
Arians,

8 τῶν ἑτεροδιδασκαλούντων. cf. 1 Tim.i.3. The Ben. note
compares Greg., Orat. xii. 203.


LETTERS.


201


openness confute them that do not walk
aright in the truth of the Gospel.


LETTER COLIC


To the people of Eves.’


1. My occupations are very numerous,
and my mind is full cf many anxious cares,
but I have never forgotten you, my dear
friends, ever praying my God for your con-
stancy in the faith, wherein ye stand and
have your boasting in the hope of the glory
of God. Truly nowad: iys it is hard to find,
and extraordinary to see, a Church pure,
unharmed by the troubles of the times, and
preserving the apostolic doctrine in all its
integrity and completeness. Such is your
Church shewn at this present time by Him
who in every generation makes manifest
them that are worthy of His calling. May
the Lord grant to you the blessings of Jerusa-
lem which is above, in return [δι your fling-
ing back at the heads of the liars their slanders
against me, and your refusal to allow them
entry into your hearts. I know, and am
persuaded in the Lord, that ¢* your reward is
great in heaven,’ * even on account of this
very conduct. For you have wisely con-
cluded among yourselves, as indeed is the
truth, that the men who are ‘* rewarding me
evil for good, and hatred for my love,” * are
accusing me now for the very same points
which they are found to have themselves
confessed and subscribed.

2. Their presenting you with their own
signatures for an accusation against me is not
the only contradiction into which they have
fallen. They were unanimously deposed by
the bishops assembled at Constantinople.®
They refused to accept this deposition and
appealed to a synod of impious men,° refus-
ing to admit the episcopacy of their judges,
in order not to accept the sentence passed
upon them.

The reason alleged for their non-recogni-
tion was their being leaders of wicked heresy.
All this’ happened nearly seventeen years
ago. The principal men of those who
deposed them were Eudoxius, Euippius,
George,® Acacius, and others unknown to
you.?

The. present tyrants of the churches are


1 Placed in 376.


* Euassai. Possibly Ptolemy’s Xetova. Ramsay, //ist,
Geog. A.M. 304. Now Yogounes, #.e.”Aycos ᾿Ιωάννης.
3 Matt. v.12. “Ps. Chex. 5.


5 7.e.in January 360. Soc. ii. 41-43; Soz. iv. 24.

6 The Synod of lLampsacus in 365 is probably referred to,
but Socrates (v.14) mentions several synods of the Homoiou-
Sians. ΤΥ δι the deposition.


8 Of uncertain 566. 9 A MS. variety is “ to me.”


their successors, some ordained to fill their
places, and others actually promoted by them.

3. Now let those who charge me with
unsound doctrine tell me in what way the
men whose deposition they refused to accept
were heretical. Let them tell me in what
way those promoted by them, and holding
the same viewsas their fathers, are orthodox.
If Euippius was orthodox, how can Eusta-
thius, whom he deposed, be other than a lay-
man? If Euippius was a heretic, how can
any one ordained by him be in communion
with Eustathius now? But all this conduct,
this trying to accuse men and set them up
again, is child’s play, got up against the
Churches of God, for their own gain.

When Eustathius was travelling through
Paphlagonia, he overthrew the altars! of
Basilides of Paphlagonia,’ and used to per-
form divine service on his own tables.* Now
he is begging Basilides to be admitted to
communion. He refused to communicate
with our reverend brother Elpidius, because
of his alliance with the Amasenes ; * and now
he comes as a suppliant to the Amasenes,
petitioning for alliance with them. Even
ye yourselves know how shocking were his
public utterances against Euippius: now he
glorifies the holders of Euippius’s opinions
for their orthodoxy, if only they will co-
operate in promoting his restitution. And I
am all the while being calumniated, not be-
cause I am doing any wrong, but because
they have imagined that they will thus be
recommended to the party at Antioch. ‘The
character of those whom they sent for last
year from Galatia, as being likely by their
means to recover the free exercise of their
episcopal powers, is only too well known to
all who have lived even for a short time with
them. I pray that the Lord may never allow
me leisure to recount all their proceedings.
I will only say that they have passed through
the whole country, with the honour and at-
tendance of bishops, escorted by their most
honourable body-guard and sympathizers ;
and have made a grand entry into the city,
and held an assembly with all authority.
The people have been given over to them.
The altar has been given over to them.
How they went to Nicopolis, and could do
nothing there of all that they had promised,
and how they came, and what appearance
they presented on their return, is known to
those who were on the spot. They are obvi-
ously taking every single step for their own


1 θυσιαστήοια.

2 7.6. Basilides, bishop of Gangra.

8 τραπεζῶν,

4 7,6. the Arian bishop of Amasia, who was intruded into
the place of Eulalius. On the state of the Amasene church at
his time, cf, Soz. vii. 2.


cf. Letter ccxxvi. p. 268.


292


BASIS


gain and profit. If they say that they have
repented, let them shew their repentance in
writing; let them anathematize the Creed
of Constantinople; let them separate from
the heretics; and let them no longer trick
the simple-minded. So much for them and
theirs.

4. I, however, brethren beloved, small
and insignificant as I am, but remaining ever
by God’s grace the same, have never changed
with the changes of the world. My creed
has not varied at Seleucia, at Constantinople,
at Zela,’ at Lampsacus, and at Rome. My
present creed is not different from the former ;
it has remained ever one and the same. As
we received from the Lord, so are we bap-
tized; as we are baptized, so we make pro-
fession of our faith; as we make profession
of our faith, sodo we offer our doxology,
not separating the Holy Ghost from Father
and Son, nor preferring Him in honour to
the Father, or asserting Him to be prior to
the Son, as blasphemers’ tongues invent.’
Who could be so rash as to reject the Lord’s
commandment, and boldly devise an order of
his own for the Names? But I do not call
the Spirit, Who is ranked with Father and
Son, acreature. I donot dare to call slavish
that which is royal.* And I beseech you to
remember the threat uttered by the Lord in
the words, ** All manner of sin and_ blas-
phemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven unto men, neither in this world,
neither in the world to come.”* Keep your-
selves from dangerous teaching against the
Spirit.. *tStand fast in the faith.”*° Look
over all the world, and see how small the
part is which is unsound. ΑἹ] the rest of
the Church which has received the Gospel,
from one end of the world to the other,
abides in this sound and unperverted doc-
trine. From their communion I pray that I
may never fall, and I pray that I may have
part and lot with you in the righteous day of
our Lord Jesus Christ, when He shall come
to give to every one according to his con-
duct.


LETTER “CCLII?
To the bishops of the Pontic Diocese."


Tue honours of martyrs ought to be very
eagerly coveted by all who rest their hopes on


1 cf. Letter ccxxvi. p. 268.

2 cf, De Sp. S. chap. xii. p. 18. b 7 Cor. xvi. 12.

' cf. Psoliqi2 Lx. 6 Placed in 376.

7In the title the word διοίκησις is used in its oldest eccle-
siastical sense of a patriarchal jurisdiction commensurate with
the civil diocese, which contained several provinces. cf. the
1Xth Canon of Chalcedon, which gives an appeal from the
metropolitan, the head of the province, to the exarch of
the “diocese,” ‘* The title exarch is here applied to the

‘


4 Matt. xii. 31, 32.


the Lord, and more especially by you who seek
after virtue. By your disposition towards
the great and good among your fellow ser-
vants you are shewing your affection to our
common Lord. Moreover, a special reason
for this is to be found in the tie, as it were,
of blood, which binds the life of exact disci-
pline to those who have been made perfect
through endurance. Since then Eupsychius
and Damas and their company are most il-
lustrious among martyrs, and their memor
is yearly kept in our city and all the neigh-
bourhood, the Church, calling on you by my
voice, reminds you to keep up your ancient
custom of paying a visit. A great and good
work lies before you among the people, who
desire to be edified by you, and are anxious
for the reward dependent on the honour paid
to the martyrs. Receive, therefore, my sup-
plications, and consent of your kindness to
give at the cost of small trouble to yourselves
a great boon to me.


LETTER CCL?
Zo the presbyters of Antioch.


THe anxious care which you have for
the Churches of God will to some extent be
assuaged by our very dear and very rever-
end brother Sanctissimus the presbyter,
when he has told you of the love and kind-
ness felt for us by all the West. But, on the
other hand, it will be roused afresh and
made yet keener, when he has told you in


-person what zeal is demanded by the pres-


ent position of affairs. All other authorities
have told us, as it were, by halves, the
minds of men in the West, and the condi-
tion of things there. He is very competent
to understand men’s minds, and to make
exact enquiry into the condition of affairs,
and he will tell you everything and will
guide your good will through the whole
business. You have matter before you


primate of a group of provincial churches, as it had been used
by Ibas, bishop of Edessa, at his trial in 448; alluding to the
‘ Eastern Council’ which had resisted the council of Ephesus,
and condemned Cyril, he said, *1 followed my exarch,’ mean-
ing John of Antioch (Mansi vii. 237; compare Evagrius iv. 11,
using ‘ patriarchs’ and ‘ exarchs’ synonymously). Reference
is here made not to all such prelates, but to the bishops of
Ephesus, Cesarea itn Cappadocia, and Heraclea, if, as
seems possible, the see of Heraclea still nominally retained its
old relation to the bishop of Thrace.’ Bright, Cazons of
the First Four Gen. Councils, pp. 156, 157.

The Pontic diocese was one of Constantine’s thirteen civil
divisions,

1 cf. p. 184,n. cf. Proleg. Eupsychius, a noble bridegroom
of Czsarea, was martyred under Julian for his share in the
demolition of the temple of Fortune. Soz. v. 11. cf. Greg.
Naz., Ep. ad Bas. \viii. September 7 was the day of the feast
at Czsarea. 2 Placed in 376.

8 This and the three following letters are complimentary
and consolatory epistles conveyed by Sanctissimus on his
return to Rome. It does not appear quite certain whether they
are to be referred to the period of his return from his second
journey to the East in 376, or that of his earlier return in 374.
cf. Letters cxx. and ccxxi.


LETTERS.


appropriate to the excellent will which you
have always shewn in your anxiety on behalf


of the Churches of God.


LETTER CCLIV.’
To Pelagius,’ bishop of the Syrian Laodicea.


May the Lord grant me once again in
person to behold your true piety and to
supply in actual intercourse all that is want-
ing in my letter. I am behindhand in be-
ginning to write and must needs make many
excuses. But we have with us the well
beloved and reverend brother Sanctissimus,
the presbyter. He will tell you everything,
both our news and the news of the West.
You will be cheered by what you hear; but
when he tells you of the troubles in which
we are involved he will perhaps add some
distress and anxiety to that which already
besets your kindly soul. Yet it is not to no
purpose that affliction should be felt by you,
able as you are to move the Lord. Your
anxiety will turn to our gain, and I know
that we shall receive succour from God as
long as we have the aid of your prayers.
Pray, too, with me for release from my
anxieties, and ask for some increase in my
bodily strength; then the Lord will prosper
me on my way to the fulfilment of my de-
sires and to a sight of your excellency.


LES CER CCLY.?
To Vitus, bishop of Charre.*


Wou.p that it were possible for me to
write to your reverence every day! For ever
since I have had experience of your aflec-
tion I have had great desire to converse
with you, or, if this be impossible, at least to
communicate with you by letter, that I may
tell you my own news and learn in what
state you are. Yet we have not what we
wish but what the Lord gives, and this we
ought to receive with gratitude. I have
therefore thanked the holy God for giving
me an opportunity for writing to your rey-
erence on the arrival of our very well be-
loved and reverend brother Sanctissimus, the
presbyter. He has had considerable trouble
in accomplishing his journey, and will tell
you with accuracy all that he has learnt in
the West. For all these things we ought to


1 Placed in 376.

2cf. Letter xcii. p.177. On Pelagius bishop of the Syrian
Laodicea, see Theod., 27. . iv. τ, πὰ ν. 8. Philostorg., A.Z.
v.31. Sozomen, /7.£. vi. 12, and vii. g.

3 Placed in 376.

Say, Letter ZC. ιν 7:
bishop of Constantinople in 381.
men, .£. vi. 33.


Vitus of Charre (Haran) was
(Labbe, ii. 955.) cf. Sozo-


293


thank the Lord and to beseech Him to give
us too the same peace and that we may
freely receive one another. Receive all the
brethren in Christ in my name.


LETTER CeLVvhL*


To the very well beloved and reverend brethren
the presbyters Acactus, Aetius, Paulus, and
Silvanus ; the deacons Silvinus and Luctus,
and the rest of the brethren the monks, Basil,
the bishop.”


News has reached me of the severe perse-
cution carried on against you, and how di-
rectly after Easter the men who fast for strife
and debate * attacked your homes, and gave
your labours to the flames, preparing for you
indeed a house in the heavens, not made
with hands,* but for themselves laying up in
store the fire which they had used to your
hurt. I no sooner heard of this than I
groaned over what had happened; pitying
not you, my brethren, (God forbid!) but
the men who are so sunk in wickedness as to
carry their evil deeds to such an extent. I
expected you all to hurry at once to the
refuge prepared for you in my humble self;
and I hoped that the Lord would give me
refreshment in the midst of my continual
troubles in embracing you, and in receiving
on this inactive body of mine the noble
sweat which you are dropping for the truth’s
sake, and so having some share in the prizes
laid up for you by the Judge of truth. But
this did not enter into your minds, and you
did not even expect any relief at my hands. I
was therefore at least anxious to find frequent
opportunities of writing to you, to the end
that lke those who cheer on combatants
in the arena, I might myself by letter
give you some encouragement in your good
fight. For two reasons, however, I have
not found this easy. In the first place, I
did not know whére you were residing.
And, secondly, but few of our people travel
in your direction. Now the Lord has
brought us the very well beloved and rever-
end brother Sanctissimus, the presbyter. By
him I am able to salute you, and I beseech
you to pray for me, rejoicing and exulting
that your reward is great in heaven,’ and
that you have freedom with the Lord to
cease not day and night calling on Him to
put an end to this storm of the Churches;


1 Placed in 376,

2 Maran (Vit. Bas. xxxvi. 5) remarks that the Acacius
heading this list is probably the Acacius who in 375 had in-
vited Basil in the name of the Church of Bera, and was
afterwards famous alike for his episcopate at Bera affd his
hostility to St. Chvysostom. cf. Letter ccxx. p. 260.

3 Is, lviii. 4. #2 Cor. Υ. 1. 5 Matt. v. 12.


294


BASIL.


to grant the shepherds to their flocks, and
that the Church may return to her proper
dignity. Iam persuaded that if a voice be
found to move our good God, He will not
make His mercy afar off, but will now
ἐς with the temptation make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it.”' Salute all
the brethren in Christ in my name.


LETTER. CCLYUY


To the monks harassed by the Arians.


1. I HAVE thought it only right to an-
nounce to you by letter how I said to my-
self, when [ heard of the trials brought upon
you by the enemies of God, that in a time
reckoned a time of peace you have won
for yourselves the blessings promised to all
who suffer persecution for the sake of the
name of Christ. In my judgment the war
that is waged against us by our fellow country-
men is the hardest to bear, because against
open and declared enemies it is easy to de-
fend ourselves, while we are necessarily at
the mercy of those who are associated with
us, and are thus exposed to continual
danger. This has been your case. Our
fathers were persecuted, but by idolaters;
their substance was plundered, their houses
were overthrown, they themselves were
driven into exile, by our open enemies,
for Christ’s name’s sake. The persecutors,
who have lately appeared, hate us no less
than they, but, to the deceiving of many,
they put forward the name of Christ, that
the persecuted may be robbed of all comfort
from its confession, because the majority of
simpler folk, while admitting that we are
being wronged, are unwilling to reckon our
death for the truth’s sake to be martyrdom.
I am therefore persuaded that the reward in
store for you from the righteous Judge is
yet greater than that bestowed on_ those
former martyrs. They indeed both had the
public praise of men, and received the re-
ward of God; to you, though your good
deeds are not less, no honours are given by
the people. It is only fair that the requital
in store for you in the world to come should
be far greater.

2. I exhort you, therefore, not to faint
in your afflictions, but to be revived by
God’s love, and to add daily to your zeal,
knowing that in you ought to be preserved
that remnant of true religion which the
Lord will find when He cometh on the
earth. Even if bishops are driven from


11 Cor, x. 13. 2 Placed in 376.


their Churches, be not dismayed. If traitors
have arisen from among the very clergy’
themselves, let not. this undermine your
confidence in God. We are saved not by
names, but by mind and purpose, and genuine
love toward our Creator. Bethink you how
in the attack against our Lord, high priests
and scribes and elders devised the plot,
and how few of the people were found
really receiving the word. Remember that
it is not the multitude who are being saved,
but the elect of God. Be not then affrighted
at the great multitude of the people who are
carried hither and thither by winds like the
waters of the sea. If but one be saved, like
Lot at Sodom, he ought to abide in right
judgment, keeping his hope in Christ un-
shaken, for the Lord will not forsake His


holy ones. Salute all the brethren in Christ
from me. Pray earnestly for my miserable
soul.


LETTER CCLVII.?
To Epiphanius the bishop.’


1. It has long been expected that, in ac-
cordance with the prediction of our Lord,
because of iniquity abounding, the love of the
majority would wax cold.* Now experience
has confirmed this expectation. But though
this condition of things has already obtained
among us here, it seems to be contradicted
by the letter brought from your holiness.
For verily it is no mere ordinary proof of
love, first that you should remember an un-
worthy and insignificant person like myself;
and secondly, that you should send to visit
me brethren who are fit and proper ministers
of a correspondence of peace. For now,
when every man is viewing every one else with
suspicion, no spectacle is rarer than that
which you are presenting. Nowhere is pity
to be seen; nowhere sympathy; nowhere
a brotherly tear for a brother in distress.
Not persecutions for the truth’s sake, not
Churches with all their people in tears;
not this great tale of troubles closing round
us, are enough to stir us to anxiety for the
welfare of one another. We jump on them
that are fallen; we scratch and tear at
wounded places; we who are supposed to
agree with one another launch the curses that
are uttered by the heretics; men who are in
agreement on the most important matters are


1 Maran conjectures an allusion to Fronto.

2 Placed in 377°

8 The learned and saintly bishop of Salamis in Cyprus.
About this time he published his great work against heresy,
the Πανάριον, and also travelled to Antioch to reconcile the
Apollinarian Vitalis to Paulinus. On the failure of his efforts,
and the complicated state of parties at Antioch at this time,
cf. Epiphan., Ixxvii. 20-23; Jerome, Ep~p.57, 58, and Soz., H.£.
vi. 25. 4 cof, Matt. xxiv.-12.


LEETERS.


295


wholly severed from one another on some
one single point. How, then, can I do
otherwise than admire him who in such
circumstances shews that his love to his
neighbour is pure and guileless, and, though
separated from me by so great a distance
of sea and land, gives my soul all the care he
canP

2. I have been specially struck with ad-
miration at your having been distressed even
by the dispute of the monks,on the Mount of
Olives, and at your expressing a wish that
some means might be found of reconciling
them to one another. I have further been
glad to hear that you have not been unaware
of the unfortunate steps, taken by certain per-
sons, which have caused disturbanceamong the
brethren, and that you have keenly interested
yourself even in these matters. But I have
deemed it hardly worthy of your wisdom
that you should entrust the rectification of
matters of such importance to me: for 1 am
not guided by the grace of God, because of
my living in sin; I have no power of elo-
quence, because I have cheerfully withdrawn
from vain studies; and I am not yet sufh-
ciently versed in the doctrines of the truth. I
have therefore already written to my beloved
brethren at the Mount of Olives, our own
Palladius,’ and Innocent the Italian, in an-
swer to their letters to me, that it is impossi-
ble for me to make even the slightest addition
to the Nicene Creed, except the ascription
of Glory to the Holy Ghost, because our
Fathers treated this point cursorily, no ques-
tion having at that time arisen concerning
the Spirit. As to the additions it is proposed
to make to that Creed, concerning the incarna-
tion of our Lord, I have neither tested nor
accepted them, as being beyond my compre-
hension.” I know well that, if once we be-
gin to interfere with the simplicity of the
Creed, we shall embark on interminable dis-
cussion, contradiction ever leading. us on
and on, and shall but disturb the souls of
simpler folk by the introduction of new
phrases.*

3. As to the Church at Antioch (I mean
that which is in agreement in the same doc-
trine), may the Lord grant that one day we
may see it united. It is in peril of being
specially open to the attacks of the enemy.


1This Palladius may possibly be identified with the
Palladius of Caesarea of Athanasius, Ep. ad Pall. Migne,
Pat, xxvi. 1167, and in the Ath. of this series, p. 5So.

2 The Ben. note remarks ‘Cum nonnulli formule Nicene
aliquid de Incarnatione adderent ad comprimendos Apollt-
nartstas, id Bastlius nec examinaverat,” etc. I rather under-
stand the present προσυφαίνομενα to refer to the proposals of
Innocent to Palladius.

3 Yet Basil will admit an addition which he holds war.
ranted, in the case of the glorification of the Spirit, and would
doubtless have acquiesced in the necessity of the additions
finally victorious in 451.


who is angry with it because there the name
of Christian first obtained." There heres
is divided against orthodoxy, and orthodoxy
is divided against herself.” My position,
however, is this. | The right reverend bishop
Meletius was the first to speak boldly for the
truth, and fought that good fight in the days
of Constantine. Therefore my Church has
felt strong affection towards him, for the sake
of that brave and firm stand, and has held
communion with him. I, therefore, by God’s
grace, have held him to be in communion up
to this time; and, if God will, I shall con-
tinue to do so. Moreover the very blessed
Pope Athanasius came from Alexandria,
and was most anxious that communion
should be established between Meletius and
himself; but by the malice of counsellors
their conjunction was put off to another sea-
son. Would that this had not been so! I
have never accepted communion with any
one of those who have since been introduced
into the see, not because I count.them un-
worthy, but because I see no ground for the
condemnation of Meletius. Nevertheless I
have heard many things about the brethren,
without giving heed to them, because the
accused were not brought face to face with
their accusers, according to that which is writ-
ten, ‘**Doth our law judge any man, before
it hear him, and know what he doeth?’ ὃ
I cannot therefore at present write to them,
right honourable brother, and I ought not to
be forced to do so. It will be becoming to
your peaceful disposition not to cause union
in one direction and disunion in another, but
to restore the severed member to the original
union. First, then, pray; next, to the ut-
most of your ability, exhort, that ambition
may be driven from their hearts, and that
reconciliation may be effected between them
both to restore strength to the Church, and to
destroy the rage of our foes. It has given great
comfort to my soul that, in addition to your
other right and accurate statements in the-
ology, you should acknowledge the necessity
of stating that the hypostases are three. Let
the brethren at Antioch be instructed by
you after this manner. Indeed I am confi-
dent that they have been so instructed; for
Ι am sure you would never have accepted
communion with them unless you had care-
fully made sure of this point in them.

4. The Maguszans,* as you were good


1 cf, note on Theodoret in this series, p. 320.

2 In 377 Meletius was in exile, and Paulinus the bishop of
the * old Catholics,” or Eustathians (Soc., H.£. iv. 2, v. 5),
opposing Vitalius, who was consecrated to the episcopate by
Apollinaris. On the confusion resulting from these three
nominally orthodox claimants, vide Jerome’s Letter xvi. in this
Series, ἢ. 20. 3 John vii. st.

4 From Magusa in Arabia, cf, Plin., Vat. Hist. vi. 32.


296


enough to point out to me in your other let-
ter, are here in considerable numbers, scat-
tered all over the country, settlers having
long ago been introduced into these parts
from Babylon. Their manners are peculiar,
as they do not mix with other men. It is
quite impossible to converse with them, in-
asmuch as they have been made the prey of
the devil to do his will. They have no
books; no instructors in doctrine. They
«re brought up in senseless institutions, piety
being handed down from father to son. In
addition to the characteristics which are open
to general observation, they object to the slay-
ing of animals as οἰ νομῶν a: and they cause
the animals they want for their own use to
be slaughtered by other people. They are
wild after illicit marr iages ; they consider fire
divine, and so on.’ No one hitherto has told
me any fables about the descent of the
Magi from Abraham: they name a certain
Zarnuas as the founder of their race. I have
nothing more to write to your excellency
about them.


ΒΕ ee ΟΝ:
To the monks Palladius and Innocent.


From your affection for me you ought to
be able to conjecture my affection for you.
I have always desired to bea herald of peace,
and, when I fail in my object, Iam grieved.
How could it be otherwise? I cannot fcel
angry with any one for this reason, because I
know that the blessing of peace has long ago
been withdrawn from us. If the responsibility
for division lics with others, may the Lord
grant that those who cause dissension may
cease to do so. I cannot even ask that your
visits to me may be frequent. You have
therefore no reason to excuse yourselves on
this score. I am well aware that men who
have embraced the life of labour, and always
provide with their own hands the necessities
of life, cannot be long away from home; but,
wherever you are, remember me, and pray
for me that no cause of disturbance may dwell
in my heart, and that I may be at peace with
myself and with God.


LETTER. CCLX.?
To Optimus the bishop.


1. UNDER any circumstances I should
have gladly seen the good lads, on account
of both a steadiness of character beyond


1-With the statements of Basil may be compared those of
Bardesanes in Eusebius, Prep. να. vi. 275, and of Epi-
phanius in his xp. Cathol. Fid.
2 Placed in 377.


8 Placed in 377.
4 Bishop of Antioch in Pisidia,


Soc. vii. 36; Theod. ν. 8.


BASIE,


their years, and their near relationship to
your excellency, which might have led me to
expect something remarkable in them. And,
when I saw them approaching me with your
letter, my affection towards them was doubled.
But now that I have read the letter, now
that I have seen all the anxious care for the
Church that there is in it, and the evidence
it aflords of your zeal in reading the divine
Scriptures, I thank the Lord. And I in-
voke blessings on those who brought me
such a letter, and, even before them, on the
writer himself.

2. You have asked for a solution of that
famous passage which is everywhere inter-
preted in different senses, ** Whosoever
slayeth Cain will exact vengeance for seven
sins.’ Your question shews that you have
yourself carefully observed the charge of
Paul to Timothy,’ for you are obviously
attentive to your reading. You have more-
over roused me, old man that I am, dull alike
from age and bodily infirmity, and from the
many afHictions which have been stirred up
round about me and have weighed down
my life. Fervent in spirit as you are yourself,
you are rousing me, now benumbed like a
beast in his den, to some little wakefulness
and vital energy. The passage in question
may be interpreted simply and may also re-
ceive an elaborate explanation. The simpler,
and one that may occur to any one off hand,
is this: that Cain ought to suffer sevenfold
punishment for his sins.

For it is not the part of a righteous judge
to define requital on the principle of like for
like, but the originator of evil must pay his
debt with addition, if he is to be made better
by punishment and render other men wiser
by his example. Therefore, since it is or-
dained that Cain pay the penalty of his sin
sevenfold, he who kills him, it is said, will
discharge the sentence pronounced against
him by the divine judgment. This is the
sense that suggests itself to us on our first
reading the passage.

3. But readers, gifted with greater curi-
osity, are naturally inclined to probe into the
question further. How, they ask, can justice
be satisfied seven times? And what are
the vengeances? Are they for seven sins
committed? Or is the sin committed once,
and are there seven punishments for the
one sin? Scripture continually assigns
seven as the number of the remission of sins.
‘¢ How often,” it is asked, ‘* shall my brother
sin against me and I forgive hime?’ a (tens
Peter who is speaking to “the Lord. been a


1 Gen. iv. 15, LXX. 2cf,1 Tim. iv. 13.


LETLERS:


297


seven times?’? Then comes the Lord’s
answer, 61 say not unto thee, until seven
times, but, until seventy times seven.” * Our
Lord did not vary the number, but multiplied
the seven, and so fixed the limit of the for-
giveness. After seven years the Hebrew
used to be freed from slavery. Seven weeks
of years used,in old times to make the
famous jubilee,? in which the land rested,
debts were remitted, slaves were set free,
and, as it were, a new life began over again,
the old life from age to age being in a sense
conipleted at’ the’ number’ seven.- These
things are types of this present life, which
revolves in seven days and passes by, wherein
punishments of slighter sins are inflicted, ac-
cording to the loving care of our good Lord,
to save us from being delivered to punish-
ment in the age that has no’ end. The ex-
pression seven times is therefore introduced
because of its connexion with this present
world, for men who love this world ought
specially to be punished in the things for
the sake of which they have chosen to live
wicked lives. If you understand the ven-
geances to be for the sins committed by Cain,
you will find those sins to be seven. Or ifyou


understand them to mean the sentence passed:


on him by the Judge, you will not go far
wrong. To take the crimes of Cain: the
first sin is ezvy at the preference of Abel;
the second is guzle, whereby he said to his
brother, ‘* Let us go into the field: ” * the third
is murder, a further wickedness: the fourth,
fratricide, a still greater iniquity: the fifth
that he committed the first murder, and set
a bad example to mankind: the sixth wrong,
in that he grieved his parents: the seventh,
his Ze to God; for when he was asked,
‘Where is Abel thy brother?” he replied,
ΕἼ know not.”*® Seven sins were therefore
avenged in the destruction of Cain. For
when the Lord said, ‘* Cursed is the earth
which has opened to receive the blood of thy
brother,” and ‘* groaning and trembling shall
there be on the earth,” Cain said, *‘ If thou
castest me out to-day from the earth, then
from thy face shall I be hid, and groaning
and trembling shall I lie upon the earth, and
every one that findeth me shall slay me.” It
is in answer to this that the Lord says,
“ὁ Whosoever slayeth Cain will discharge
seven vengeances.” ® Cain supposed that he
would be an easy prey to every one, because
of there being no safety for him in the earth
(for the earth was cursed for his sake), and
of his being deprived of the succour of God,


4 Gen. iv.8.
5 Gen. iv. 9.


6 Gen. iv. 11, 12, 14,15, LXX.


1-Matt xviii. 21, 22.
2 Deut. v. 12.
8 Lev. xxv. 10.


Who was angry with him for the murder,
and so of there being no help for him
either from earth or from heaven. There-
fore he said, ‘*It shall come to pass that
every one that findeth me shall slay me.”
Scripture proves his error in the words, ‘* Not
so;” z.e. thou shall not be slain. For to
men suffering punishment, death is a gain,
because it brings relief from their pain. But
thy life shall be prolonged, that thy punish-
ment may be made commensurate with thy
sins. Since then the word ἐκδικούμενον may
be understood in two senses; both the sin
for which vengeance was taken, and the man-
ner of the punishment, let us now examine
whether the criminal suffered a sevenfold
torment.

4. The seven sins of Cain have been
enumerated in what has been already said.
Now 1 ask if the punishments inflicted on him
were seven, and I state as follows. The
Lord enquired * Where is Abel thy brother?’
not because he wished for information, but
in order to give Cain an opportunity for re-
pentance, as is proved by the words them-
selves, for on his denial the Lord immediately
convicts him saying, ** The voice of thy
brother’s blood crieth unto me.” So the en-
quiry, ** Where is Abel thy brother? ” was
not made with a view to God’s information,
but to give Cain an opportunity of perceiving
his sin. But for God’s having visited him he
might have pleaded that he was left alone
and had had no opportunity given him for
repentance. Now the physician appeared
that the patient might flee to him for help.
Cain, however, not only fails to hide his
sore, but makes another one in adding the
lie to the murder. ‘*I know not. Am I my
brother’s keeper?”? Now from this point
begin to reckon the punishments. ** Cursed
is the ground for thy sake,” one punishment.
‘©T hou shalt ‘till the ground.” This is the
second punishment. Some secret necessity
was imposed upon him forcing him to the
tillage of the earth, so that it should never
be permitted him to take rest when he might
wish, but ever to suffer pain with the earth,
his enemy, which, by polluting it with his
brother’s blood, he had made accursed.
ς Thou shalt till the ground.” Terrible pun-
ishment, to live with those that hate one, to
have for a companion an enemy, an implaca-
ble foe. ‘* Thou shalt till the earth,” that
is, Thou shalt toil at the labours of the
field, never resting, never released from thy
work, day or night, bound down by secret
necessity which is harder than any savage
master, and continually urged on to labour.
‘*And it shall not yield unto thee her


208


strength.” Although the ceaseless toil had
some fruit, the labour itself were no little
torture to one forced never to relax it. But
the toil is ceaseless, and the labours at the
earth are fruitless (for ** she did not yield her
strength’’) and this fruitlessness of labour is
the third punishment. ‘* Groaning and trem-
bling shalt thou be on the earth.” Here two
more are added to the three; continual
groaning, and tremblings of the body, the
limbs being deprived of the steadiness that
comes of strength. Cain had madea bad use
of the strength of his body, and so its vigour
was destroyed, and it tottered and shook, and
it was hard for him to lift meat and drink to
his mouth, for after his impious conduct,
his wicked hand was _ no longer allowed to
minister to his body’s needs. Another pun-
ishment is that which Cain disclosed when
he said, ** Zhou hast driven me out from the


face of the earth, and from thy face shall 7


be hid.” What is the meaning of this driv-
ing out from the face of the earth? It means
deprivation of the benefits which are derived
from the earth. He was not transferred to
another place, but he was made a stranger to
all the good things of earth. ‘ And from
thy face shall [be hid.”. The heaviest pun-
ishment for men of good heart is alienation
from God.
every one that findeth me shall slay me.”
He infers this from what has gone before.
Iam cast out of the earth, and hidden from


thy face, it remains for me to be slain of


every one. What says the Lord? JVof so.
But he puta mark upon him. This is the
seventh punishment, that the punishment
should not be hid, but that by a plain sign
proclamation should be made to all, that this
is the first doer of unholy deeds. To all who
reason rightly the heaviest of punishments
is shame. We have learned this also in the
case of the judgments, when ‘‘some ” shall
rise ‘* to everlasting life, and some to shame
and everlasting contempt.” 1

5, Your next question is of a kindred
character, concerning the words of Lamech
to his wives; ‘ 7 have slaina man to my
wounding, and a young man to my hurt:
ef Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly
Lamech seventy and sevenfold.”* Some
suppose that Cain was slain by Lamech, and
that he survived to this generation that he
might suffer a longer punishment. But this
is not the case. Lamech evidently com-
mitted two murders, from what he says
himself, ** I have slain a man and a young
man,’ the man to his wounding, and the


1 Dan. xii. 2. 2 Gen. iv. 23, 24.


** And tt shall come to pass that


If


BASIL.


young man to his hurt. There is a difference


between wounding and hurt.' And there is
a difference between a man and a young
man. ‘*If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold,
truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.” It is
right that I should undergo four hundred and
ninety punishments, if God’s judgment on
Cain was just, that his punishments should
be seven. Cain had not learned to murder
from another, and had never seen a murderer
undergoing punishment. But I, who had
before my eyes Cain groaning and trembling,
and the mightiness of the wrath of God,
was not made wiser by the example before
me. ~Wherefore I deserve to suffer four
hundred and ninety punishments. There are,
however, some who have gone so far as the
following explanation, which does not jar
with the doctrine of the Church; from Cain
to the flood, they say, seven generations
passed by, and the punishment was brought
on the whole earth, because sin was every-
where spread abroad. But the sin of
Lamech requires for its cure not a Flood,
but Him Who Himself takes away the sin
of the world.? Count the generations from
Adam to the coming of Christ, and you
will find, according to the genealogy of Luke,
that the Lord was born in the seventy-seventh.

Thus I have investigated this point to the
best of my ability, though I have passed by
matters therein that might be investigated,
for fear of prolonging my observations be-
yond the limits of my letter. But for your
intelligence little seeds are enough. ‘ Give
instruction,” it is said, “ὁ to a wise man, and
he will be yet wiser.”* ‘If a skilful man
hear a wise word he will commend it, and
add unto it.” *

6. About the words of Simeon to Mary,
there is no obscurity or variety of interpre-
tation. ‘**And Simeon blessed them, and
said unto Mary His mother, Behold, this
Child is set for the fall and rising again of
many in Israel; and for a sign which shall
be spoken against; (yea, a sword shall pierce
through thine own soul also,) that the
thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.” ®
Here I am astonished that, after passing by
the previous words as requiring no explana-
tion, you should enquire about the expres-
sion, ‘* Yea, a sword shall pierce through
thy own soul also.” To me the question,
how the same child can be for the fall and
rising again, and what is the sign that shall
be spoken against, does not seem less per-
plexing than the question how a sword shall
pierce through Mary’s heart.


8 Prov. ix.g. 5 Luke ii. 34, 385


“" 1LXX,. μώλωψ, Z.e. weal.
2 Peclus &xXalo.


2 John i. 29.


LEPEERS.


299


7. My view is, that the Lord is for falling
and rising again, not because some fall and
others rise again, but because in us the worst
falls and the better is set up. The advent!
of the Lord is destructive of our bodily aflec-
tions and it rouses the proper qualities of
the soul. As when Paul says, ** When I am
weak, then I am strong,” ἢ the same man is
weak and is strong, but he is weak in the
flesh and strong in the spirit. Thus the
Lord does not give to some occasions of
falling and to others occasions of rising.
Those who fall, fall from the station in which
they once were, but it is plain that the faith-
less man never stands, but is always dragged
along the ground with the serpent whom he
follows. He has then nowhere to fall from,
because he has already been cast down by
his unbelief. Wherefore the first boon is.
that he who stands in his sin should fall and
die, and then should live in righteousness
and rise, both of which graces our faith in
Christ confers onus. Let the worse fall
that the better may have opportunity to
rise. If fornication fall not, chastity does
not rise. Unless our unreason be crushed
our reason will not come to perfection. In
this sense he is for the fall and rising again
of many.


8. Lor a sign that shall be spoken
against. By a sign, we properly, under-


stand in Scripture a cross. Moses, it is said,
set the serpent ‘‘upon a pole.” * That is
upon across. Or else asign* is indicative of
something strange and obscure seen by the
simple but understood by the intelligent.
There is no cessation of controversy about
the Incarnation of the Lord; some assert-
ing that he assumed a body, and others that
his sojourn was bodiless; some that he had
a passible body, and others that he ful-
filled the bodily cconomy by a kind of
appearance. Some say that His body was
earthly, some that it was heavenly; some
that He pre-existed before the ages; some
that He took His beginning from Mary. It
is on this account that He is a sign that shall
be spoken against.

9. By a sword is meant the word which
tries and judges our thoughts, which pierces
even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit and of the joints and marrow, and is
a discerner of our thoughts.° Now every
soul in the hour of the Passion was subjected,
as it were, to a kind of searching. Accord-
ing to the word of the Lord it is said, ** All
ye shall be offended because of me.” ® Simeon
therefore prophesies about Mary herself, that


5 cof. Heb. iv. 12.
6 Matt. xxvi. 3.


3 Num. xxi. 8.
6 σήμειον, LXX.


1 ἐπιδάνεια.
22 Cor, xii. 10.


when standing by the cross, and beholding
what is being done, and hearing the voices,
after the witness of Gabriel, after her secret
knowledge of the divine conception, after the
great exhibition of miracles, she shall feel
about her soul a mighty tempest.1- The Lord
was bound to taste of death for every man —
to become a propitiation for the world and
to justify all men by His own blood. Even
thou thyself, who hast been taught from on
high the things concerning the Lord, shalt
be reached by some doubt. This is the
sword. ‘* That the thoughts of many hearts
may be revealed.” He indicates that after
the offence at the Cross of Christ a certain
swift healing shall come from the Lord to
the disciples and to Mary herself, confirming
their heart in faith in Him. In the same
way we saw Peter, after he had been
offended, holding more firmly to his faith in
Christ. What was human in him was
proved unsound, that the power of the Lord
might be shewn.


LETTER CCLXI.?


To the Sozopolitans.®


I HAVE received the letter which you, right
honourable brethren, have sent me concerning
the circumstances in which you are placed.
I thank the Lord that you have let me share
in the anxiety you feel as to your attention
to things needful and deserving of serious
heed. But I was distressed to hear that over
and above the disturbance brought on the
Churches by the Arians, and the confusion
caused by them in the definition of the faith,
there has appeared among you yet another
innovation, throwing the brotherhood into
great dejection, because, as you have in-
formed me, certain persons are uttering, in
the hearing of the faithful, novel and un-
familiar doctrines which they allege to be
deduced from the teaching of Scripture.
You write that there are men among you
who are trying to destroy the saving in-
carnation* of our Lord Jesus Christ, and,


1The Ben. note strongly objects to this slur upon the
constancy of the faith of the Blessed Virgin, and is sure that
St. Basil’s error will not be thus corrected without his own
concurrence. It supposes this interpretation of the passage in
question to be derived from Origen, Hom. xxvii. In Lucam,
and refers to a list of commentators who have followed him in
Petavius, De Incar. xiv. 1.

2 This letter is placed in 377. Fessler styles it ‘‘ celeber-
rima.’”? The Benedictine heading is ‘ Cum scripsissent
Basilio Sozopolitant nonnullos carnem celestem Christo
affingere et se ih humanos tn tpsam divinttatem conferre ;
breviter hunc errorem refellit; ac demonstrat nthil nobis
prodesse passtones Christi si non eandem ac nos carnem
habuit. Quod spectat ad affectus humanos, probat naturales
a Christo assumptos futsse, vittosos vero nequaquam.”

3 Sozopolis, or Suzupolis, in Pisidia (cf. Evagrius, Ast.
Ecc. iii. 33), has been supposed to be the ancient name of Sou-
zon, S. of Aglasoun, where ruins still exist. On its connexion
with Apollonia. cf. Hist. Geog. A.M. p. 400. = * οἰκονομίαν.


300


BASIL,


so far as they can, are overthrowing the
grace of the great mystery unrevealed from
everlasting, but manifested in His own times,
when the Lord, when He had gone through !
all things pertaining to the cure of the human
race, bestowed on all of us the boon of His
own sojourn among us. For He helped His
own creation, first through the patriarchs,
whose lives were set forth as examples and
rules to all willing to follow the footsteps of
the saints, and with zeal like theirs to reach
the perfection of good works. Next for
succour He gave the Law, ordaining it by
angels in the hand of Moses;* then the
prophets, foretelling the salvation to come;
judges, kings, and righteous men, doing great
works, with a mighty * hand. After all these
in the last days He was Himself manifested
in the flesh, ‘* made of a woman, made under
the law, to redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons.” 4

2. If, then, the sojourn of the Lord in
flesh has never taken place, the Redeemer °®
paid not the fine to death on our behalf, nor
through Himself destroyed death’s reign.
For if what was reigned over by death was
not that which was assumed by the Lord,
death would not have ceased working his
own ends, nor would the sufferings of the
God-bearing flesh have been made our gain;
He would not have killed sin in the flesh;
we who had died in Adam should not have
been made alive in Christ; the fallen to
pieces would not have been framed again;
the shattered would not have been set up
again; that which by the serpent’s trick
had been estranged from God would never
have been made once more His own. All
these boons are undone by those that assert
that it was with a heavenly body that the
Lord came among us. And if the God-
bearing flesh was not ordained to be assumed
of the lump of Adam, what need was there
of the Holy Virgin? But who has the
hardihood now once again to renew by the
help of sophistical arguments and, of course,
by scriptural evidence, that old dogma ® of
Valentinus, now long ago silenced? For
this impious doctrine of the seeming’ is no


1 Here the Ben, Ed. call attention to the fact that St. Basil
may by this word indicate the appearance of the Son to the
patriarchs before the Birth from the Virgin, and compares a
Similar statement in his Book Cont. Eunom.I1., as well as the
words of Clemens Alex. in the work Quis Dives Salvandus,
n.8, in which the Son is described as amd γενέσεως μέχρε TOU
σημείον THY ἀνθρωπότητα διατρέχων. 2 οὔ. Gal, 111. το.

8 κραταιᾷ With the ed. Par. seems to make better sense than
κρυφαίᾳ, which has better authority. 4 Gal. iv. 4, 5.

5 Λυτρωτής. cf. Acts vii. 35, where R.V. gives redeemer asa
marginal rendering. Λυτρωτής = payer of the λύτρον, which
is the means of release (λύω). The word is used of Moses in
the Acts in a looser sense than here of the Saviour.

6 On the use of dogma” for heretical opinion,


cf. De Sp.
S. note on § 66. 7 δόκησις. ἡ Ξ


novelty. It was started long ago by the
feeble-minded Valentinus, who, after tearing
off a few of the Apostle’s statements, con-
structed for himself this impious fabrication,
asserting that the Lord assumed the ‘+ form
of a servant,” ? and not the servant himself,
and that He was made in the ‘ likeness,”
but that actual manhood was not assumed by
Him. Similar sentiments are expressed by
these men who can only be pitied for bring-
ing new troubles upon you.?

3. As to the statement that human feel-
ings are transmitted to the actual Godhead,
it is one made by men who preserve no
order in their thoughts, and are ignorant
that there is a distinction between the feelings
of flesh, of flesh endowed with soul, and of
soul using a body.® It is the property of
flesh to undergo division, diminution, dis-
solution; of flesh endowed with soul to feel
weariness, pain, hunger, thirst, and to be
overcome by sleep; of soul using body to
feel grief, heaviness, anxiety, and such like.
Of these some are natural and necessary to
every living creature; others come of evil
will, and are superinduced because of life’s
lacking proper discipline and training for
virtue. Hence it is evident that our Lord
assumed the natural affections to establish
His real incarnation, and not by way of
semblance of incarnation, and that all the
affections derived from evil that besmirch
the purity of our life, He rejected as un-
worthy of His unsullied Godhead. It is on
this account that He is said to have been
‘¢ made in the likeness of flesh of sin;”’ 4
not, as these men hold, in likeness of flesh,
but of flesh of sin. It follows that He took
our flesh with its natural affections, but ** did
no sin.’?® Just as the death which is in
the flesh, transmitted to us through Adam,
was swallowed up by the Godhead, so was the
sin taken away by the righteousness which
is in Christ Jesus,° so that in the resurrection
we receive back the flesh neither liable to
death nor subject to sin. |

These, brethren, are the mysteries of the


MPhil, i. 7.

2On the Docetism of Valentinus vide Dr. Salmon in P).C.
Biog. i. 869. ‘* According to V. (Irenzus i. 7) our Lord’s
nature was fourfold: (1) He had a ψυχή or animal soul; (2) He
had a πνεῦμα or spiritual principle derived from Achamoth;
(3) He had a body, but nota material body, but a heavenly one.
. « « (4) The pre-existent Saviour descended on Him in the
form of a dove at His Baptism. When our Lord was brought
before Pilate, this Saviour as being incapable of suffering with-
drew His power;” (cf. the Gospel of Peter, ‘* The Lord cried,
saving, ‘ My Power, my Power, Thou hast left me.’ ᾽) ‘and the
spiritual part which was also impassible was likewise dis-
missed; the animal soul and the wonderfully contrived body
alone remaining to suffer, and to exhibit on the cross on earth
a representation of what had previously taken place on the
heavenly Stauros. It thus appears that Valentinus was only
partially docetic.”” But cf. Iren, v.1, 2, and iii. 22.

8 of, De Rp. 3.28 12. pp Fe δ Pets ii. 22.

4 Rom. viii. 3, R.V. marg. cf. Rom, v.12 ad jin,


LETTERS.


Church; these are the traditions of the
Fathers. Every man who fears the Lord,
and is awaiting God’s judgment, I charge
not to be carried away by various doctrines.
If any one teaches a different doctrine, and
refuses to accede to the sound words of the
faith, rejecting the oracles of the Spirit, and
making his own teaching of more authority
than the lessons of the Gospels, of such an
one beware. May the Lord grant that one
day we may meet, so that all that my argu-
ment has let slip I may supply when we
stand face to face! I have written little
when there was much to say, for I did not
like to go beyond my letter’s bounds. At
the same time I do not doubt that to all that
fear the Lord a brief reminder is enough.


ΤΕ 6CLxtit.'
To the Monk Urbicius.’


1. You have done well to write to me. You
have shewn how great is the fruit of charity.
Continue so to do. Do not think that, when
you write to me, you need offer excuses. I
recognise my own position, and I know that
by nature every man is of equal honour with
all the rest. Whatever excellence there is
in me is not of family, nor of superfluous
wealth, nor of physical condition; it comes
only of superiority in the fear of God.
What, then, hinders you from fearing the
Lord yet more, and so, in this respect, being
greater than I am? Write often to me, and
acquaint me with the condition of the
brotherhood with you. Tell me what mem-
bers of the Church in your parts are sound,
that I may know to whom I ought to write,
and in whom I may confide. I am told
that there are some who are endeavouring to
deprave the right doctrine of the Lord’s in-
carnation by perverse opinions, and I there-
fore call upon them through you to hold off
from those unreasonable views, which some
are reported to meto hold. I mean that
God Himself was turned into flesh; that He
did not assume, through the Holy Mary, the
nature’ of Adart but; in His own proper
Godhead, was changed into a material na-
tere.”

2. This absurd position can be easily
confuted. The blasphemy is its own con-
viction, and I therefore think that, for one
who fears the Lord, the mere reminder is
enough. If He was turned, then He was
changed. But far be it from me to say or
think such a thing, when God has declared,


3 φύραμα.
4 φύσις.


1 Placed in 377.
9 of. Letters cxxiii. and ccclxvi.


301


(41 am the Lord, I change not.”' More-
over, how could the benefit of the incarna-
tion be conveyed to us, unless our body,
joined to the Godhead, was made superior to
the dominion of death? If He was changed,
He no longer constituted a proper body, such
as subsisted after the combination with it of
the divine body.” But how, if all the nature
of the Only-begotten was changed, could
the incomprehensible Godhead be circum-
scribed within the limit of the mass of a
little body? JI am sure that no one who is
in his senses, and has the fear of God, is
suffering from this unsoundness. But the
report has reached me that some of your
company are afflicted with this mental in-
firmity, and I have therefore thought it neces-
sary, not to send youa mere formal greeting,
but to include in my letter something
which may even build up the souls of them
that fear the Lord. I therefore urge that
these errors receive ecclesiastical correction,
and that you abstain from communion with
the heretics. I know that we are deprived
of our liberty in Christ by indifference on
these points,


LETTER, CCLXIIE’


To the Westerns.


1. May the Lord God, in Whom we
have put our trust, give to each of you grace
sufficient to enable you to realize your hope,
in proportion to the joy wherewith you have
filled my heart, both by the letter which you
have sent me by the hands of the well-
beloved fellow-presbyters, and by the sym-
pathy which you have felt for me in my dis-
tress, like men who have put on bowels of
mercy,‘ as you have been described to me by
the presbyters afore-mentioned. Although
my wounds remain the same, nevertheless it
does bring alleviation to me that I should
have leeches at hand, able, should they find
an opportunity, to apply rapid remedies to
my hurts. Wherefore in return I salute you
by our beloved friends, and exhort you, if
the Lord puts it into your power to come to
me, not to hesitate to visit me. For part of
the greatest commandment is the visitation
of the sick. Butif the good God and wise


1 Mal. iii. 6.

2 The sentence in all the MSS. (except the Codex Cois/in.
II., which has ὁ τραπεὶς) begins ov τραπείς. The Ben. Ed
propose simply to substitute εἰ for ov, and render * S7 enim
conversus est, Ct Sadi constiturt corpus, quod videlicet
densata in ipsa deitate, substitit.”” I have endeavoured to
force a possible meaning on the Greek as it stands, though
παχυνθείσης more naturally refers to the unorthodox change
than to the orthodox conjunction, The original is ov yap
τραπεὶς οἰκεῖον ὑπεστήσατο σῶμα, ὅπερ, παχυνθείσης αὐτῷ τῆς
θεϊκῆς φύσεως, ὑ ὑπέστη.


8 Placed in 377. 4 Col, iii. 12,


302


BASIL.


Dispenser of our lives reserves this boon for
another season, at all events write to me
whatever it is proper for you to write for the
consolation of the oppressed and the lifting
up of those that are crushed down. Already
the Church has suffered many severe blows,
and great has been my affliction at them.
Nowhere is there expectation of succour,
unless the Lord sends us a remedy by you
who are his true servants.

2. The bold and shameless heresy of the
Arians, after being publicly cut off from the
body of the Church, still abides in its own
error, and does not do us much harm because
its impiety is notorious to all. Nevertheless,
men clad in sheep's clothing, and presenting
a mild and amiable appearance, but within
unsparingly ravaging Christ’s flocks, find it
easy to do hurt to the simpler ones, because
they came out from us. It is these who are
grievous and hard to guard against. It is
these that we implore your diligence to de-
nounce publicly to all the Churches of the
East; to the end that they may either turn
to the right way and join with us in genuine
alliance, or, if they abide in their perversity,
may keep their mischief to themselves alone,
and be unable to communicate their own
plague to their neighbours by unguarded com-
munion. Iam constrained to mention them
by name, in order that you may yourselves
recognise those who are stirring up disturb-
ance here, and may make them known to
our Churches. My own words are sus-
pected by most men, as though I had an ill
will towards them on account of some
private quarrel. You, however, have ail
the more credit with the people, in pro-
portion to the distance that separates your
home from theirs, besides the fact that
you are gifted with God’s grace to help
those who are distressed. If more of you
concur in uttering the same opinions, it is
clear that the number of those who have
expressed them will make it impossible to
oppose their acceptance.

3. One of those who have caused me
great sorrow is Eustathius of Sebasteia in
Lesser Armenia; formerly a disciple of
Arius, and a follower of him at the time
when he flourished in Alexandria, and con-
cocted his infamous blasphemies against the
Only-begotten, he was numbered among
his most faithful disciples. On his return to
his own country he submitted a confession of
the sound faith to Hermogenes, the very
blessed Bishop of Caesarea, who was on the
point of condemning him for false doctrine.
Under these circumstances he was ordained
by Hermogenes, and, on the death of that


bishop, hastened to Eusebius of Constanti-
nople, who himself yielded to none in the
energy of his support of the impious doc-
trine of Arius. From Constantinople he
was expelled for some reason or another,
returned to his own country and a second
time made his defence, attempting to conceal
his impious sentiments and cloking them
under a certain verbal orthodoxy. He no
sooner obtained the rank of bishop than he
straightway appeared writing an anathema
on the Homoousion in the Arians’ synod at
Ancyra.' From thence he went to Seleucia
and took part in the notorious measures of
his fellow heretics. At Constantinople he
assented a second time to the propositions of
the heretics. On being ejected from his
episcopate, on the ground of his former
deposition at Melitine,’ he hit upon a journey
to you as a means of restitution for himself.
What propositions were made to him by the
blessed bishop Liberius, and to what he
agreed, I am ignorant. I only know that
he brought a letter restoring him, which he
shewed to the synod at Tyana, and was
restored to his see. He is now defaming
the very creed for which he was received;
he is consorting with those who are anathe-
matizing the Homoousion, and is prime
leader of the heresy of the pneumatomachi.
As it is from the west that he derives his
power to injure the Churches, and uses the
authority given him by you to the overthrow
of the many, it is necessary that his correc-
tion should come from the same quarter, and
that a letter be sent to the Churches stating
on what terms he was received, and in what
manner he has changed his conduct and
nullifies the favour given him by the Fathers
at that time.

4. Next comes Apollinarius, who is
no less a cause of sorrow to the Churches.
With his facility of writing, and a tongue
ready to argue on any subject, he has filled
the world with his works, in disregard of
the advice of him who said, ‘* Beware of mak-
ing many books.” * In their multitude there
are certainly many errors. How is it possi-
ble to avoid sin in a multitude of words?‘
And the theological works of Apollinarius
are founded on Scriptural proof, but are
based on a human origin. He has written
about the resurrection, from a mythical, or
rather Jewish, point of view; urging that we
shall return again to the worship of the
Law, be circumcised, keep the Sabbath,
abstain from meats, offer sacrifices to God,
anathemas formulated against all who rejected it.


2 Before 359. Mansi iii. 291. 4cf, Prov. x. τὸν
8 Ecc, xii, 12, LXX. cf. Ep. ccxliv. p. 286.


— δὰ, ἢ;


“ιν νυ ee ee


a ΜΡ:


LEVEES:


303


worship in the Temple at Jerusalem, and be
altogether turned from Christians into Jews.
What could be more ridiculous? Or, rather,
what could be more contrary to the doctrines
of the Gospel? Then, further, he has made
such confusion among the brethren about
the incarnation, that few of his readers pre-
serve the old mark of true religion; but the
more part, in their eagerness for novelty,
have been diverted into investigations and
quarrelsome discussions of his unprofitable
treatises.

5. As to whether there is anything objec-
tionable about the conversation of Paulinus,
you can say yourselves. What distresses me
is that he should shew an inclination for the
doctrine of Marcellus, and unreservedly
admit his followers to communion. You
know, most honourable brethren, that the
reversal of all our hope is involved in the
doctrine of Marcellus, for it does not confess
the Son in His proper hypostasis, but repre-
sents Him as having been sent forth, and as
having again returned to Him from Whom
He came; neither does it admit that the
Paraclete has His own subsistence. It
follows that no one could be wrong in de-
claring this heresy to be all at variance with
Christianity, and in styling it a corrupt
Judaism. Of these things I implore you to
take due heed. ‘This will be the case if you
will consent to write to all the Churches of
the East that those who have perverted
these doctrines are in communion with you,
if they amend; but that if they contentiously
determine to abide by their innovations, you
are separated from them. I am myself well
aware, that it had been fitting for me to treat
of these matters, sitting in synod with you in
common deliberation. But this the time
does not allow. Delay is dangerous, for the
mischief they have caused has taken root.
I have therefore been constrained to dis-
patch these brethren, that you may learn
from them all that has been omitted in my
letter, and that they may rouse you to afford
the succour which we pray for to the Churches
of the East.


LEDs GOLA.’
To Barses, bishop of Edessa, tn extle.?


To Barses the bishop, truly God-beloved
and worthy of all reverence and honour,
Basil sends greeting in the Lord. As my


1 Placed in 377.

2 See Soz., H.£. vi. 34, who says that Barses, with Eulo-
ius, was not consecrated to any definite see. cf. also Theo-
oret, 7.E. iv. 16, where it is stated that his bed was preserved

at Aradus.


dear brother Domninus’ is setting out to
you, I gladly seize the opportunity of writ-
ing, and I greet you by him, praying the
holy God that we may be so long preserved
in this life as to be permitted to see you,
and to enjoy the good gifts which. you
possess. Only pray, I beseech you, that the
Lord may not deliver us for aye to the
enemies of the Cross of Christ, but that He
will keep His Churches, until the time of
that peace which the just Judge Himself
knows when He will bestow. For He will
bestow it. He will not always abandon us.
As He limited seventy years” for the period
of captivity for the Israelites in punishment
for their sins, so peradventure the Mighty
One, after giving us up for some appointed
time, will recall us once again, and will
restore us to the peace of the beginning —
unless indeed the apostasy is now nigh at
hand, and the events that have lately hap-
pened are the beginnings of the approach of
Antichrist. If this be so, pray that the good
Lord will either take away our afflictions, or
preserve us through our afflictions unvan-
quished. Through you I greet all those
who have been thought worthy to be associ-
ated with you. <All who are with me salute
your reverence. May you, by the grace of
the Holy One, be preserved to the Church
of God in good health, trusting in the Lord,
and praying for me.


LETTER. CCLXY.?


To Eulogius, Alexander, and Harpocration,
bishops of Egypt, in exile.


1. In all things we find that the provi-
dence exercised by our good God over His
Churches is mighty, and that thus the very
things which seem to be gloomy, and do not
turn out as we should like, are ordained for
the advantage of most, in the hidden wisdcm
of God, and in the unsearchable judgments
of His righteousness. Now the Lord has
removed you from the regions of Egypt, and
has brought you and established you in the
midst of Palestine, after the manner of Israel
of old, whom He carried away by captivity
into the land of the Assyrians, and there ex-
tinguished idolatry through the sojourn of
His saints. Now too we find the same
thing, when we observe that the Lord is
making known your struggle for the sake of
true religion, opening to you through your
exile the arena of your blessed contests, and


1Domninus was a not uncommon name, and there are
several mentioned about the same time, e.g. Nilus, E/p. iii.
43 and 144. 2 Jer. xxv. 12. Ὁ Placed in 357.


304


BASIL.


to all who see before them your noble con-
stancy, giving the boon of your good ex-
ample to lead them to salvation. By God’s
grace, I have heard of the correctness of
your faith, and of your zeal for the brethren,
and that it is in no careless or perfunctory
spirit that you provide what is profitable and
necessary for salvation, and that you support
all that conduces to the edification of the
Churches. I have therefore thought it right
that I should be brought into communion
with your goodness, and be united to your
reverences by letter. For these reasons I
have sent my very dear brother the deacon
Elpidius, who not only conveys my letter,
but is moreover fully qualified to announce
to you whatever may have been omitted in
my letter.

2. I have been specially moved to desire
union with you by the report of the zeal of
your reverences in the cause of orthodoxy.
The constancy of your hearts has been stirred
neither by multiplicity of books nor by
variety of ingenious arguments. You have,
on the contrary, recognised those who en-
deavoured to introduce innovations in oppo-
sition to the apostolic doctrines, and you
have refused to keep silence concerning the
mischief which they are causing. I have
in truth found great distress among all who
cleave to the peace of the Lord at the divers
innovations of Apollinarius of lLaodicea.
He has all the more distressed me from
the fact that he seemed at the beginning on
cur side. <A sufferer can in a certain sense
endure what comes to him from an open
enemy, even though it be exceedingly pain-
ful, as it is written, ‘*‘For it was not an
enemy that reproached me; then I could
have borne it.”' But it is intolerable, and
beyond the power of comfort, to be wronged
by aclose and sympathetic friend. Now that
very man whom I have expected to have at
my right hand in defence of the truth, Ihave
found in many ways hindering those who
are being saved, by seducing their minds and
drawing them away from direct doctrine.
What rash and hasty deed has he not done?
What ill considered and dangerous argu-
ment has he not risked? Is not all the
Church divided against herself, specially
since the day when men have been sent by
him to the Churches governed by orthodox
bishops, to rend them asunder and to set
up some peculiar and illegal service? Is
not ridicule brought upon the great mystery
of true religion when bishops go about with-
out people “and clergy, having nothing but


3. ῬΡδεῖν. τὰς


the mere name and title, and effecting
nothing for the advancement of the Gospel
of peace and salvation? Are not his dis-
courses about God full of impious doctrines,
the old impiety of the insane Sabellius being
now renewed by him in his writings? For
if the works which are current among the
Sebastenes are not the forgery of foes, and are
really his composition, he has reached a
height of impiety which cannot be surpassed,
in saying that Father, Son, and Spirit are
the same, and other dark pieces of irrever-
ence which I have declined even to hear,
praying that I may have nothing to do with
those who have uttered them. Does he not
confuse the doctrine of the incarnation?
Has not the economy of salvation been made
doubtful to the many on account of his dark
and cloudy speculations about it? To collect
them all, and refute them, requires long time
and much discussion. But where have the
promises of the Gospel been blunted and de-
stroyed as by his figments? So meanly and
poorly has he dared to explain the blessed
hope laid up for all who live according to
the Gospel of Christ, as to reduce it to mere
old wives’ fables and doctrines of Jews. He
proclaims the renewal of the Temple, the
observance of the worship of the Law, a
typical high priest over again after the real
High Priest, and a sacrifice for sins after the
Lamb of God Who taketh away the sin
of the world.' He preaches partial baptisms
after the one baptism, and the ashes of a
heifer sprinkling the Church which, through
its faith in Christ, has not spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing;? cleansing of leprosy
after the painless state of the resurrec-
tion; an offering of jealousy * when they
neither marry nor are given in marriage ;
shew-bread after the Bread from heaven;
burning lamps after the true Light. In a
word, if the law of the Commandments has
been done away with by dogmas, it is plain
that under these circumstances the aogmas
of Christ will be nullified by the injunc-
tions of the law.* At these things shame
and disgrace have covered my face,’ and
heavy grief hath filled my heart. Where-
fore, I beseech you, as skilful physicians,
and instructed how to discipline antagonists
with gentleness, to try and bring him back
to the right order of the Church, and to per-
suade him to despise the wordiness of his
own works; for he has proved the truth of
the proverb ‘in the multitude of words
there wanteth not sin.”° Put boldly before
ene ee 29 2 Eph. v. 27. 3 cf. Num. v. 15.
his passage shews in what sense St. Basil understands


δόγματα in Eph. ii. 15, and Col. ii. 14. cf note on p. 41.
5 cof. Ps. Ixiv. 7. 6 Prov. X. 19.


LETTERS:


305


him the doctrines of orthodoxy, in order that
his amendment may be published abroad,
and his repentance made known to his breth-
ren.

3. It is also desirable that I should re-
mind your reverence about the followers of
Marcellus, in order that you may decide
nothing in their case rashly or inconsider-
ately. On account of his impious doctrines
he has gone out from the Church.’ It is
therefore necessary that his followers should
only be received into communion on condi-
tion that they anathematize that heresy, in
order that those who are united to me
through you may be acccpted by all the
brethren. And now most men are moved
to no small grief on hearing that you have
both received them and admitted them to
ecclesiastical communion on their coming
to your excellency. Nevertheless you ought
to have known that by God’s grace you do
not stand alone in the East, but have many
in communion with you, who vindicate the
orthodoxy of the Fathers, and who put
forth the pious doctrine of the Faith at
Nicea. The Westerns also all agree with
you and with me, whose exposition of the
Faith I have received and keep with me,
assenting to their sound doctrine. You
ought, then, to have satisfied all who are in
agreement with you, that the action which
is being taken may be ratified by the general
consent, and that peace may not be broken
by the acceptance of some while others are
kept apart. Thus you ought to have at the
Same time seriously and gently taken coun-
sel about matters which are of importance
to all the Churches throughout the world.
Praise is not due to him who hastily deter-
mines any point, but rather to him who


1 Here the Ben. note is Mirum 7d videtur ac prima specie
vix credibile, Marcellum ob imptos errores ex ecclesia extisse.
Nam §. Athanastus suspectum illum quidem, sed tamen per
gatium habuit, teste Epiphanio, Heres. \xxii. p. 837. 7nC
wWlius discipuli communicatorias beatissimt pape Athanasti
litteras ostenderunt confessoribus ig yptiis, ibid. p.843. Tes-
tatur idem Epitphantus varia esse Catholicorum de Marcello
judicia, alits eum accusantibus, alits defendentibus, p. 834.
Paulinus ejus discthulos sine discrimine reciptebat, ut in
superiore epistola vidimus. Ipse Basilius in epist. 69 quert-
tur quod eum Ecclesia Romana in communionem ab initio sus-
cepisset. Quomodo ergo extise dicttur ex Ecclesta qui tot habutt
communicatores ? Sed tamen S. Basilii testimontum cum sua
sponte magni est momentt (non entm ut tn dijudtcandts Mar-
cellt scriptis, tta in ejusmodi farto proclive fult errare), tum
etiam hoc argumento confirmatur quod Athanastus extremts
vite su@ annis Marcellum a communione sua removertt.
Neque enim, δ΄ semper cum eo communicasset Athanasius,
opus habuissent illius discipuli confessione fidet ad tmpetran-

am confessorum Ligyptiorum communionem: nec Petrus
Athanasii successor canones violatos, concessa tllis commu-
nione, quereretur,ut videmus in epistola sequenti,si Agyptum
inter ac Marcellum ejusque clerum et plebem non fulsset rupta
communio. Videtur ergo Marcellus sub finem vite aliquid
peccasse, quod Athanasium ab ejus communtone discedere
cogeret : et cum jamdudum a tota fere ortente damnatus esset,
amissa Athanasit communione, que unicum fere illius refu-
gium erat, desertus ab omnibus vidert deburt, nec et nova
tonominia notato prodesse poterat concessa olim a Romana

ecclesia communtio.


rules every detail firmly and unalterably, so
that when his judgment is enquired into,
even ata later time, it may be the more es-
teemed. This is the man who is accepta-
ble both to God and man as one who guides
his words with discretion.’ Thus I have
addressed your reverence in such terms as
are possible in a letter. May the Lord grant
that one day we may meet, that so, after
arranging everything together with you for
the government of the Churches, I may
with you receive the reward prepared by
the righteous Judge for faithful and wise
stewards. In the mean time be so good as
to let me know with what intention you
have received the followers of Marcellus,
knowing this, that even if you secure every-
thing, so far as you yourselves are con-
cerned, you ought not to deal with a matter
of such importance on your own sole respon-
sibility. It is further necessary that the
Westerns, and those who are in communion
with them in the East, should concur in the
restoration of these men.


LET COLxXy i
To Petrus, bishop of Alexandria?


I. You have very properly rebuked me,
and in a manner becoming ἃ spiritual
brother who has been taught genuine love
by the Lord, because I am not giving you
exact and detailed information of all that is
going on here, for it is both your part to be
interested in what concerns me, and mine to
tell you all that concerns myself. But I
must tell you, right honourable and well-
belaved brother, that our continuous afflic-
tions, and this mighty agitation which is now
shaking the Churches, result in my taking all
that is happening as a matter of course. Just
as in smithies where men whose ears are
deafened get accustomed to the sound, so by
the frequency of the strange tidings that
reach me I have now grown accustomed to
be undisturbed and undismayed at extraor-
dinary events. So the policy which has
been for a long time pursued by the Arians
to the detriment of the Church, although
their achievements have been many and
great and noised abroad through all the
world, has nevertheless been endurable to
me, because of their being the work of open
foes and enemies of the word of truth. It
is when these men do something unusual
that I am astonished, not when they attempt
something great and audacious against


1 Ps... exit, 5. 8 cf, Letter cxxXiii. p. 200.


2 Placed in 377.


306


BASIL.


true religion. But I am_ grieved and
troubled at what is being done by men
who feel and think with me. Yet their
doings are so frequent and so constantly re-
ported to me, that even they do not appear
surprising. So it comes about that I was
not agitated at the recent disorderly pro-
ceedings, partly because I knew perfectly
well that common report would carry them
to you without my help, and partly because
I preferred to wait for somebody else to
give you disagreeable news. And _ yet,
further, I did not think it reasonable that I
should show indignation at such proceed-
ings, as though I were annoyed at suffer-
ing a slight. To the actual agents in the
matter I have written in becoming terms,
exhorting them, because of the dissension
arising among some of the brethren there,
not to fall away from charity, but to wait
for the matter to be set right by those who
have authority to remedy disorders in due
ecclesiastical form. That you should have
so acted, stirred by honourable and becom-
ing motives, calls for my commendation,
and moves my gratitude to the Lord that
there remains preserved in you a relic of
the ancient discipline, and that the Church
has not lost her own might in my persecu-
tion. The canons have not suffered perse-
cution as well as I. Though importuned
again by the Galatians, I was never able to
give them an answer, because I waited for
yyour decision. Now, if the Lord so will,
‘and they will consent to listen to me, I hope
ithat I shall be able to bring the people to
‘tthe Church. It cannot then be cast in my
teeth that I have gone over to the Marcel-
lians, and they on the contrary will become
limbs of the body of the Church of Christ.
Thus the disgrace caused by heresy will be
made to disappear by the method I adopt,
and I shall escape the opprobrium of hav-
ing gone over to them.

z. I have also been grieved by our
brother Dorotheus, because, as he has him-
self written, he has not gently and mildly
reported everything to your excellency. I
set this down to the difficulty of the times.
I seem to be deprived by my sins of all
success in my undertakings, if indeed the
best of my brethren are proved ill-disposed
and incompetent, by their failure to perform
their duties in accordance with my wishes.
On his return Dorotheus reported to me the
conversation which he had had with your
excellency in the presence of the very vener-
able bishop Damasus, and he caused me
distress by saying that our God-beloved
‘brethren and fellow-ministers, Meletius and


Eusebius, had been reckoned among the
Ariomaniacs.* If their orthodoxy were
established by nothing else, the attacks made
upon them by the Arians are, to the minds
of all right thinking people, no small proof
of their rectitude. Even your participation
with them in sufferings endured for Christ’s
sake ought to unite your reverence to them
in love. Be assured of this, right honour-
able sir, that there is no word of orthodoxy
which has not been proclaimed by these
men with all boldness. God is my witness.
I have heard them myself. I should not
certainly have now admitted them to com-
munion, if I had caught them tripping in
the faith. But, if it seem good to you, let
us leave the past alone. Let us make a
peaceful start for the future. For we have
need one of another in the fellowship of the
members, and specially now, when the
Churches of the East are looking to us, and
will take your agreement as a pledge of
strength and consolidation. If, on the other
hand, they perceive that you are in a state
of mutual suspicion, they will drop their
hands, and slacken in their resistance to the
enemies of the faith.”


ΤΕ CCLAVE
To Barses, bishop of Edessa, in exile.


For the sake of the affection which I
entertain for you, I long to be with you, to
embrace you, my dear friend, in person, and
to glorify the Lord Who is magnified in
you, and has made your honourable old age
renowned among all them that fear Him
throughout the world. But severe sickness
afflicts me, and to a greater degree than I
can express in words, 1 am weighed down
by the care of the Churches. I am not my
own master, to go whither I will, and to
visit whom I will. Therefore I am trying
to satisfy the longing I have for the good
gifts in you by writing to you, and I be-
seech your reverence to pray for me and for
the Church, that the Lord may grant to me
to pass the remaining days or hours of my
sojourn here without offence. May He permit
me to see the peace of His Churches. Of
your fellow-ministers and fellow-athletes may
[ hear all that I pray for, and of yourself that
you are granted sucha lot as the people under
bius (of Samosata) and Meletius was monstrous, and remarks
on the delicacy with which Basil approaches it, without
directly charging Petrus, from whom it must have come, witlt
the slander involved.

2 One MS. contains a note to the effect that this letter was
never sent. Maran (Vit. Bas. xxxvii.) thinks the internal


evidence is in favour of its having been delivered.
3 Placed in 377, or in the beginning of 378.


:
ὃ


LEEPER.


307


you seek for by day and by night from the
Lord of righteousness. I have not written
often, not even so often as I ought, but I
have written to your reverence. Possibly
the brethren to whom I committed my
greetings were not able to preserve them.
But now that I have found some of my
brethren travelling to your excellency, I
have readily entrusted my letter to them,
and I have sent some messages which I beg
you to receive from my humility without
disdain, and to bless me after the manner of
the patriarch Isaac.’ I have been much oc-
cupied, and have had my mind drowned in
a multiplicity of cares. So it may well be
that I have omitted something which I ought
to have said. If so, do not reckon it against
me; and do not be grieved. Act in all
things up to your own high character, that
I, like every one else, may enjoy the fruit of
your virtue. May you be granted to me and
to the Church, in good health, rejoicing in
the Lord, praying for me.


LETTER CCLXVIII.?


To Eusebius, in exile.


EVEN in our time the Lord has taught us,
by protecting with His great and powerful
hand the life of your holiness, that He does
not abandon His holy ones. I reckon your
case to be almost like that of the saint re-
maining unhurt in the belly of the monster
of the deep, or that of the men who feared
the Lord, living unscathed in the fierce fire.
For though the war is round about you on
every side, He, as I hear, has kept you un-
harmed. May the mighty God keep you, if
I live longer, to fulfil my earnest prayer that
I may see you! If not forme, may He keep
you for the rest, who wait for your return as
they might for their own salvation. I am
persuaded that the Lord in His loving-kind-
ness will give heed to the tears of the
Churches, and to the sighs which all are
heaving over you, and will preserve you in
life until He grant the prayer of all who
night and day are praying to Him. Of all
the measures taken against you, up to the
arrival of our beloved brother Libanius the
deacon,’ I have been sufficiently informed
by him while on his way. I am anxious to
learn what happened afterwards. I hear
that in the meanwhile still greater troubles
have occurred where you are ; about all this,
sooner if possible, but, if not, at least by our

1 Gen. xxvii. 27. 2 Placed in 378.


3 To be distinguished from Libanius the bishop, p. 177, and
Libanius the professor, mentioned later.


reverend brother Paul the presbyter, on his
return, may I learn, as I pray that I may,
that your life is preserved sate and sound.
But on account of the report that all the
roads are infested with thieves and deserters,’
[ have been afraid to entrust anything to the
brother’s keeping, for fear of causing his
death. Ifthe Lord grant a little quiet, (as I
am told of the coming of the army), I will
try to send you one of my own men, to visit
you, to bring me back news of everything
about you.


LETTER CCLXIX.’


To the wife of Arintheus, the General.
| Consolatory. ἡ


1. Ir had been only proper, and due to
your affection, that I should have been on
the spot, and have taken part in the present
occurrences. Thus I might have at once
assuaged my own sorrow, and given some
consolation to your excellency. But my
body will no longer endure long journeys,
and so I am driven to approach you by
letter, that I seem not to count what has
happened as altogether of no interest to me.
Who has not mourned for that man? Who
is so stony of heart as not to have shed a
warm tear over him? I especially have been
filled with mourning at the thought of all the
marks of respect which I have received from
him, and of the general protection which
he has extended to the Churches of God.
Nevertheless, I have bethought me that he
was human, and had done the work he had
to do in this life, and now in the appointed
time has been taken back again by God Who
ordains our lots. All this, I beseech you, in
your wisdom, to take to heart, and to meet
the event with meekness, and, so far as is
possible, to endure your loss with moderation.
Time may be able to soothe your heart, and
allow the approach of reason. At the same
time your great love for your husband, and
your goodness to all, lead me to fear that,
from the very simplicity of your character,
the wound of your grief may pierce you
deeply, and that you may give yourself uo
entirely to your feelings. The teaching of
Scripture is always useful, and specially at
times like this. Remember, then, the sen-
tence passed by our Creator. By it all we
who are dust shall return to dust.* No one
is so great as to be superior to dissolution.

2. Your admirable husband was a good
and great man, and his bodily strength


1 Δησερόρων, Or Δεσερτόρων, the accepted reading, is a curi-

ous Latinism for the Greek ἀὐτόμολοι. Eusebius was in exile

in Thrace, and there now the Goths were closing round Valens.
2 Placed in 378. 3 Gen. iii. 1y.


308


; BASIL.


rivalled the virtues of his soul. He was un-
surpassed, I must own, in both respects. But
he was human, and he is dead; like Adam,
like Abel, like Noah, like Abraham, like
Moses, or any one else of like nature that
you can name. Let us not then complain
because he has been taken from us. Let us
rather thank Him, who joined us to him,
that we dwelt with him from the beginning.
To lose a husband is a lot which you share
with other women; but to have been united
to such a husband is a boast which I do not
think any other woman can make. In truth
our Creator fashioned that man for us as a
model of what human nature ought to be.
All eyes were attracted towards him, and
every tongue told of his deeds. Painters
and sculptors fell short of his excellence, and
historians, when they tell the story of his
achievements in war, seem to fall into the
region of the mythical and the incredible.
Thus it has come about that most men have
not even been able to give credit to the re-
port conveying the sad tidings, or to accept
the truth of the news that Arinthzeus is dead.
Nevertheless Arintheus has suffered what
will happen to heaven and to sun and to
earth. He has died a bright death; not
bowed down by old age; without losing one
whit of his honour; great in this life; great
in the life to come; deprived of nothing of
his present splendour in view of the glory
hoped for, because he washed away all the


stain of his soul, in the very moment of:


his departure hence, in the laver of regenera-
tion. That you should have arranged and
joined in this rite is cause of supreme conso-
lation. Turn now your thoughts from the
present to the future, that you may be wortiy
through good works to obtain a place of rest
like his. Spare an aged mother; spare a
tender daughter, to whom you are now the
sole comfort. Be an example of fortitude to
other women, and so regulate your grief that
you may neither eject it from your heart, nor
be overwhelmed by your distress. Ever
keep your eyes fixed on the great reward of
patience, promised, as the requital of the
deeds of this life, by our Lord Jesus Christ.’


LET eR sCCEA xX?
Without Address.


I am distressed to find that you are by no
means indignant at the sins forbidden, and


Concerning Raptus.”


1¢f, Ep. clxxix and Theod., #. £. iv. 30.

2 Placed after 374.

3 On this subject see before Letters cxcix. and ccxvii. pp. 238
and 256. See Preb. Meyrick in D.C.A. ii. 1102: “ It means
not exactly the same as our word ravishment, but the violent


that you seem incapable of understanding,
how this rapéws, which has been committed,
is an act of unlawfulness and_ tyranny
against society and human nature, and an
outrage on free men. Iam sure that if you
had all been of one mind in this matter, there
would have been nothing to prevent this bad
custom from being long ago driven out of
your country. Do thou at the present time
shew the zeal of a Christian man, and be
moved as the wrong deserves. Wherever you
find the girl, insist on taking her away, and
restore her to her parents, shut out the man
from the prayers, and make him excommu-
nicate. His accomplices, according to the
canon’ which I have already put forth, cut
off, with all their household, from the
prayers. The village which received the
girl after the abduction, and kept her, or
even fought against her restitution, shut
out with all its inhabitants from the prayers ;
to the end that all may know that we regard
the ravisher as a common foe, like a snake
or any other wild beast, and so hunt him
out, and help those whom he has wronged.


LETTER ΓΙΣ


To Eusebius,? my comrade, to recommend Cyri-
acus the presbyter.


AT once and in haste, after your de-
parture, I came to the town. Why need I
tell a man not needing to be told, because he
knows by experience, how distressed 1 was
not to find you? How delightful it would
have been to me to see once more the ex-
cellent Eusebius, to embrace him, to travel
once again in memory to our young days,
and to be reminded of old times when for
both of us there was one home, one hearth,
the same schoolmaster, the same leisure,
the same work, the same treats, the same
hardships, and everything shared in com-
mon! What do you think I would not have
given to recall all this by actually meeting
you, torid me of the heavy weight of my
old age, and to seem to be turned from an
old man into a lad again? But I have lost
this pleasure. At least of the privilege of
meeting your excellency in correspondence,
removal of awoman to a place where her actions are no longer
tree, for the sake of inducing her or compelling her to marry.
ig By some rvaptus is distinguished into the two classes of
raptus seductionis and raptus violentia.” cf. Cod. Theod,
ix. tif. xxiv. egg. 1,2, and Cod. Fustin. ix.-xiii. leg.1 Corp.
Juris. ii. 832.

1 κήρυγμα. The Ben. note is no doubt right in understand-
ing the word not to refer to any decree on this particular case,
but to Basil’s general rule in Canon xxx. cf. p. 239. On the use
of κήουγμα by Basil, see note on p. 41.

2 Placed at the end of Basil’s life.


3 Apparently a schoolfellow of Basil, not to be identified
with any of the others of the name.


LEVIS:


309


and of consoling myself by the best means
at my disposal, I am not deprived. I am
so fortunate as to meet the very rever-
end presbyter Cyriacus. JI am ashamed to
recommend him to you, and to make him,
through me, your own, lest I seem to be
_ performing a superfluous task in offering to
you what you already possess and value
as yourown. But it is my duty to witness
to the truth, and to give the best boons 1
have to those who are spiritually united to
me. I think that the man’s blamelessness in
his sacred position is well known to you;
but I confirm it, for I do not know that any
charge is brought against him by those who
do not fear the Lord and are laying their
hands upon all. Even if they had done
anything of the kind, the man would not
have been unworthy, for the enemies of the
Lord rather vindicate the orders of those
whom they attack than deprive them of
any of the grace given them by the Spirit.
However, as I said, nothing has even been
thought of against the man. Be so good
then as to look upon him as a blameless
presbyter, in union with me, and worthy of
all reverence. Thus will you benefit your-
self and gratify me.


LETTER CCLXXII.


To Sophronius the magister officiorum?


1. It has been reported to me by Actiacus
the deacon, that certain men have moved
you to anger against me, by falsely stating me
to be ill-disposed towards your excellency.
I cannot be astonished at a man in your posi-
tion being followed by certain sycophants.
High position seems to be in some way
naturally attended by miserable hangers-on
of this kind. Destitute as they are of any
good quality of their own whereby they may
be known, they endeavour to recommend
themselves by means of other people’s ills.
Peradventure, just as mildew is a blight
which grows in corn, 80 flattery steal-
ing upon friendship is a blight of friend-
ship. So, as I said, I am by no means
astonished that these men should buzz about
your bright and distinguished hearth, as
drones do about the hives. But what has
moved my wonderment, and has seemed
altogether astounding, is that a man like
yourself, specially distinguished by the
seriousness of your character, should have
been induced to give both your ears to these
people and to accept their calumny against


1 Written in the last years of Basil’s life.
2 cf. DP. 134, 0.


me. From my youth up to this my old
age 1 have telt affection for many men,
but I am not aware that I have ever felt
greater affection for any one than for your
excellency. Even had not my reason in-
duced me to regard a man of such a charac-
ter, our intimacy from boyhood would have
sufficed to attach me to your soul. You
know yourself how much custom has to do
with friendship. Pardon my deficiency, if I
can show nothing worthy of this preference.
You will not ask some deed from me in
proof of my good will; you will be satisfied
with a temper of mind which assuredly
prays for you that you may have all that is
best. May your fortunes never fall so low,
as that you should need the aid of any one
so insignificant as myself!

2. How then was I likely to say anything
against you, or to take any action in the
matter of Memnonius? These points were
reported to me by the deacon. How could
I put the wealth of Hymetius before the
friendship of one so prodigal of his sub-


stance as you are? There is no truth in
any of these things. I have neither said
nor done anything against you. Possibly


some ground may have been given for some
of the lies that are being told, by my remark-
ing to some of those who are causing dis-
turbance, ‘*‘‘If the man has determined to
accomplish what he has in mind, then,
whether you make disturbance or not, what
he means to be done will certainly be done.
You will speak, or hold your tongues; it
will make no difference. If he changes his
mind, beware how you defame my friend’s
honourable name. Do not, under the pre-
tence of zeal in your patron’s cause, attempt
to make some personal profit out of your
attempts to threaten and alarm.” As to that
person’s making his will, 1 have never said
one word, great or small, directly or in-
directly, about the matter.

2. You must not refuse to believe what
I say, unless you regard me as quite a
desperate character, who thinks nothing of
the great sin of lying. Put away all sus-
picion of me in relation to the business, and
for the future reckon my affection for you as
beyond the reach of all calumny. Imitate
Alexander, who received a letter, saying
that his physician was plotting his death, at
the very moment when he was just about to
drink his medicine, and was so far from
believing the slanderer that he at one and
the same time read the letter and drank the
draught.’ I refuse to admit that I am in any

1 Plut., Alex.


310


BASIL.


way inferior to the men who have been
famous for their friendship, for I have never
been detected in any breach of mine; and,
besides this, I have received from my God
the commandment of love, and owe you love
not only as part of mankind in general,
but because I recognise you individually as a
benefactor both of my country and of myself.


LEER CCLXXi
Without address.


I Am sure that your excellency loves me
well enough to regard all that concerns me
as concerning you. ‘Therefore I commend
to your great kindness and high consideration
my very reverend brother Hera, whom I do
not merely call brother by any conventional
phrase, but because of his boundless affec-
tion. I beseech you to regard him as
though he were nearly connected with your-
self, and, so far as you can, to give him
your protection in the matters in which he
requires your generous and thoughtful aid.
I shall then have this one more kindness to
reckon in addition to the many which I have
already received at your hands.


Concerning Hera.


LETTER ‘CCLEAXIV~


To Himerius, the master.


TuaT my friendship and affection for the
very reverend brother Hera began when I
was quite a boy, and has, by God’s grace,
continued up to my old age, no one knows
better than yourself. For the Lord granted
me the affection of your excellency at about
the same time that He allowed me to be-
come acquainted with Hera. He now needs
your patronage, and I therefore beseech and
supplicate you to do a favour for the sake
of our old affection, and to heed the ne-
cessity under which we now lie. I beg
you to make his cause your own, that he
may need no other protection, but may re-
turn to me, successful in all that he is pray-
ing for. Then to the many kindnesses
which I have received at your hands I shall
be able to add yet this one more. I could
not claim any favour more important to
myself, or one more nearly touching my own
interests.


DETER COLXXyV??
Without address.


You have anticipated my entreaties in


Concerning Hera.


1 Written in the last years of Basil’s life.
2 Of the same time as the preceding.
8 Placed at the same time as the preceding.


>


your affection for my very reverend brother
Hera, and you have been better to him than
I could have prayed for you to be in the
abundant honour which you have shewn
him, and the protection which you have
extended to him on every occasion. But I
cannot allow his affairs to go unnoticed by a
word, and I must beseech your excellency
that for my sake you will add something to
the interest you have shewn in him, and
will send him back to his own country vic-
torious over the revilings of his enemies.
Now many are trying to insult the peaceful-
ness of his life, and he is not beyond the
reach of envy’s shafts. Against his foes we
shall find one sure means of safety, if you
will consent to extend your protection over
him.


LETTER CCUREVIA
To the great Harmatius.


THE common law of human nature makes
elders fathers to youngsters, and the special
peculiar law of us Christians puts us old
men in the place of parents to the younger.
Do not, then, think that I am impertinent or
shew myself indefensibly meddlesome, if I
plead with you on behalf of your son. In
other respects I think it only right that you
should exact obedience from him; for, so
far as his body is concerned, he is subject to
you, both by the law of nature, and by the
civil law under which we live. His soul,
however, is derived from a diviner source,
and may properly be held to be subject to
another authority. The debts which it owes
to God have a higher claim than any others.
Since, then, he has preferred the God of us
Christians, the true God, to your many gods
which are worshipped by the help of
material symbols, be not angry with him.
Rather admire his noble firmness of soul, in
sacrificing the fear and respect due to his
father to close conjunction with God, through
true knowledge and a life of virtue. Nature
herself will move you, as well as your in-
variable gentleness and kindliness of disposi-
tion, not to allow yourself to feel angry with
him even to a small extent. And I am sure
that you will not set my mediation at naught,
—or rather, I should say, the mediation of
your townsmen of which I am the exponent.
They all love you so well, and pray so
earnestly for all blessings for you, that they
suppose that in you they have welcomed a
Christian too. So overjoyed have they been
at the report which has suddenly reached the
town.


1 Placed in the last years of Basil’s life.


LETIERS.


311


ΓΕ CCLXXVIT}
To the learned Maximus.


Tue excellent Theotecnus has given mean
account of your highness, whereby he has
inspired me with a longing for your acquaint-
ance, so clearly do his words delineate the
character of your mind. He has enkindled
in me so ardent an affection for you, that
were it not that Lam weighed down with
age, that I am the victim of a congenital ail-
ment, that 1 am bound hand and foot by the
numberless cares of the Church, nothing
would have hindered my coming to you.
For indeed it is no small gain that a member
of a great house, a man of illustrious lineage,
in adopting the life of the gospel, should
bridle the propensities of youth by reflection,
and subject to reason the affections of the
flesh; should display a humility consistent
with his Christian profession, bethinking
himself, as is his duty, whence he is come
and whither he is going. For it is this con-
sideration of our nature that reduces the
swelling of the mind, and banishes all boast-
fulness and arrogance. Ina word it renders
one a disciple of our Lord, Who said, ‘+ Learn
of me, for Iam meek and lowly in heart.” ?
And in truth, very dear son, the only thing
that deserves our exertions and praises is our
everlasting welfare; and this is the honour
that comes from God.

Human affairs are fainter than a shadow;
more deceitful than a dream. Youth fades
more quickly than the flowers of spring; our
beauty wastes with age or sickness. Riches
are uncertain; glory is fickle. The pursuit
of arts and sciences is bounded by the present
life; the charm of eloquence, which all covet,
reaches but the ear: whereas the practice of
virtue is a precious possession for its owner,
a delightful spectacle for all who witness
it. Make this your study; so will you be
worthy of the good things promised by the
Lord.

But a recital of the means whereby to
make the acquisition, and secure the enjoy-
ment of these blessings, lies beyond the in-
tention of this present letter. Thus much
however, after what I heard from my brother
Theotecnus, it occurred to me to write to
you. I pray that he may always speak the
truth, especially in his accounts of you; that
the Lord may be the more glorified in you,
abounding as you do in the most precious
fruits of piety, although derived from a
foreign root.


1 Placed at the end of Basil’s life.
2 Matt. xi. 29.


ἘΣ “CCLEXY HI,”


To Valerianus.


I DESIRED, when in Orphanene,’ to see
your excellency ; I had also hoped that while
you were living at Corsagzena, there would
have been nothing to hinder your coming to
me ata synod which I had expected to hold
at Attagzena; since, however, I failed to hold
it, my desire was to see you in the hill-coun-
try; for here again Evesus,* being in that
neighbourhood, held out hopes of our meet-
ing. But since I have been disappointed
on both occasions, I determined to write and
beg that you would deign to visit me; for I
think it is but right and proper that the
young man should come to the old. Fur-
thermore, at our meeting, I would make you
a tender of my advice, touching your nego-
tiations with ,certain at Cesarea: a right
conclusion of the matter calls for my inter-
vention. If agreeable then, do not be back-
ward in coming to me.


LETTER CCL
To Modestus the Prefect.


ALTHOUGH so numerous are my letters,
conveyed to your excellency by as many
bearers, yet, having regard to the especial
honour you have shewn me, I cannot think
that their large number causes you any
annoyance.

I do not hesitate therefore to entrust to this
brother the accompanying letter: I know
that he will meet with all that he wishes,
and that you will count me but as a bene-
factor in furnishing occasion for the gratifi-
cation of your kind inclinations. He craves
your advocacy. His cause he will explain
in person, if you but deign to regard him
with a favourable eye. and embolden him to
speak freely in the presence of so august an
atithority. Accept my assurance that any
kindness shewn to him, I shall regard as per-
sonal to myself. His special reason for leav-
ing Tyana and coming to me was the high
value he attached to the presentation of a
letter written by myself in support of his ap-
plication. That he may not be disappointed
of his hope ; that I may continue in the enjoy-
ment of your consideration ; that your interest
in all that is good may, in this present matter,
find scope for its full exercise —are the


1 Placed in the episcopate. ‘
2A districtin Armenia Minor. Ramsay, Hist. Geog. A.M.
14.
: Ξ cf. Ep. ccli. p. 291. Euassai or Evesus is about fifty miles
north of Cesarea.
4 Placed in the episcopate.


312


ΒΆΘΙΙΙ


grounds on which I crave a gracious recep-
tion for him, and a place amongst those
neatest to you.


LETTER CCLXXX’
To Modestus the Prefect.


I reEL my boldness in pressing my suit by
letter upon a man in your position; still the
honour that you have paid me in the past
has banished all my scruples. Accordingly
I write with confidence.

My plea is fora relative of mine, a man
worthy of respect for his integrity. He is
the bearer of this letter, and he stands to me
in the place of ason. Your favour isall that
he requires for the fulfilment of his wishes.
Deign therefore to receive, at the hands of
the aforesaid bearer, my letter in furtherance
of his plea. I pray you to give him an op-
portunity of explaining his affairs at an in-
terview with those in a position to help him.
So by your direction shall he quickly obtain
his desires; while I shall have occasion for
boasting that by God’s favour I have found a
champion who regards the entreaties of my
friends as personal claims to his protection.


LETTER “GCLXXXI?
To Modestus the Prefect.


I am mindful of the great honour I
received in the encouragement you gave
me, along with others, to address vour
excellency. I avail myself of the privilege
and the enjoyment of your gracious favour.

I congratulate myself upon having such
a correspondent, as also upon the oppor-
tunity afforded your excellency of conferring
an honour on me by your reply.

I claim your clemency on behalf of Hella-
dius my special friend. I pray that he may
be relieved from the anxieties of Tax-
assessor, and so be enabled to work in the
interests of our country.

You have already so far given a gracious
consent, that I now repeat my request, and
pray you to send instructions to the gover-
nor of the Province. that Helladius may be
released from this infliction.


LETTER CCLXXXxXII,?
To a bishop. ‘


You blame me for not inviting you; and,
when invited, you do not attend. That


1 Placed inthe episcopate. % Placed in the episcopate.


2 Placed in the episcopate.


your former excuse was an empty one is
clear from your conduct on the second
occasion. For had you been invited before,
in all probability you would never have
come.

Act not again unadvisedly, but obey this
present invitation; since you know that its
repetition strengthens an indictment, and
that a second lends credibility to a previous
accusation.

I exhort you always to bear with me; or
even if you cannot, at any rate it is your
duty not to neglect the Martyrs, to join
in whose commemoration you are invited.
Render therefore your service to us both;
or if you will not consent to this, at any rate
to the more worthy.


LETTER CCLXXXIII.


To a widow.


I Hope to find a suitable day for the con-
ference, after those which I intend to fix for
the hill-country. I see no opportunity for our
meeting (unless the Lord so order it beyond
my expectation), other than at a public
conference.

You may imagine my position from your
own experience. If in the care of a single
household you are beset with such a crowd
of anxieties, how many distractions, think
you, each day brings to me?

Your dream, I think, reveals more per-
fectly the necessity of making provision for
spiritual contemplation, and cultivating that
mental vision by which God is wont to be
seen. Enjoying as you do the consolation
of the Holy Scriptures, you stand in need
neither of my assistance nor of that of any-
body else to help you.to comprehend your
duty. You have the all-sufficient counsel
and guidance of the Holy Spirit to lead yo
to what is right. |


LETTER CCLXXXIV??


To the assessor in the case of monks.


ConcEerRNING the monks, your excellency
has, I believe, already rules in force, so that
I need ask for no special favour on their
behalf.

It is enough that they share with others
the enjoyment of your general beneficence ;
still I feel it incumbent upon me too to
interest myself in their case. I therefore
submit it to your more perfect judgment,


1 Placed in the episcopate, 2 Placed in the episcopate.


LETTERS:


that men who have long since taken leave
of this life, who have mortified their own
bodies, so that they have neither money to
spend nor bodily service to render in the
interests of the common weal, should be
exempted from taxation. For if their lives
are consistent with their profession, they
possess neither money nor bodies; for the
former is spent in communicating to the
needy; while their bodies are worn away
in prayer and fasting.

Men living such lives you will, I know,
regard with special reverence; nay you will
wish to secure their intervention, since by
their life in the Gospel they are able to
prevail with God.


LETTER CCLXXXVv.’
Without Address.


TuHeE bearer of this letter is one on whom
rests the care of our Church and the man-
agement of its property —our beloved son.

Deign to grant him freedom of speech on
those points that are referred to your holi-
ness, and attention to the expression of his
own views; so shall our Church at length
recover herself, and henceforth be released
from this many-headed Hydra.

Our property is our poverty; so much so
that we are ever in search of one to relieve
us of it; for the expenses. of the Church
property amount to more than any profit
that she derives from it.


ΓΕ CCUXXXVI.


To the Commentariensis.*


WHEREAS certain vagabonds have been
arrested in the church for stealing, in de-
fiance of God’s commandment, some poor
men’s clothing, of little value otherwise, yet
such as they had rather have on than off
their backs; and whereas you consider that
in virtue of your office you yourself should
have the custody of the offenders: — I
hereby declare, that I would have you know
that for offences committed in the church
itis our business to mete out punishment,
and that the intervention cf the civil author-
ities is in these cases superfluous. Where-
fore, the stolen property, as set forth in
the document in your possession and in
the transcript made in the presence of eye-

+ Placed in the episcopate.

_ 2 Placed in the episcopate.


SA registrar of prisons, or prison superintendent.
Fast. ix. 4.4. Dis. xviii, 20. 6.


Cod.


2}ῈῚ


witnesses, I enjoin you to retain, reserving
part for future claims, and distributing the
rest among the present applicants.

As for the offenders, — that they be cor-
rected in the discipline and admonition of
the Lord. By this means I hope to work
their successive reformations. For where
the stripes of human tribunals have failed,
I have often known the fearful judgments of
God to be effectual. If it is, however, your
wish to refer this matter also to the count,
such is my confidence .in his justice and
uprightness that I leave you to follow your
own counsels.


ΤΣ CC LOC sh,


Without address.


Ir is difficult to deal with this man. I
scarcely know how to treat so shifty, and, to
judge from the evidence, so desperate a
character. When summoned before the
court, he fails to appear; and if he does
attend, he is gifted with such volubility of
words and oaths, that I think myself well off
to be quickly ridof him. I have often known
him twist round his accusations upon his
accusers. In a word, there is no creature
living upon earth so subtile and versatile in
villainy. A slight acquaintance with him
suffices to prove this. Why then do you
appeal tome? Why not at once bring your-
selves to submit to his ill-treatment, as to a
visitation of God’s anger?

At the same time you must not be con-
taminated by contact with wickedness.

I enjoin therefore that he and all his house-
hold be forbidden the services of the Church,
and all other communion with her ministers.
Being thus made an example of, he may
haply be brought to a sense of his enormi-
ties.


LETTER CCLXXXVITI.


Without address. Excommunicatory.


WHEN public punishment fails to bring a
man to his senses, or exclusion from the
prayers of the Church to drive him to repent-
ance, it only remains to treat him in accord-
ance with our Lord’s directions —as it is
written, ‘‘ If thy brother shall trespass
against thee, < . . tell him his fault be-
tween thee and him; . . if he will not
hear thee, take with thee another ;” * and if
he shall” then ** neglect to hear, tell it unto


1 Placed in the episcopate.
2 Placed in the episcopate.


314


the Church; but if he neglect to hear even
the Church, let him be unto thee henceforth
as an heathen man, and as ἃ publican.”?
Now all this we have done in the case of this
fellow. First, he was accused of his fault;
then he was convicted in the presence of one
or two witnesses ; thirdly, in the presence of
the Church. Thus we have made our solemn
protest, and he has not listened to it. Hence-
forth let him be excommunicated.

Further, let proclamation be made through-
out the district, that he be excluded from
participation in any of the ordinary relations
of life; so that by our withholding ourselves
from all intercourse with him he may be-
come altogether food for the devil.’


LETTER CCLXXXIX.?


Without address. Concerning an affiicted


Woman.


I CONSIDER it an equal mistake, to let the
guilty go unpunished, and to exceed the
proper limits of punishment. I accordingly
passed upon this man the sentence I con-
sidered it incumbent on me to pass—ex-
communication from the Church. The
sufferer I exhorted not to avenge herself;
but to leave to God the redressing of her
wrongs. ‘Thus if my admonitions had
possessed any weight, I should then have
been obeyed, for the language I employed
was far more likely to ensure credit, than
any letter to enforce compliance.

So, even after listening to her statements
that contained matter sufficiently grave, I
still held my peace; and even now I am not
sure that it becomes me to treat again of this
same question.

For, she says,I have foregone husband,
children, all the enjoyments of life, for the
attainment of this single object, the favour
of God, and good repute amongst men. Yet
one day the offender, an adept from boyhood
in corrupting families, with the impudence
habitual to him, forced an entrance into my
house; and thus within the bare limits
of an interview an acquaintanceship was
formed. It was only owing to my ignorance
of the man, and to that timidity which comes
from inexperience, that I hesitated openly
to turn him out of doors. Yet to such a
pitch of impiety and insolence did he come,
that he filled the whole city with slanders,
and publicly inveighed against me by affix-
ing to the church doors libellous placards.


1 Matt. xviii. 15-17.


8 Placed in the episcopate.
2 Contrast 1 Tiin. i. 20.


BASIL.


For this conduct, it is true, he incurred the
displeasure of the law; but, nevertheless, he
returned to his slanderous attacks on me.
Once more the market-place was filled with
his abuse, as well as the gymnasia, theatres,
and houses whose congeniality of habits gained
him an admittance. Nor did his very extrav-
agance lead men to recognise those virtues
wherein I was conspicuous, so universally had
I been represented as being of an incontinent
disposition. In these calumnies, she goes on
to say, some find a delight—such is the
pleasure men naturally feel in the disparage-
ment of others; some profess to be pained,
but shew no sympathy; others believe the
truth of these slanders; others again, having
regard to the persistency of his oaths, are
undecided. But sympathy 1 have none.
And now indeed I begin to realise my
loneliness, and bewail myself. I have no
brother, friend, relation, no servant, bond or
free, in a word, no one whatever to share
my grief. And yet, I think, lam more than
any one else an object of pity, in a city
where the haters of wickedness are so few.
They bandy violence; but violence, though
they fail to see it, moves in a circle, and in
time will overtake each one of them.

In such and still more appealing terms she
told her tale, with countless tears, and so
departed. Nor did she altogether acquit me
of blame; thinking that, when I ought to
sympathise with her like a father, I am in-
different to her troubles, and regard the
sufferings of others too philosophically.

For it is not, she urged, the loss of money
that you bid me disregard; nor the endur-
ance of bodily sufferings; but a damaged
reputation, an injury involving loss upon
the Church at large.

This is her appeal; and now I pray you,
most excellent sir, consider what answer
you would have me make her. The de-
cision I have come to in my own mind is,
not to surrender offenders to the magis-
trates; yet not to rescue those already in
their custody, since it has long ago been
declared by the Apostle, that the magistrates
should be a terror to them in their evil-
doings; for, itis said, ‘* he beareth not the
sword in vain.” ' To surrender him, then, is
contrary to my humanity; while. to release
him would be an encouragement to his
violence.

Perhaps, however, you will defer taking
action until my arrival. I will then shew
you that I can effect nothing from there
being none to obey me.


----


1 Rom. xiii. 4,


LETTERS.


315


LET PER. CCxXC?


To Nectarius.


May many blessings rest on those who
encourage your excellency in maintaining a
constant correspondence with me! And
regard not such a wish as_ conventional
merely, but as expressing my sincere con-
viction of the value of your utterances.
Whom could I honour above Nectarius —
known to me from his earliest days as a
child of fairest promise, who now through
the exercise of every virtue has reached a
position of the highest eminence? — So
much so, that of all my friends the dearest
is the bearer of your letter.

Touching the election of those set over
districts,” God forbid that I should do any-
thing for the gratification of man, through
listening to importunities or yielding to fear.
In that case I should be not a steward, but a
huckster, bartering the gift of God for the
favour of man. But seeing that votes are
given but by mortals, who can only bear
such testimony as they do from outward
appearances, while the choice of fit persons
is committed in all humility to Him Who
knows the secrets of the heart, haply it is
best for everybody, when he has tendered
the evidence of his vote, to abstain from all
heat and contention, as though some self-
interest were involved in the testimony, and
to pray to God that what is advantageous
may not remain unknown. ‘Thus the result
is no longer attributable to man, but a cause
for thankfulness to God. For these things,
if they be of man, cannot be said to be;
but are pretence only, altogether void of
reality. .

Consider also, that when a man strives
with might‘and main to gain his end, there
is no small danger of his drawing even sin-
ners to his side; and there is much sin-
fulness, such is the weakness of man’s
nature, even where we should least ex-
Dect it.

Again, in private consultation we often
offer our friends good advice, and, though
we do not find them taking it, yet we are
not angry. Where then it is not man that
counsels, but God that determines, shall we
feel indignation at not being preferred before
the determination of God?


1 Placed in the episcopate.

2On the word συμμορίας the Ben. note is: ‘* Hac voce non
designatur tota diocests, sed certos quidam pagorum numerus
chorepiscopo commissus, ut patet ex epist, cxlli.,” g.v., “ erat
autem chorepiscoporum sedes insigni alicul affixa pago, cut
alit pagi attribuebantur. Unde Basilius in epist. c\xxxviii.
§ 10. Auctor est Amphilochio ut agrum Mestie@ subjectum
Vasodis subjiciat.’’


And if these things were given to man by
man, what need were there for us to ask
them of ourselves? Were it not better for
each to take them from himself? But if
they are the gift of God, we ought to pray
and not to grieve. And in our prayer
we should not seek our own will, but leave
it to God who disposes for the best.

Now may the holy God keep from your
home all taste of sorrow; and grant to you
and to your family a life exempt from harm
and sickness.


LETTER CCXCI.?


To Timotheus the Chorepiscopus.


THE due limits of a letter, and that mode
of addressing you, render it inconvenient
for me to write all I think; at the same time
to pass over my thoughts in silence, when
my heart is burning with righteous indigna-
tion against you, is well-nigh impossible.
I will adopt the midway course: I will
write some things; others I will omit. For
I wish to chide you, if so I may, in terms
both frank and friendly.

Yes! that Timotheus whom 1 have known
from boyhood, so intent upon an upright
and ascetic life, as even to be accused of
excess therein, now forsakes the enquiry
after those means whereby we may be united
to God; now makes it his first thought what
some one else may think of him, and lives
a life of dependence upon the opinions of
others; is mainly anxious how to serve his
friends, without incurring the ridioule of
enemies; and fears disgrace with the: world
as a great misfortune. Does he not know,
that while he is occupied with these trifles
he is unconsciously neglecting his highest
interests? For, that we cannot be en-
gaged with both at once—the things of
this world and of Heaven —the holy Scrip-
tures are full of teaching for us. Nay,
Nature herself is full of such instances.
In the exercise of the mental faculty,
to think two thoughts at the same time
is quite impossible. In the perceptions
of our senses, to admit two sounds fall-
ing upon our ears at the same moment,
and to distinguish them, although we are
provided with two open passages, is im-
possible. Our eyes, again, unless they are
both fixed upon the object of our vision,
are unable to perform their action accu-
rately. ;

Thus much for Nature; but to recite to
you the evidence of the Scriptures were as


1 Placed in the episcopate. 2 cf. note on p. 156.


316 ΒσΠι


ridiculous as, so runs the proverb, ‘ to carry
owls to Athens.’ Why then combine
things incompatible—the tumults of civil
life and the practice of religion?

Withdraw from clamour; be no more the
cause or object of annoyance; let us keep
ourselves to ourselves. We long since pro-
posed religion as our aim; let us make
the attainment of it our practice, and shew
those who have the wish to insult us that it
does not lie with them to annoy us at their
will. But this will only be when we have
clearly shewn them that we afford no handle
for abuse.

For the present enough of this! Would that
some day we might meet and more perfectly
consider those things that be for our souls’
welfare; so may we not be too much occu-
pied with thoughts of vanity, since death
must one day overtake us.

I was greatly pleased with the gifts you
kindly sent me. They were most welcome
on their own account; the thought of who it
was that sent them made them many times
more welcome. The gifts from Pontus, the
tablets and medicines, kindly accept when I
send them. At present they are not by me.


N.B. The letters numbered CCXCII.-
CCOCLX VI. ate included’ by the εν ἘΠ.
in a ‘Classis Tertia,” having no note of
time. Some are doubtful, and some plainly
spurious. Of these I include such as seem
most important.


LETTER CCXCH,
To Palladius.


THE one-half of my desire has God ful-
filled in the interview He granted me with our
fair sister, your wife. The other half He is
able to accomplish; and so with the sight of
your excellency I shall render my full thanks
to God.

And I am the more desirous of seeing you,
now that I hear you have been adorned with
that great ornament, the clothing of immor-
tality, which clokes our mortality, and puts
out of sight the death of the flesh; by virtue
of which the corruptible is swallowed up in
incorruption. :

Thus God of His goodness has now alien-
ated you from sin, united you to Himself,
has opened the doors of Heaven, and pointed
out the paths that lead to heavenly bliss. I
entreat you therefore by that wisdom wherein


1 γλαῦκ᾽ ᾿Αθήναζε. Arist., AV. 301.


you excel all other men, that you receive the
divine favour circumspectly, proving a faith-
ful guardian of this treasure, as the reposi-
tory of this royal gift, keeping watch over it
with all carefulness. Preserve this seal of
righteousness unsullied, that so you may
stand before God, shining in the brightness
of the Saints. Let no spot or wrinkle defile
the pure robe of immortality ; but keep holi-
ness in all your members, as having put on
Christ. ‘* For,” it is said, ‘‘as many of you
as have been baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ.””' Wherefore let all your members
be holy as becomes their investment in a
raiment of holiness and light.


LETTER CCXCIITI.


To Julianus.


How fare you this long while? Have you
altogether recovered the use of your hand?
And how do other things prosper? Δο-
cording to your wishes and my prayers? In
accordance with your purposes?

Where men are readily disposed to change,
it is only natural that their lives are not well
ordered: but where their minds are fixed,
steadfast and unalterable, it follows that their


‘lives should be conformable to their pur-


poses.

True, it is not in the helmsman’s power to
make a calm when he wishes; but with us,
it is quite easy to render our lives tranquil
by stilling the storms of passion that surge
within, by rising superior to those that assail
us from without. The upright man is touched
by neither loss, nor sickness, nor the other
ills of life; for he walks in heart with God,
keeps his gaze fixed upon the future, and
easily and lightly weathers the storms that
rise from earth.

Be not troubled with the cares of earth.
Such men are like fat birds, in vain endowed
with flight, that creep like beasts upon the
ground. But you—for I have witnessed
you in difficulties — are like swimmers rac-
ing out at sea.

A single claw reveals the whole lion: so
from a slight acquaintance I think I know
you fully. And I count it a great thing,
that you set some store by me, that I am not
absent from your thoughts, but constantly in
your recollection.

Now writing is a proof of recollection;
and the oftener you write, the better pleased
Tam.


1 Gal. iii. 27.


—— Ce eS eee eee eee .᾿


LETTERS.


347


LETTER, CCXCIV.


To Festus and Magnus.


Ir is doubtless a father’s duty to make
provision for his children; a husbandman’s
to tend his plants and crops; a teacher’s to
bestow care upon his pupils, especially when
innate goodness shews signs of promise for
them.

The husbandman finds toil a pleasure
when he sees the ears ripen or the plants in-
crease; the teacher is gladdened at his
pupils’ growth in knowledge, the father at
his son’s in stature. But greater is the care
I feel for you ; higher the hopes I entertain ;
in proportion as piety is more excellent than
all the arts, than all the animals and fruits
together.

And piety I planted in your heart while
still pure and tender, and I matured it in the
hopes of seeing it reach maturity and bear-
ing fruits in due season. My prayers mean-
while were furthered by your love of learn-
ing. And you know well that you have my
good wishes, and that God’s favour rests
upon your endeavours; for when rightly di-
rected, called or uncalled, God is at hand to
further them.

Now every man that loves God is prone
to teaching; nay, where there is the power
to teach things profitable, their eagerness is


well nigh uncontrollable; but first their
hearers’ minds must be cleared of all re-
sistance.


Not that separation in the body is a hin-
drance to instruction. The Creator, in the
fulness of His love and wisdom, did not con-
fine our minds within our bodies, nor the
power of speaking to our tongues. Ability
to profit derives some advantage even from
lapse of time; thus we are able to transmit
instruction, not only to those who are dwell-
ing far away, but even to those who are
hereafter to be born. And experience proves
my words: those who lived many years
before teach posterity by instruction pre-
served in their writings; and we, though
so far separated in the body, are always
near in thought, and converse together with
ease.

Instruction is bounded neither by sea nor
land, if only we have a care for our souls’
profit.


LETTER, CExev;:
To monks.


I po not think that I need further com-
mend you to God’s grace, after the words


that I addressed to you in person. I then
bade you adopt the life in common, after the
manner of living of the Apostles. This you
accepted as wholesome instruction, and gave
God thanks for it.

Thus your conduct was due, not so much
to the‘words I spoke, as to my instructions to
put them into practice, conducive at once to
your advantage who accepted, to my comfort
who gave you the advice, and to the glory
and praise of Christ, by Whose name we
are called.

For this reason I have sent to you our
well-beloved brother, that he may learn of
your zeal, may quicken your sloth, may re-
port to me of opposition. For great is my
desire to see you all united in one body, and
to hear that you are not content to live a life
without witness; but have undertaken to be
both watchful of each other’s diligence, and
witnesses of each other’s success.

Thus will each of you receive a reward in
full, not only on his own behalf, but also for
his brother’s progress. And, as is fitting,
you will be a source of mutual profit, both
by your words and deeds, as a result of con-
stant intercourse and exhortation.

But above all I exhort you to be mindful of
the faith of the Fathers, and not to be shaken
by those who in your retirement would try
to wrest you from it. For you know that
unless illumined by faith in God, strictness
of life availeth nothing; nor will a right
confession of faith, if void of good works,
be able to present you before the Lord.

Faith and works must be joined: so shall
the man of God be perfect, and his life not
halt through any imperfection.

For the faith which saves us, as saith the
Apostle, is that which worketh by love.


LETTER CCXCVI.


To a widow.


[A short letter in which Basil excuses
himself for making use of the widow’s mules. |
LETTER CCXCVII.


To a widow.


[A short letter of introduction. ]


LeeLee. CeCXCvitii.
Without address.


[A short letter of commendation. }


318


BASIL.


LETTER CCXCIX,


To a Censttor-


I was aware, before you told me, that you
do not like your employment in public
affairs. It isan old saying that those who
are anxious to lead a pious life do not throw
themselves with pleasure into office. The
case of magistrates seems to me like that of
physicians. ‘They see awful sights; they
meet with bad smells; they get trouble for
themselves out of other people’s calamities.
This is at least the case with those who are
real magistrates. All men who are engaged
in business, look also to make a profit, and
are excited about this kind of glory, count it
the greatest possible advantage to acquire
some power and influence by which they
may be able to benefit their friends, punish
their enemies, and get what they want for
themselves. You are notaman of this kind.
How should you be? You have voluntarily
withdrawn from even high office in the
State. You might have ruled the city like
one single house, but you have preferred a
life free from care and anxiety. You have
placed a higher value on having no troubles
yourself and not troubling other people, than
other people do on making themselves disa-
greeable. But it has seemed good to the
Lord that the district of Ibora* should not be
under the power of hucksters, nor be turned
into a mere slave market. It is His will that
every individual in it should be enrolled, as
is right. Do you therefore accept this re-
sponsibility? It is vexatious, I know, but it
is one which may bring you the approbation
of God. Neither fawn upon the great and
powerful, nor despise the poor and needy.
Show to all under your rule an impattiality
of mind, balanced more exactly than any
scales. ‘Thus in the sight of those who have
entrusted you with these responsibilities your
zeal for justice will be made evident, and
they will view you with exceptional admira-
tion. And even though you go unnoticed
by them, you will not be unnoticed by our
God. The prizes which He has put before
us for good works are great.


ITER VY CCC.
Without address.


[A consolatory letter to a father. ]


1 7,6. assessor of taxes.
2 See geographical note in Prolegomena.


LETTER CCCI.


To Maximus.


[Consolatory on the death of his wife. ]


LETTER: CCG.


To the wife of Briso.


[Consolatory on the death of her husband.
These three consolatory letters present no
features different from those contained in
previous letters of a similar character. |


LETTER CCCIII.
To the Comes Privatarum.


You have, I think, been led to impose a
contribution of mares’ on these people by
false information on the part of the inhabi-
tants. What is going on is quite unfair. It
cannot but be displeasing to your excellency,
and is distressing to me on account of my
intimate connexion with the victims of the
wrong. I have therefore lost no time in
begging your lordship not to allow these
promoters. of iniquity to succeed in their
malevolence.


LETTER CCCIV.
To Abursius.


[A few unimportant words of introduc-
tion. |


LETTER CCCV.
Without address.


[An unimportant letter of recommenda-
tion. |


LEC CEC:
To the Governor of Sebasteia.?


I am aware that your excellency is favour-
ably receiving my letters, and I understand
why. You love all that is good; you are


1 φοράδων τέλεσμα. ““ Recte Scultetum castigat Combefisius
quod raptim vectigal reddiderit, At idem immerito putat
οὗ equarum possessionem tributum aliquod ejusmodt homini-
bus impositum futsse. Perspicuum est equas 1psas 115, quibus
patrocinatur Basilius, imperatas fuisse, tdque in mulle
magis quam tn tributi loco; si quidem eos comes ret privat@
falsis ‘criminationibus deceptus damnaverat. Sic etiam
Greg. Naz., Ep. clxxxiv. Nemestum flectere conatur qut
Valentiniano equarum multam ob aliquod delictum infilex-
erat. Nec mirum est in Cappadocia, gu@_optimos equos
alebat, ejusmodt multas impossitas Suisse.” Ben. note.

2'Hyeudve SeBaoteias. The Ben. Ed. think that here and
in Letter \xiii. ἡγειών means not governor but Head of the
Senate. cf. Cod. Theod. xii., i. 127, 171, 189. So in Letter
Ixxxvi. The‘ prepositus pagorum’’ is styled ἡγεμών.


.
ee ee eee eee ee κα ᾿νάς οὐὐνδι, ὐὐμδόν τινων:


ee ee ee Se se ee ee 2


LETTERS.


ready in doing kindnesses. So whenever I
give you the opportunity of shewing your
magnanimity, you are eager for my letters,
because you know that they furnish an occa-
sion for good deeds. Now, once more, behold
an occasion for your shewing all the signs of
rectitude, and at the same time for the public
exhibition of your virtues! Certain persons
have come from Alexandria for the discharge
of a necessary duty which is due from all
men to the dead. They ask your excellency
to give orders that it may be permitted them
to have conveyed away, under official sanc-
. tion, the corpse of a relative who departed
this life at Sebasteia, while the troops were
quartered there. They further beg that, as
far as possible, aid may be given them for
travelling at the public expense, so that, of
your bounty, they may find some help and
solace in their long journey. The tidings of
this will travel as far as to great Alexandria,
and will convey thither the report of your
excellency’s astonishing kindness. This you
well understand without my mentioning it.
I shall add gratitude for this one more favour
to that which I feel for all which you have
done me.


LETTER CCCVII.
Without address.


[A request to mediate between two liti-
gants. |
EET TER. CCCViIIT.


Without address.


[Commendatory, with the mention of a
_ place called Capralis. ]


LETTER ‘CCCEX.
Without address.


[Commendatory on behalf of a man re-
duced from wealth to poverty, with three
children, and anxious about his rating. |

LETTER: CCCX,
Without address.


[Commendatory on behalf of some kinsfolk,
and of the people of Ariarathia, a place in the
Sargaransene, about 60 m. E. of Cesarea."]


LETTER CCCXI.


[Commendatory :


short and of no impor-
tance. |


1 Ramsay, Mist. Geog. A.M. p. 55.


319


LETTER CCCXII.


[Commendatory: short and unimportant. |


LETTER CCCXITI.


[Commendatory of the interests of Sul-
picius. |
LETTER CCCXIV.


Without address.
[Commendatory. |


LETIER’ CCERYV.
Without address.


[Commendatory of a widow. |]
LETTERS ΟΣ CeCe i.
CCCXVIIL.,C COKE,


Without address.
[Commendatory ; short. |


LE PTERY COCK:


Without address.
[A salutation. |


LETT ES. CCCKXE.
To Thecla.


[Included among the Letters of Gregory
of Nazianzus, who is assumed by the Ben.
Ed. to be indubitably the writer.']

BEVTER: CCCXXIT.


Without address.


[ Asking a friend to come with his wife and
spend Easter with him. |


LETTER CCCXXITI.


To Philagrius Arcenus.


LETTER CCCXX?Y:.
To Fasinicus, the Physician.


LETTER CCCXXV.


To Magninianus.


LETTER CCCXXVI.
Without address.
[ Monitory. ]
1 Vide Greg. Naz., Ep. lvii.


BASIL.


LET ER MCC CXXV I.
Without address.
[ Hortatory. |


LETTER CCCXXVIII.
To [yperectius.
[On Basil’s health. ]


iid ea WCC Ni
To Phatrius.
[Wir thanks for a present of fish. ]


LEVTRRS COCK OCC,
ΟΣ στ; OCGKROUEL


[ All short and without address.
Letters from CCCXXIII. to CCCXXXIII.


have no importance. |


DETTER Cex ty.
To a writer.


straight, and make the lines
Do not let your hand go too high
or too low. Avoid forcing the pen to travel
slantwise, like Hsop’s crab. Advance
straight on, as if following the line of the
carpenter’s rule, which always preserves
exactitude and prevents. any irregularity.
The oblique is ungraceful. It is the straight
which pleases the eye, and does not allow
the reader’s eyes to go nodding up and down
like a swing-beam. This has been my fate
in reading your writing. As the lines lie
ladderwise, I was obliged, when I had to
go from one to another, to mount up to the
end of the last: then, when no connexion
was to be found, I had to go back, and seek
for the right order again, retreating and fol-
lowing the furrow,’ like Theseus in the story
following Ariadne’s thread.” Write straight,
and do not confuse our mind by your slanting
and irregular writing,


sO ised a] Ga i ee, OG es, OS a
Basil to Libanius.?


I am really ashamed of sending you the
Cappadocians one by one. I should prefer


WRITE
straight.


1 Of the use of this word to indicate the lines in MSS., cf.
Aristoph., Thesm.782, and Anth., Pad. vi. 82.
27.e.in the Labyrinth of Crete.
Ope virginea, nullis iterata priorum,
Fanua aificilis filo est tnventa relecto.
Bake tthe Ov., Metam. viii. 172.
3* Basilit et Libanit epistole mutue,quas magni factt Tille-


he filed ἐμ Sah fa: ut genuinas, maxime dubi@e videntur Gar-
ner, in Vit. Bas. cap. 39, p. 172, segqg., ts tamen illas spartim
edidit. . . . Schroeckh Garn. dubitationi deomnium tllarum


epist. mutuarum νοθείᾳ guedam opponit.” Fabricius. Harles.,
Tom. ix.

Maran (Vit. Bas. xxxix. 2) thinks that the Libanian corre-
spondence, assuming it to be genuine, is to be assigned partly


to induce all our youths to devote them-
selves to letters and learning, and to avail
themselves of your instruction in their train-
ing. But itis impracticable to get hold of
them all at once, while they choose what
suits themselves. I therefore send you those
who from time to time are won over; and
this I do with the assurance that I am con-
ferring on them a boon as great as that
which is given by those who bring thirsty
men to the fountain. The lad, whom 1 am
now sending, will be highly valued for his
own sake when he has been in your society.
He is already well known on account of his
father, who has won a name among us both
for rectitude of life and for authority in our
community. He is, moreover, a close friend
of my own. To requite him for his friend-
ship to me, I am conferring on his son the
benefit of an introduction to you —a boon
well worthy of being earnestly prayed for by
all who are competent to judge of a man’s
high character.


LETTER CCCXXXVI.


Libanius to Basilius.


1. After some little time a young Cappa-
docian has reached me. One gain to me is
that he isa Cappadocian. But this Cappa-
docian is one of the first rank. This is
another ‘gain. . Further, -he: brings (mera
letter from the admirable Basil. This is the
greatest gain of all. You think that I have
forgotten you. I had great respect for you
in your youth. I saw you vying with old
men in self-restraint, and this in a city teem-
ing with pleasures. J saw you already in
possession of considerable learning. Then
you thought that you ought also to see
Athens, and you persuaded Celsus to accom-
pany you. Happy Celsus, to be dear to
you! Then you returned, and livedyat
home, and I said to myself, What, I wonder,
is Basil about now? ‘To what occupation
has he betaken himself? Is he following
the ancient orators, and practising in the
courts? Oris he turning the sons of fortu-
nate fathers into orators? ‘Then there came


to the period of the retreat, partly to that of the presbyterate,
while two only, the one a complaint on the part of Libanius
that bishops are avaricious, and Basil’s retort, may perhaps
have been written during the episcopate. He would see no
reason for rejecting them on the ground merely of the unlike-
lihood of Basil’s corresponding with a heathen philosopher,
but he is of opinion that the style of most of them is unworthy
both of the sophist and of the archbishop. Yet there seems
no reason why they should have been invented. It is intel-
ligible enough that they should have been preserved, consid-
ering the reputation of the writers; but they suggest no motive
for forgery. The life of Tibanius extended from 314 to nearly
the end of the fourth century. J. R. Mozlev, in D.C.B. (iv.
712) refers to G. R. Siever (Das Leben des Libanius, Berlin,
1868) as the tullest biographer,


"


——— ΞΥΓ


LETIERS.


those who reported to me that you were
adopting a course of life better than any of
these, and were, rather, bethinking you how
you might win the friendship of God than
heaps of gold, I blessed both you and the
Cappadocians; you, for making this your
aim; them, for being able to point to so
noble a fellow-countryman.

2. [lam aware that the Firmus, whom you
mention, has continually won everywhere; ἢ
hence his great power as a speaker. But
with all the eulogies that have been bestowed
on him, I am not aware that he has ever re-
ceived such praise as I have heard of in your
letter. For what a credit it is to him, that it
should be you who declare that his reputa-
tion is inferior to none!

Apparently, you have despatchedthis young
man to me before seeing Firminus ; had you
done so, your letters would not have failed to
mention him. What is Firminus now doing
or intending to do? Is he still anxious to be
married? Or is all that over now? Arethe
claims of the senate heavy on him? Is he
obliged to stay where he is? Is there any
hope of his taking to study again? Let him
send me an answer, and I trust it may be
satisfactory. If it be a distressing one, at
least it will relieve him from seeing me at his
door. And if Firminus had been now at
Athens, what would your senators have done?
Would they have sent the Salaminia’ after
him? You see that it is only by your fel-
low-countrymen that I am wronged. Yet
I shall never cease to love and praise the
Cappadocians. I should like them to be
better disposed to me, but, if they continue
to act as they do, I shall bear it. Firminus
was four months with me, and was not a day
idle. You will know how much he has
acquired, and perhaps will not complain.
As to his being able to come here again,
what ally can I call in? If your senators
are right-minded, as men of education ought
to be, they will honour me inthe second case,
since they grieved me in the first.


LETTER COCCXXXVIL.


Basil to Libantus.


Lo and behold, yet another Cappadocian
has come to you; a son of my own! For
my present position makes all men my sons.


1 πανταχοῦ διετέλεσε κοατῶν. ‘* Ubigue constantem perdu-
rasse.’ Ben. Ed. “ Ubitque firma memoria fuerit.” Com-
befis) Firmus may possibly be the father of the young
student.

2 The allusion is to the ““ Salaminia,”’ one of the two sacred
or state vessels of the Athenian government. The ‘‘ Paralus”
and the “ Salaminia’”’? were both Triremes, the latter being
called also ** Delia”? and ‘* Theoris,’”? because it was used to
convey the Θεωροὶ to Delos. State criminals were conveyed by

em,


239


On this ground he may be regarded as a
brother of the former one, and worthy of the
same attention alike from me his father, and
from you his instructor — if really it is pos-
sible for these young men, who come from
me, to obtain any further favours. I do not
mean that it is not possible for your excel-
lency to give anything more to your old com-
rades, but because your services are so lay-
ishly bestowed upon all. It will be sufficient
for the lad before he gets experience if he be
numbered among those who are intimately
known to you. I trust you may send him
back to me worthy of my prayers and of
your great reputation in learning and elo-
quence. He is accompanied bya young man
of his own age, and of like zeal for instruction ;
a youth of good family, and closely associated
with myself. I am sure he will be in every
way as well treated, though his means are
smaller than is the case with the rest.


LETTER CCCXXXVIII.


Libanius to Basit.


I KNow you will often. write, “Ἅ Here is
another Cappadocian for you!” I expect
that you will send me many. I am sure
that you are everywhere putting pressure on
both fathers and sons by all your compli-
mentary expressions about me. But it
would not be kind on my part not to men-
tion what happened about your good letter.
There were sitting with me not a few of our
people of distinction, and among them the
very excellent Alypius, Hierocles’ cousin.
The messengers gave in the letter. I read it
right through without a word; then with a
smile, and evidently gratified, I exclaimed,
‘¢T am vanquished!” ‘** How? When?
Where?” they asked. ‘* How is it that you are
not distressed at being vanquished?” **T am
beaten,” I replied, *‘ in beautiful letter writ-
ing. Basil has won. But I love him; and
so 1 διῇ delighted.” On hearing this, they
all wanted to hear of the victory from the
letter itself. It was read by Alypius, while
all listened. It was voted that what I had
said was quite true. Then the reader went
out, with the letter still in his hand, to shew
it, I suppose, to others. I had some difh-
culty in getting it back. Go on writing
others like it; go on winning. This is for
me to win. You are quite right in thinking
that my services are not measured by money.
Enough for him who has nothing to give,
that he is as wishfil to receive. If I perceive
any one who is poor to be a lover of learning,
he takes precedence of the rich. True, I


3.55


BASIL.


never found such instructors; but nothing
shall stand in the way of my being, at least
in that respect, an improvement on mine.
Let no one, then, hesitate to come hither be-
cause he is poor, if only he possesses the one
qualification of knowing how to work.


LETTER CCCXXXIX.


Basil to Libantius.


Wuart could not a sophist say? And such
a sophist! One whose peculiar art is,
whenever he likes, to make great things
small, and to give greatness to small things!
This is what you have shewn in my case.
That dirty little letter of mine, as, perhaps,
ou who live in all luxury of eloquence
would call it, a letter in no way more tolera-
ble than the one you hold in your hands now,
you have so extolled as, forsooth, to be
beaten by it, and to be yielding me the prize
for composition! You are acting much as
fathers do, when they join in their boys’


gaines, and let the little fellows be proud of


the victories which they have let them win,
without any loss to themselves, and with
much gain to the children’s emulation.
Realiy and truly the delight your speech
must have given, when you were joking
about me, must have been indescribable! It
is as though some Polydamas' or Milo’
were to decline the pancratium ora wrestling
bout with me!* After carefully examining,
I have found no sign of weakness. So those
who look for exaggeration are the more as-
tonished at your being able to descend in
sport to my level, than if you had led the
barbarian in full sail over Athos.* I, how-
ever, my dear sir, am now spending my time
with Moses and Elias, and saints like them,
who tell me their stories in a barbarous
tongue,’ and I utter what I learnt from them,
true, indeed, in sense, though rude in phrase,
as what I am writing testifies. If ever |]
learned anything from you, I have forgotten
it in the course of time. But do you con-
tinue to write to me, and so suggest other
topics for correspondence. Your letter will
exhibit you, and will not convict me. I have


1 A famous athlete of Scotussa. Paus, vi. 5.

2 The athlete of Crotona, who was crowned again and again
at the Pythian and Olympian games.

30 θλίβειν καὶ κατέχειν δυνάμενος, παλαιστικός " ὃ δὲ ὦσαι TH
πληγῇ, πυστικός * ὃ δὲ ἀμφοτέροις τούτοις, παγκρατιαστικός. AriSt.,
Rhet.i.v. 14.

4 The story that Xerxes had made a canal through the isth-
mus of Athos was supposed to be an instance of gross ex-
agegeration. cf. Juv. x. 174: “ Creditur olim Velificatus Athos
et quidquid Gracia mendax Audet in historia,’ and Claudian
iii. 336: ‘* Remitge Medo solicitatus Athos.’ But traces of the
canal are said to be still visible.

5 This might lead to the idea that Basil knew some Hebrew,
but the close of the sentence indicates that he means the Greek
of the LXX., in which he always quotes Scripture.


already introduced to you the son of Anysius,
as a son of my own. If he is my son, he is
the child of his father, poor, and a poor man’s
son. What I am saying is well known to
one who is wise as well as a sophist.'


LETTER: COCAL.
Libanius to Basil.


Hap you been for a long time considering
how best you could reply to my letter about
yours, you could not in my judgment have
acquitted yourself better than by writing as
you have written now. You call me a
sophist, and you allege that it is a sophist’s
business to make small things great and great
things small. And you maintain that the
object of my letter was to prove yours a good
one, when it was not a good one, and that it
was no better than the one which you have
sent last, and, in a word that you have no
power of expression, the books which you
have now in hand producing no such eflect,
and the eloquence which you once possessed
having all disappeared. Now, in the en-
deavour to prove this, you have made this
epistle too, which you are reviling, so ad-
mirable, that my visitors could not refrain
from leaping with admiration as it was being
read. I was astonished that after your try-
ing to run down the former one by this, by
saying that the former one was like it, you
have really complimented the former by it.
To carry out your object, you ought to have
made this one worse, that you might slander
the former. But it is not like you, I think,
to do despite to the truth. It would have
been done despite to, if you had purposely
written badly, and not put out the powers
you have. It would be characteristic of you
not to find fault with what is worthy of
praise, lest in your attempt to make great
things insignificant, your proceedings reduce
you to the rank of the sophists. Keep to
the books which you say are inferior in style,
though better in sense. No one hinders
you. But of the principles which are ever
mine, and once were yours, the roots both
remain and will remain, as long as you exist.
Though you water them ever so little, no
length of time will ever completely destroy
them.


LETTER CCCXLI.


Libanius to Basil.


You have not yet ceased to be offended
with me, and so I tremble as I write. If you


1 σοφῷ τε καὶ σοφιστῇ.


ΤΡ 9;


323


have cared, why, my dear sir, do you not
write? If you are still offended, a thing
alien from any reasonable soul and from
your own, why, while you are preaching to
others, that they must not keep their anger
till sundown,’ have you kept yours during
many suns? Peradventure you have meant
to punish me by depriving me of the sound
of your sweet voice? Nay; excellent sir,
be gentle, and let me enjoy your golden
tongue.


LETTER, GCCCXELM.


Bastl to Libanius.


Att who are attached to the rose, as
might be expected in the case of lovers of
the beautiful, are not displeased even at the
thorns from out of which the flower blows.
I have even heard it said about roses by
some one, perhaps in jest, or, it may be, even
in earnest, that nature has furnished the
bloom with those delicate thorns, like stings
of love to lovers, to excite those who pluck
them to intenser longing by these ingeniously
adapted pricks.* But what do I mean by
this introduction of the rose into my letter?
You do not need telling, when you remem-
ber your own letter. It had indeed the
bloom of the rose, and, by its fair speech,
opened out all spring to me; but it was
bethorned with certain fault findings and
charges against me. But even the thorn of
your words is delightful to me, for it en-
kindles in me a greater longing for your
friendship.


LETTER > CCCXLITII.


Libantus to Bast.


Ir these are the words of an untrained
tongue, what would you be if you would
polish them? On your lips live fountains of
words better than the flowing of springs. I,
on the contrary, if I am not daily watered,
am silent.


LETTER CCCXLIV. :


Bastl to Libanius.


I am dissuaded from writing often to you,
learned as you are, by my timidity and my
ignorance. But your persistent silence is
different. What excuse can be offered for it?
If any one takes into account that you are


1¢f. Eph. iv. 27, and the passage quoted by Alford from
Plut., De Am. Frat. 4588 B., to the effect that the Pythagoreans,
whenever anger had caused unkindly words, shook hands
before sundown, and were reconciled.

2 MS. vary between ἐνπλήκτοις, ἐνπλέκτοις, ἀπλήκτοις, ἀπράκ-
τοις.


slow to write to me, living as you do in the
midst of letters, he will condemn you for
forgetfulness of me. He who is ready at
speaking is not unprepared to write. And
if a man so endowed is silent, it is plain that
he acts either from forgetfulness or from


contempt. I will, however, requite your
silence with a greeting. Farewell, most
honoured sir. Write if you like. If you


prefer it, do not write.


LETTER. CCCXLY.


Libantus to Basil.


Ir is, I think, more needful for me to
defend myself for not having begun to write
to you long ago, than to offer any excuse
for beginning now. I am that same man
who always used to run up whenever you
put in an appearance, and who listened
with the greatest delight to the stream of
your eloquence ; rejoicing to hear you; with
difficulty tearing myself away; saying to
my friends, This man is thus far superior to
the daughters of Achelous, in that, like
them, he soothes, but he does not hurt as
they do. Truly it is no great thing not
to hurt; but this man’s songs are a positive
gain to the hearer. That I should be in
this state of mind, should think that I am
regarded with affection, and should seem
able to speak, and yet should not venture
to write, is the mark of a man guilty of ex-
treme idleness, and, at the same time, in-
flicting punishment on himself. For it is
clear that you will requite my poor little
letter with a fine large one, and will take
care not to wrong me again. At this word,
I fancy, many will cry out, and will crowd
round with the shout, What! has Basil done
any wrong —evena small wrong? Thenso °
have CEacus, and Minos, and his brother.’
In other points I admit that you have won.
Who ever saw you that does not envy you?
But in one thing you have sinned against
me; and, if I remind you of it, induce
those who are indignant thereat not to make
a public outcry. No one has ever come to
you and asked a favour which it was easy
to give, and gone away unsuccessful. But
I am one of those who have craved a boon
without receiving it. What then did I
ask? Often when I was with you in camp,
I was desirous of entering, with the aid of
your wisdom, into the depth of Homer’s
frenzy. If the whole is impossible, I said,
do you bring me to a portion of what I


1 Rhadamanthus and Minos were both said to be sons of
Zeus and Europa. ε΄ Verg., 4x. vi. 566 and Pind., Οἱ. ii. 75.


want. I was anxious for a part, wherein,
when things have gone ill with the Greeks,
Agamemnon courts with gifts the man
whom he has insulted. When I.so spoke,
you laughed, because you could not deny
that you could if you liked, but were un-
willing to give. Do I really seem to be
wronged to you and to your friends, who
were indignant at my saying that you were
doing a wrong?


LETTER -CCCXEVIL.


Libanius to Basil.


You yourself will judge whether I have
added anything in the way of learning to
the young men whom you have sent. I hope
that this addition, however little it be, will
get the credit of being great, for the sake
of your friendship towards me. But inas-
much as you give less praise to learning than
to temperance and to a refusal to abandon
our souls to dishonourable pleasures, they
have devoted their main attention to this,
and have lived, as indeed they ought, with
due recollection of the friend who sent them
hither.

So welcome what is your own, and give
praise to men who by their mode of life have
done credit both to you and to me. But to
ask you to be serviceable~to them is like
asking a father to be serviceable to his
children.


LETTER 4CCCXLVit.
Libanius to Basil.


Every bishop is a thing out of which it
is very hard to get anything.’ The further
you have advanced beyond other people in
learning, the more you make me afraid that
you will refuse what [ ask. I want some
rafters.” Any other sophist would have
called them stakes, or poles, not because
he wanted stakes or poles, but rather for
shewing off his wordlets than out of any real
need. If you do not supply them, I shall
have to winter in the open air.


LETTER CCCXLVITI.


Basil to Libanius.


If γριπίζειν is the same thing as to gain,
and this is the meaning of the phrase which
your sophistic ingenuity has got from the
depths of Plato, consider, my dear sir,


1 ποᾶγμα δυσγρίπιστον. γριπίζω = 7 catch fish, from ypidos,
acreel, 2 στρωτήρ.


BASIE,


who is the more hard to be got from, I
who am thus impaled’ by your episto-
lary skill, or the tribe of Sophists, whose
craft is to make money out of their words.
What bishop ever imposed tribute by his
words? What bishop ever made his dis-
ciples pay taxes? It is you who make your
words marketable, as confectioners make
honey-cakes. See how you have made the
old man leap and bound! However, to
you who make such a fuss about your de-
clamations, I have ordered as many rafters to
be supplied as there were fighters at Ther-
mopyle,? all of goodly length, and, as
Homer has it, ‘*long-shadowing,” * which
the sacred Alpheus has promised to restore.*


LETTER: GCéccrr:
Libanius to Basil.


WILL you not give over, Basil, packing
this sacred haunt of the Muses with Cappa-
docians, and these redolent of the frost® and
snow and all Cappadocia’s good things?
They have almost made me a Cappadocian
too, always chanting their ‘+I salute you.”’
But I must endure, since it is Basil who
commands. Know, however, that I am
making a careful study of the manners and
customs of the country, and that 1 mean to
metamorphose the men into the nobility
and the harmony of my Calliope, that they
may seem to you to be turned from pigeons
into doves.


LETTER CCCL.


Basil to Libanius.


Your annoyance is over. Let this be
the beginning of my letter. Go on mock-
ing and abusing me and mine, whether
laughing or in earnest. Why say anything
about frost? or snow, when you might be
luxuriating in mockery? For my part, Li-
banius, that I may rouse you to a hearty
laugh, I have written my letter enveloped in
a snow-white veil. When you take the letter
in your hand, you will feel how cold it is,
and how it symbolizes the condition of the
sender — kept at home and not able to put
his head out of doors. For my house is a
grave till spring comes and brings us back
from death to life, and once more gives to
us, as to plants, the boon of existence.


1 With a play on χάραξ, the word used for stakes.

2 7.6. three hundred.

3 Hom. iii. 346.

4 Non illepide auctor epistole fluvium obstringit restit-
uendt promisso, ut gratuito a se dari ostendat.’’ Ben. note.

δηριτή, an unknown word. Perhaps akin to κρίοτη. cf.
Ducange s.v.


LE ΤΡ 5, 325


LETTER CCCLI.
Basil to Libanius.


Many, who have come to me from where
you are, have admired your oratorical power.
They were remarking that there has been a
very brilliant specimen of this, and a very
great contest, as they alleged, with the result
that all crowded together, and no one ap-
peared in the whole city but Libanius alone
in the lists, and everybody, young and
old, listening. For no one was _ willing
to be absent—not a man of rank—not a
distinguished soldier — not an artisan. Even
women hurried to be present at the struggle.
And what was it? What was the speech
which brought together this vast assembly?
I have been told that it contained a de-
scription of a man of peevish temper. Pray
lose no time in sending me this much ad-
mired speech, in order that I too may join
if praising - your eloquence. - If Iam a
praiser of Libanius without his works, what
am I likely to become after receiving the
grounds on which to praise him?


LETTER CEeLil.
Libantus to Basil.


BEHOLD! 1 have sent you my speech, all
streaming with sweat asl am! How should
I be otherwise, when sending my speech to
one who by his skill in oratory is able to
shew that the wisdom of Plato and the ability
of Demosthenes were belauded in vain? I
feel like a gnat compared with an elephant.
How I shiver and shake, as I reckon up the
day when you will inspect my performance!
I am almost out of my wits!


ΦΕΡΕ CECE:
Basil to Libanius.


I HAVE read your speech, and have im-
mensely admired it. O muses; O learning;
O Athens; what do you not give to those
who love you! What fruits do not they
gather who spend even a short time with
you! Oh for your copiously flowing foun-
tain! What men all who drink of it are
shewn to be! I seemed to see the man him-
self in your speech, in the company of his
chattering little woman. A living story has
been written on the ground by Libanius, who
alone has bestowed the gift of life upon his
words.


LET PER, CCCLIV.


Libanius to Basil.


Now I recognise men’s description of me!
Basil has praised me, and 1 am hailed victor
over all! Now that I have received your
vote, I am entitled to walk with the proud
gait of a man who haughtily looks down on
all the world. You have composed an
oration against drunkenness. I should like
to read it. But I am unwilling to try to say
anything clever. When I have seen your
speech it will teach me the art of expressing
myself.


LETTER: 8 δὲ Ὁ


Libanius to Basil.


ARE you living at Athens, Basil? Have
you forgotten yourself? The sons of the
Cesareans could not endure to hear these
things. My tongue was not accustomed to
them. Just as though I were treading some
dangerous ground, and were struck at the
novelty of the sounds, it said to me its father,
‘* My father, vou never taught this! This
man is Homer, or Plato, or Aristotle, or
Susarion. He knows everything.” So far
my tongue. I only wish, Basil, that you
could praise me in the same manner!


LETTER CCCLVI.
Basil to Libanius.


I am delighted at receiving what you write,
but when you ask me to reply, I am ina
difficulty. What could I say in answer to so
Attic a tongue, except that I confess, and
confess with joy, that Iam a pupil of fisher-
men?

LETTER CCCEVIG


Libanius to Basil.


Wuat has made Basil object to the letter,
the proof of philosophy? I have learned to
make fun from you, but nevertheless your
fun is venerable and, so to say, hoary with
age. But, by our very friendship, by our
common pastimes, do away, I charge you,
with the distress caused by your letter . . .
in nothing differing.’


LETTER CCCLVIII.
Libanius to Basil.


On, for the old days in which we were all
in all to one another! Now we are sadly


—_—


1 Incomplete in original.


3206


BASIL.


separated! Ye have one another, I have
no one like you to replace you. I hear that
Alcimus in his old age is venturing on a
young man’s exploits, and is hurrying to
Rome, after imposing on you the labour of
remaining with the lads. You, who are
always so kind, will not take this ill. You
were not even angry with me for having to
write first.


LETIER CCCLIX,


Basil to Libanius.


You, who have included all the art of the
ancients in your own mind, are so silent,
that you do not even let me get any gain ina
letter. I, if the art of Dedalus had only
been safe, would have made me _ Icarus’
wings and come to you. But wax cannot
be entrusted to the sun, and so, instead of
Icarus’ wings, I send you words to prove my
affection. It is the nature of words to in-
dicate the love of the heart. So far, words.!
You do with them what you will, and, pos-
sessing all the power you do, are silent. But
pray transfer to me the fountains of words
that spring from your mouth.


LETIER CCCLXA.*


Of the Holy Trinity, the Incarnation, the
invocation of Saints, and their Images.


AccorDiNG to the blameless faith of the
Christians which we have obtained from God,
I confess and agree that I believe in one
God the Father Almighty; God the Father,
God the Son,God the Holy Ghost ; Iadoreand
worship one God, the Three.’ I confess to
the ceconomy of the Son in the flesh,* and
that the holy Mary, who gave birth to Him
according to the flesh, was Mother of God.*®
I acknowledge also the holy apostles, pro-
phets, and martyrs; and I invoke them to
supplication to God, that through them, that
is, through their mediation, the merciful
God may be propitious to me, and that a
ransom may be made and given me for my
sins. Wherefore also I honour and kiss the


1 Corrupt in original.

2 This letter is almost undoubtedly spurious, but it has a
certain interest, from the fact of its having been quoted at the
so-called 7th Council (2d of Nica) in 757. Maran (Vit. Bas.
xxxix.) is of opinion that it is proved by internal evidence to
be the work of some Greek writer at the time of the Icono-
clastic controversy. The vocabulary and style are unlike that
of Basil.

3 Neuter sc. πρόσωπα, not Vrogragets, aS We Should expect in
Basil.

4 ἔνταοκον οἰκονομίαν an expression I do not recall in
Rasil’s genuine writings.

5 Meoroxov, the watchword of the Nestorian controversy,
which was after Basil’s time.


features of their images, inasmuch as they
have been handed down from the holy
apostles, and are not forbidden, but are in
all our churches.


Letrers CCCLXI. and CCCLXIII.,: to
Apollinarius, and Letters CCCLXII. and
CCCLXIV., from Apollinarius to Basil, are
condemned as indubitably spurious, not
only on internal evidence, but also on the
ground of Basil’s asseveration that he had
never written but once to Apollinarius, and
that “45 layman to layman.”' Letter
CCCLXV., “το the great emperor Theo-
dosius,” on an inundation in Cappadocia, is
also condemned by the Ben. Ed. as spurious,
and contains nothing of ecclesiastical or
theological interest. Tillemont however
(vol.v., p.739) thought its style not unworthy
of a young man and a rhetorician, and con-
jectures the Theodosius to whom it is ad-
dressed to be not the great emperor, but
some magistrate of Cappadocia.


LETTER Οὐ"


Basil to Urbicius the monk, concerning
continency.


You do.well in making exact definitions
for us, so that we may recognise not only
continency, but its fruit. Now its fruit is
the companionship of God. For not to be
corrupted, is to have part with God; just as
to be corrupted is the companionship of the
world. Continency is denial of the body,
and confession to God. It withdraws from
anything mortal, like a body which has the
Spirit of God. It is without rivalry and
envy, and causes us to be united to God.
He who loves a body envies another. He
who has not admitted the disease of corrup-
tion into his heart, is for the future strong
enough to endure any labour, and though he
have died in the body, he lives in incorrup-
tion. Verily, if I rightly apprehend the
matter, God seems to me to be continency,
because He desires nothing, but has all
things in Himself. He reaches after nothing,
nor has any sense in eyes or ears; wanting


1 Ep. ccxxiv. § 2.

2Tntroduced by the Ben. with the following preface: En
magni Basilii epistolam, ex prisco codice xi. f. 324, @ me
exscriptam, que olim clarissimrs quogue virts Marctane
bibliothece descriptoribus Zannetro atgue Morellio inedita visa
est; atqueutrum sit alicubt postremis his annts edita, mthi
non constat, sed certe tn plentssima Garnerti edttione desid-
eratur. Ea scribitur ad Urbicum monachum, ad quem alia
due Basilii epistole exstant, nempe 123 arid 262, 1n Garneriana
editione. Argumentum titulusque est De Continentia, neque
vero scriptum hoc Basilianum diutius ego celandum arbitror
presertim guia Sutdas ac Photius nthil prestantius aut
epistolart charactert accommodatius Basilit epistolis esse
judicarunt. Mat, biblioth. nov. patr. iii. 450.


LEDTERS: 327


nothing, He is in all respects complete and} peculiar manner, without rendering his
full. Concupiscence is a disease of the soul; |; food... So mighty a power in Him was
but continency is its health. And continency | continency, that His food was not corrupted
must not be regarded only in one species, as,{in Him, since He had no corruption. If
for instance, in matters of sensual love. It} only there be a little continency in us, we are
must be regarded in everything which the| higher than all. We have been told that
soul lusts after in.an evil manner, not being| angels were ejected from heaven because
content with what is needful for it. Envy is|of concupiscence and became incontinent.
caused for the sake of gold, and innumerable| They were vanquished; they did not come
wrongs for the sake of other lusts. Not to]down. What could that plague have effected
be drunken is continency. Not to overeat|there, if an eye such as I am thinking of
one’s self is continency. To subdue the} had been there? Wherefore I said, If we have
body is continency, and to keep evil thoughts| a little patience, and do not love the world,
in subjection, whenever the soul is disturbed} but the life above, we shall be found there
by any fancy false and bad, and the heart is| where we direct our mind. For itis the mind,
distracted by vain cares. Continency makes| apparently, which is the eye that seeth unseen
men free, being at once a medicine and a!things. For we say ‘*the mind sees;”
power, for it does not teach temperance; it|‘‘ the mind hears.” I have written at length,
gives it. Continency is a grace of God.|though it may seem little to you. But there
Jesus seemed to be continency, when He was] is meaning in all that I have said, and, when

made light to land and sea; for He was car-| you have read it, you will see it.
Pew “eieier by carth nor ocean; and just as) ee
He walked on the sea, SO He did not weigh lopicoque seth Aikundele: Copatieiai ae
down the earth. For if death comes of χμοά nos edidimus AA. class 1. x. P- 499-500, guod incipit:
: ᾿ Δητοῦμεν, εἰ ἢ πλήρωσις τῶν βρωμάτων επὶ Χριστοῦ εκέκτητο καὶ
corruption, and not dying comes of not ἢδν-] κένωσιν. Erat enim hac guoque una ex objectionibus herets-
ing corruption, then Jesus wrought not mor- | ipirii.< shents etiam’ in Gnsolita matroitate, Ulitur quoque
tality but divinity." He ate and drank in a Athanastus exemplo trinitatis tllius apud Abrahamum con-
vivantis, negue tamen naturali necessttati obtemperantts ;


quod item de Christo post resurrectionem edente intelligen-
1 θεότητα οὐ θνητότητα. dum dicit,


ENDEXES.


‘
:
)
ὃ
͵
2
4
. '
,
>
‘
.
,
Η
; ;
ἷ
ae
‘
«
.
1
ἢ
' 2
δ
ΑΝ
ὁ
oY
‘
ial
‘
᾿ υ
‘ Ὁ
ad ;


Sia.) DA,


PND EXTON, ἘΣ a


PAGE PAGE PAGE PAGE

ἘΠΕΙΣ Ey ef bee. Ὁ Bods av. 6) τῶν 4 121 [10 1 TEAS oe 2 τ ἘΠ Oe ee eae ee
By 2 oo) COL GE, 63 Ἐν SA 00; 275 IM. 25s, wat Veta aR Ii. 10, 15,30): aR Ἵν τ
he 2p LK)! 58,62 See whe a’ 20 WHHL Oe) 405 se Nes li. 12, LAX. 05; 50; 202
Beak on pla a 03 ΧΧΙ 10... 228 IX. ag ols eben eey 1 Sv fal Sod ee
Wy 43s 5) wr + 63, G4 Meio) ΙΧΧ. 130 ΧΧΥ 2), 2G a 5] ἰγε an ON 208
1 Eee the) 82 XXV. το, LXX. 5 ΧΑ ΤΡ ae eS Wwi.G, ΤΟ Χο τὸ οὐ
Weis ae vate. Gg KEW 20; 21. 276 506.4) a. ae oe 30 lye, Pl, Χο τ τ al
le 5x LX. 2 "42 5 a) ἢΣ 5 Xxxiii. 6, LXX. 5 le, 82. si. chow Wena
1. oy eran 65,68 XXL. 53; LXX. 30 XXXVL. 27, La ee jt, 68 ew Wer en eee) 8
Mieny vel alia GF xaxhii. 21; LXX. 39 SERVE! Bud ae es lv...22, oi) ον ΝΥ ΥΠ215
Pee ee wire, OC) 1Ἐν ὙΧ νην VE ai) ty 0) | 65 ΕΞ v.68) 6 sm eq δ ents Wil Si so a) ae es
πῶ a aes .70 WV Stel} 212 ον: 4, a Ribs oy eee ΠΟ
ORIG ὁ οὖν 72 Put Gah. sh) 212 v. 6, LXX. as a 248 ᾿χνι 53, LXX. aye
Be τ at le. 74,75 RVI VES. το το οὐ 203 γε a ene 0 Ixvills.6%;% «7 92
ΠῚ eal ts 70 EVs TO, τὸ si... 297 Villy 5a) A La Qeeencin Lexis? 3, LXX. a) 39
1.14... 984, 86, 87 avi, ΟΣ hs 132 Vit, Out) es eae TenG' : 7
τ ie | O2 | NUM. Y. 15°, 304 Kis δ τιν ae Ray Loree ae Ixxiii. 8, LXX. d= 287
TEC ow ee hes. OF ΧΙ, oy a LXX. 38 ΧΥ ἢ me 55 lxxiii..'2395,24 4 τς
1: 20: . <- 70; 89,.06 Mil. Ὁ), 8.5. «τ: χν. δὶ & ie aivi Ἰχχν τ ts Bae
ΕΟ 20! δὴν 228 xxi. 8 Pits ey ao RVIs.4; LXX.. a PAS bexys 2, LXX. eae y.
eee 2 ig hiathe Ox Khe 9) hey τῆν ὁ ZO XVil. 3, 4, LXX.. 288 lxxv, 5, dX. ||) ee
Ἰ 2,0. π᾿ Ὁ, 102 ΣΧ 1 πον, .251 ΧΥ]]. 4: EX Υ70 Ιχχν 3; XX) eee
τον τὰν 60 Shi 20% 230 XViil. Zhe, RY Ἰχχν 20). ba ae ae
eae al ste’ KUT XXXVI. 5, LXX. 7 XViii. ee Came 67 Txxvills G36 a4 lo pea
Pee es ee 217 9611}. 17... .. o's 2865 XVili. 31 oi ee eae Txxix. 6 72s si 7.5
sa ΡΘΟΥΝ Ὁ: Weise ἢ Ἀπ. ORS ΧΥΠ]]. 31, ΕΥΧ. xlil, xiii kxxe αν ae oh ee
ὙΠ 8. τν a ate ee Wee Oy otal ray) τὸ MVM, 39h 1: Ti ke2 Tees ἘΣ 200
Bie a) cate, 66 Mini πο ἡ Ὁ BOW XIX. Q, 10, LXX. τοὶ Ixxxth. δέοιτο ΠΝ
iy vel ahs! xt Wic2hs te.) oe MI TAS MIK, FG.) Share. Ue TO! Ἰχχχν δι τὸν eee
Mie 3). 221, 207 Wels 5 xiii KS Bip ΠΝ 5 Lxxxvill. go" 6.0 a ag
ἹΠΗΚ ΤΕ ΠΕΡ cell's 1] Vi. £3, LXX. 117 MEME) E20 GN sa aie iN exits FON ag. cat pe 7
Se ae ee MUX 16,34 %) “30 RGIS Te ca ΕΙΣ νἀ (ὧς:
ἵνα, RKO) 7 EV, Oy Sil ee lv xxiii. 6, Pe ΧΕ ΧΙ τ Ver oaee
INES ak ἦν πόδ. BOF ig a ἢ ἅς Xxlii. 6, LXX. e) 64 ΧΟ ΧΟ an
Ve Diced kan - νὰ RR τὸ τ - Kivi Ἔχ S : ἀν SPY 1 CROCE. TS wie eters ae
We + LT, 13, 14, REG ὁ οἷς 19 Χχῖν σεν ee 6 OW 1S τ ΠΝ
He, ΤΧΧ ,. 207 ΧΧΧΙΪ. 6, LXX. lviii Χχῖν eR ΣΙ ΧΟΙ ES as. ἢ τ»
We 15. ἘΧ Χο; 206 sxe 2 xl, xhhit xxi. ΧΟ 4) τὺ SOV. TOM PL 6
We 2324) ers, 208 RENN I2,L XX. 117 un, 9 as 6 xev.. 4, LX Xe) oS ge
Wo oa a et). SD ΣΧ 30). 6 | vii ΧΧΙΧ. 7 ὙΠ ie’ χουν. 6; LX XA 2 eee
Be BS Vs εν ἢ το τ, 12 XXxil. 39, LXX. 117 XXIX. 12 Shes Kev. δὶς + 230
MVS 19,224 i. 20 MEK.) TZ tele OI KKK. 25 LO, 5.09) ΧΙ ΧΟΥ 5 LXX. a BRS
Mike 2a Δ. 9 Sill XXXIli. 13, 15; ᾿ XXxiil. 6 oa Oe Cis 6% 64% oe 194
ΤΙΣ, 20. ei a) - 208 EX el La ae XXXill. 6, ie 121 | αι τὴν νἀ ὙΠ
RMS WS e's 277 RRMVEL, 25 Ὁ Cal FO RANIV IF aly ad Cee ae τ τὰ
TRL 19. fs. tye Josh. xxw.27, LXX.. τὸ KESIVE, “ew 6 CML Ss leh al ag 2
BRN, BGs ans 2g ud. v.27, LAX. |. | 285 AEN c TG sate avy 295 CM 30s.) sh rye ΤῊΣ
es PM a” 9 MAVin Δ Ὁ τ ἢ ἈΠΕ SERVE, Oy en ah SV 20 ClV.. 24%." + a ¢ 105
WAV. ΡΠ: (307 Sam. Vile 4 δῖ ς 2.117 XXXVil. 4 sa) FPOE CDV 2G) ai al ναι Oe
MOV σον ey.) 32 i Sg i eet 21 ΣΧΧΨΙΪ, TGs Ὁ ὁ. 262 CV. 29s), τ 1 6
SLVEM EO δι. 30 BV FA ἐπ as EAMIK, ΣῊΝ νυν 95 Civ. 30. ἀν e
XXxl. 47. ΣῈ 10 MINS ZOO) ον εὐ FREY ΧΙ FOCI LN xvi ὃν 37. νι wh Bie 6 ae
abe S, LXX. 3 7 Mere PS uti. 260 ΧΙ. Gta d te) 5.0 GVI., 32'S eer ae
KM Oy Seah ay 10} XVI. IZ +4) 230 xy A an’ wh 3S CVI. 13. it Valea 7
Rive Ora τς ὍΔ ἘΠῚ ee 22-0) eh a) BRT xlv. 8 . aoe xii evils οι τς ote ae
Shi TOs δεν. 277 | 2 Ki, iv. 30 ° IOI Ws ISA te eka? ΟΥ̓. 26 ἰὼ aig ge
Exod. vi. ὡς ἘΠ ΜΕ ὦ αν eee Zien used ΠΝ ΎΤΕΙ ΟἸΧ δ ἀν ΠΡ ee
ak) ee Vile FS ony a) 2.77 ΕΝ sh ented tS ον sei
xiv. 31, LXX. Pe job: ht, LaXe sn « 138 We Fay ον ie: 35 Cx. 5s pM al a aoe


332


—__—.


PAGE
Ps. ext, 6, 153
ΧΙ: Οἷς lvii


CM. Fe ee «253
See a se) IK
CxVIN TO", Ὁ. 121
Caviit..21 xlii
Cm. τ τς | 32
Cwawe° 3)» 5. lit
ὈΣῖΣ ὅν. LK. 2
Cxix. OI 120
Ome. TOS ee Ὁ G5
exis TOS ss τς ἐκ ΙΣ
CXIX. ἘΣ 230
ΧΙ Ts 2X. 139
xe. 146 ek is ὙΠ]
ὌΧΧΙ: 3. 93


xxiv. 3,4; xX 263
cxxiv. 5, LXX. 263
CXXIV. 7 146
ΟΧΧΧΙΙ. 4 . lix, 144
ἜΣΣΧΥΤ BO “on |e Bz
ὌΣΧΧΙΧ: Ὁ τς 4.54 Se KER
exxxix. 7.0, 12%, 214
CXXMIXS 13.3 120
ΟΧΧΧΙΧ. 14. 106


Cells: i ackyectun. ον 20
Cx. TOs | datas Ὁ
CHV. BOs. ἐν ls 6


ὌΧΙ 13) 1K. 2. FERS
ὌΧΙ 5 ce 4) oe 6
exlvii. 4 66


CXIVMI V2. τὺ x) ce ee
exlvill. 5. il
XIV, ois Nie RE
Ὁ Aye Kastee es ΓΟ

Ῥἕονν Tvs sw i

Dae os) te ΕΙΣ
1 Kwa ἐπ τὰ (eee
Vo Sy LA τ ἢν]


v. Ἵ . xl vill
V. 177
vi. 5 ΔῈ ΟὟ 144
vi. Se


vi. 3 ἜΣ Χ tee 97
Wil. 22,23, Χο 17ὃ
ὙΠ: 2 2 ts, eu do ΧΙ
ὙΠ ΣΦ, LX X. xli, 120


χ: Οὐ “eo. 2282):208
IX. TO ne Ha. ae 55
Χο TO.) 4 » go2
Be MQ. 2% ore) πον 504
ΣΙ 26.15 fue? we? hv
Kili. ὦν Iuxm. « 162
RIV. oie’ τς ἐς SESS
i 3. 1, ee.
RV. ΠΟ τς 255
xvii. 3 222


xvii. 28, LXX. "2, 223
svilts 3, LAX. 147
xviii. 22, LXX. . 227
XIX. <1 e's . xiviii
Ril 2s a eate hte ΟΖ
xxiii. 14. lviii
xxiii, 27, LXX. xlviii
MA 29° ΕΥ̓ ἀν 47


ΧΧΥΙ. 21 ἰ- 222
ΧΧΙ͂Χ, 12 . xivili
“XIX, 10, Tene. tbo


Eccles. i. 2, LXX. . 4
1.6; 7 2) +293
ii, 7 vives =) eld
iWiA .


BASEL.


PAGE

Eccles. vii. 7, LXX. 154
vii. 8, LXX. 5.262

ISS c's, oe eS
ΧΊΟΣ, ὠὰ om

Mis ie! ΤΟ 172

ΧΙ A ΣΎ 202

xi. 12, ΧΝ. 292

Song of Sol.v.2 . ὍΝ
LS Slee oe Vie ose τὸ


1. 3° * 95, 275
i. 18 So, See
is BE fe ot. ἐπ)
1.5: LXX. 3 2

ays ee We,"
Vv. 20 obs xlix


Whe 43. ios gies) porate rere
ΠΡΌ Ass) en wl Pe 1


1X. 4 > FERS
Mi BOS ala see eae
Xi, ΘΝ. 277
aN tees Pa eh
IVF 4 lvii
xiv. 13 XXXIV
RU: 26. ie: mgt te LD
Xxll. 4


ndipuact pe eer
KEV. Oy LO Ma oe VEGA
xxix, 1G, LX. ἥ
pS Hig: a Sy 261
ἘΠ ΙΖ oe ger ee 6
ne a eT 6
x1,.22, LOOK. αὐ 56; 92
= CLR Bio, CARL MNT ee ©
athe 6. « : 277
xlii. 14, LXX. 160, 262
ΧΙ, 10 xiii
Siw, οἷν 3 he BI ees
oe Res aa aes, 8)
DAVE. GPO is ceo ee ee


xix. O% xhiii
Beles Gs akc Ve 2]
1. 6, TO 5 Lowe
11 2 a5, as ΓΘ b's
lis :2,43, LXX. 118
1111. ᾿ς 120
1s oe XXXV
lvi. IO. 251
lvili. 4. lxi, 293
᾿νε ον ys. Ὑ phe ΙΧῚ
ΘΝ Snr Eis


Ixii. 14, LXX. seers

PMU, Wee gah hare Bl
Jet. 1. 10

Hs 26500444 τὸ
11. 12,44, fied: pans


11.123 116
iii. I ‘229,234
11 eee othee AUST


iV. 5; LXX. orf
Vi. 22 e .Φ Φ . 73


Vill. Aas 147, 151
Wit 22), κα 7 har §t
IX 4, . 149, 285
ἴχ 16, EXO. eee ala


ΧΟ XK. Sal cee
xX. ©1, JX. 230
ἘΠῚ 23.4% «198
xvii. 6, LXX. oi δὲ
ΝΠ FZ . 4150
xviii. 22, LXX. 237


XX. 2, Bee : 35
᾿ xxii. 28-30, LXX.
XXV. 12


PAGE

Jer. sora νας. 120
WAMIX6 45 he. ρον BO
Dah. LEO Mina πη ge
FRCS Yio Tia in 80S ies SS


Vile 3216 147
XVlll. 20 264
xViil. 24 144


SETUP Gis, Mey te HO
Dan. iii. 10 .
1} 02) eae |S oe fe)
ἵν. 5. Ie ς 0
Wi, ΤΟ. fs: GE
ὙΠ: 10, ἢ τὺ πὸ 2A
EEL Peet Lise ΤΊΖΗ


mat ee 298
Hosea ii. 13 . 150
ee oa 150
Bi, GBS τ. ἢν ἧι
χῖν. 9 Ὁ & «20
JOC MAL. oe el tei OA
Amos il. 7 213
lil. 6 lvii
Wis 12: 4


: 147
νὰ 13, LXX. 67
Mio HS esd 7 ALR RO
3S yh ee, ge5
vil. 10

ance 12


-7
Nah. i. ae LXX. 225, a
Hab. ii. 3 +: 250
Page. 11.46, 5 We. 35


Zech. ii. 8 185
See | She

Kis ple pei Le 120

Mal. τ, Ὅς. 29,32
1.90.) τς ete BOT


is 5 eo OR ae * See

2 Esdras ii. 14
Judith ix: 5§,16° τς _-33
Wisdomi. 4 . «122
A eh Peep 21
ΔΙ

ἸΧΘΎΣ oe oe

ΧΙ. ΟῚ 5127, 260

ΧΥΠ TS ἧς ΤῚ

Ecclug. 1%. 13 chen. τὶ


xx. 18 298
SXVINE AT Ls.) 88
ΧΙ Sa ει 160


xiii. 20.7% II

MAL. SOG, ἢ
Baruch iii. 3, LXX. ΙΟ
WBS) lysed. EM

Piel 346s a) se Me es
2 Mace. Vil. .
ΔΙ δ ες. 1 20 το £0 i!
As Gt i ey el

11, τὸ. 28 oe II

rh ee ae ae ee Σ Σ

ili. CA se re 25

ἸῸΝ ἘΞ WN Bis 2m


18. OGG τ Ὁ 42k
ἦν. 20P23 ind.’ 75
vs Sb L223
Ws EU 2 SY) dee 8
Ws 12... ΟΣ 20 1,205
ὦ ΚΝ 2
Vs BO vic 128
Vi Pa Ak ae ees:

240, 248


<


828. bs hia hee


PAGE
Matt. v. 32 ee
γ. 34 . 238, 248
Va 77 1548
v.41 on tae
Vv. 42 xvii, xlix
Wis 2: 260
Vi. 29. 128
vii. I 244
vii. 3 106
vil. 4 266
vii. 6 50
Vil, 14) 146
Wl 5. 92
vil, τό. xlix
Mil: 18. xlix
wal i22 25
Will. iB vau fe 14
Vil, oc. a)» 144
Vit. IZh.. i 144
Vi. FC 120
ix. PR te II
ix. 12, 13- 152
ie de (ere 12
1K. 29) ἐν το 271
Res ΠΟ 5 ts 208
ΧΟ 10,20. τ 53:
E120 ng 38
Χ. 29 115
x. 37 144
x. 38 144 ᾿
xi. 20 25
x1..25 257
X1.,27 . XXKVIli, 29,
270
ΚΙ. 2a oy Ree ae
x1..29.. 4 2%, 300
ΧΙ, 28. τς, 25, 221
ΧΙ, 2352. 4 ates
ΧΙ, 26:5 12
Xi, 5.1 ς 29, 47
Mls 345 22. 292
ΧΙ, 34 0 js eas
A. 30 5238 154
Ke AL at ve 41
χῖν ghia. ye 149
XIV: 330.8 II
KV. TB aig. Sy 129
xv. 20. 15
ΚΥ1 3G ly 5}
xVL TOV.) ae ee
Xvi. 24 110
KVi. 27°); XU, 10
XVills, % νυ a RE
XVill, TQ) 4.924, 40%
XVili. 15-17 314
XVI. BP Ὁ: 129
XVili.. 20) ὁ 146
KVill. 22, 22:4. 209
xix. Ὁ . 214
xix. 7 . 265
max, 21 - 208
XIX. 2B! ie eee
XX. 12 44 dw) 2052


Χχ, 29... a xlu, 219
Take Gv II
xxi. 28 « MXXIX
xxl. 33 79
xxi. 43 62
xxiii. 24 266
Ste bss 9 276
EK, 1 50, 177»,


190, 210, 233, 294


INDEX OOK TEXTS:


Matt.


Mark


Luke


John


PAGE
XxIv. 22 68
XXIV. 35 53


XXiV. 36 Xxxvili, 276


Guin. Ble 25
XXV. 21 eae
XXV. 34 a Iva
ive 30. τὸ e128
Χχν. 41 lvii
HAVA 3 299
SKVI. Ooi. os XXXIX
XXV1. 52 256


eV GAL τἴ ig EE


REVI. IA. 196
SAVUL FSy. xii
IVI. τοῦτον KKKIV,


15, 27, 28, 35, 37;
48, 156, 250

RBS eee Ra 5)
ΠΣ ΝΥ tad, BE
ne 0 ae Ὁ om
Ge πὸ a 25
ae πτ τ" 9
ΠΧ ΣΌΝ aie ae ΤᾺ


1X. 37 128
x. 18 276
xe 23,24. 120


x1. 23 aie 243
Mite 32.110, 276,277


ΧΙ 21 τ et: AGE
Ἱ LE : 24
eae πο 275
ji. I : 41
We LE y a xlil
eta ταν. | a4
li. 34,35 + . 298
li. 52 . 12, 24, 276 |


iil. ὃ Area 220


ὙΙ 27, 25 128
V1. 34, 35 . xivill
Ni 17. - 244


Raat eo ves ΧΟ]
ὙΠ AG το Ὁ. 6


ae ae τ Ὁ. 25
S38. Ὁ ἜΝ ES
ΧῚ ΤΟ] ἐς 2
ΧΙ 26. «ὦ 121
Bi. 22. ὡς 4
xii. 8, 9 8 19
xi. TO -. 44
ἘΠ ea lvi
Xi. 290 of) hae
Mil. 5G. 262
XI. 27 ς 149
It? 20᾽- 144
9 ele Ge OU 144
Dae es 152
xv. 32)5 152
Vi. 20430.) « 143
XVI. 20 - 20
XVll. 2 : 150
xvii. 21 122
MV ΤΟΝ ays BET
EVHI. 246 o ς 1290
EE. Sar ak, 4) EGO
ΧΧΊΙ (27 = ERA
Sa. 2G yo: RR
ΣΎ | oa XERIK
Χχῖν. 39

i. t “Sexxxvi; xii, xii


11,24


John i. 3.


PAGE

14, 118, 138

Tere, τὴν ἘΠ 20
1:. 1 4. τὸ Ὁ; FES
bed dhietead 6
15. Ὁ, 03, 23;
274

120". 298, 304
Fe 35... Ὁ ie BE
1π|..2 21
11. ἢ a (22
iii. 6 7
ii 14e\. 20
1... ἡ 276
Wey eh |< 116
iv. 18 225
ΟΝ eh tency 3G
ἦν. 24 Jat, 15;
29, 30, 40

Bera! ise ay | Xa
v.19 . XXXL;
152. 120

v. 20 ὦ, 12
ΜΙ: ὦ KRU
Ve 22 τ MN 152
¥: 23 ς Ὁ, FO
v. 29 xlili, 151
Wag sh paw 260
ν. δι᾿. 20
Wis ZU ot sy ey) He
ae oi ee ga 9
vi. 40 xl, 119
Wi. AQ, G1) 20
Vi. 54 Ixxili, 179
vi. 54, 62 . Ixaill
Vl. 57: ὦ. XXXIX, 13
117, 118

vi. 63 «20, 212


VIZDEe vesicle 0 Σὶ


Wilei2Ae sis 243
WH ST τς προ 20
Vil. 51. « ..242,; 268,

295


cae ἘΠῚ Saas) Sats | CIE


Χ
x
Fe BEN She ol hav) | ET
KS) s KARWAN, 277
x


2 BOW ας 36
X. 30 37, 206
ΧΙ. 25 XXXIX, 13,

117
xii. 28 - 29
ΧΙ]. 49 13, 14
ΧΙ]. 50 14
ΧΙ]. 35 - 233, 243
ΧΙ Sa at ee Π1


SV Σοὶ a Is 25


Maeve sa) Mink Ey ΕΖ
xlv. 9 9, 14, 106,
141

χῖν Ὁ, ΣΟ ὦ Ὁ. 28
Xie ΤΟ πο co oe LEXI
ΧΙΝ AE, ὦ 5 pel 1241
χῖν LO! 1 20,.30. 34
XIV. τὸ; 28.. 120
xiv. 17 . 29, 30, 34
ἐν REVO “tap a ἀμ.) 33
xiv. 23. . Ix, 37
Bi. 2A Se cia Ue 14
πὶν. 20. ive 20, SE2
xiv. 28 .xxxvili, 118,
119


ΧΙΝ SE tig τ BA


PAGE
John xve Meg Sy SR
χρυ τ Wy RO
χοὰς Bike
KVG PY dl) cet ol oe
SV Te sf a XXXV1
XV. 20 « 15; 24, 29;
30
XV. 2659s) 3} «> 30
Χν 2, οὐ λει
V1. cae ay pete 5122
ἘΝ1: 13) τοι «fy 2430
KVIITA ists. che τὴν 29
AVL: wi) ee ONZE
RVI. Qe re lviii
ΧΙ 39 τ oe, “Tide
ΧΥ Fe XU, THF
XVI eh hye, 29
XVil. 10 XXXVii, 13
XVI DE hye se 251
ΧΙ 22 γο 119
MV 2h ae 2 1}
KYO au ake al." 25
XX 22. 22. ὦ 35
χὰ. 2 wy, onto) AM
Acts.i, δ ot val ean 8
1s 65.7, ΠΣ FAO
i, 7 sa τ ρου TIES
1 1G) 5 Niue τ eee
is, 22/5) ome 25
11: 36) 6) πὸ op Ry ἈΠῚ
ist; oy τ: 1111
τ».
IVs 125. ahs onl 250
ie Fey cae a ee
ἵν a 208
ν. 4.9 ες 23
Vi 20%. o> or
ἀπ το ho a $4 2a
Vili, 2s 6
vil. 16 elie ΣΙΝ
ψι1:.20. 52
Vii. 22 lyili
vit. SL) Χ
vii. 55 10
Vill, 20 Ὁ 157
Vili. 20; .. 35
Will. 27; lxiv
ig.ik ss on 279
Pa ee é "E20
pe νι τ gs
χ 207; Sh oy | COE
38.5 ὃ 18
Se) cee eke a St
XV1. 4 ere gh
Xvi. 25 oy ats Ne
Vy 4s). 4a
XVil. 21 . et ae
MVil. Ze al ἃ 25
SIRS NT) enh τ", 25
XX. 29 ie ae 61
Sete TS ae a, BRO
SAVE EO aerate an | “EZ
XXVii. 5. . 259
XXVIll. 2 . 12
Rom: i. 4 a ou 4044, 1290
Uap « Il 47
is Bey ae ah eye
i. 10
ΤΟ a> 5 101
15 20° τξτ, 71; 220;
: 275
4. 25; 22. ΒΑ


PAGE

Rom: i. 4453. .< 5)
WG tne: <2 ae 25
Tek eke Peter t « 7
lik Aue 16: atel f ὙΣΠῚ
iis 10... « 257
IV, 10. <1) 20
5 eT τς II
Tote - 14
Vu 12.957. 300
v.14 19
γ11.. 20
Vin Su 18
Vi. 45 5 21
γ1: ee 22
vi. 8 : 20
VAT? τὸ SEZ
Vin 19, “oa 4 150
Vi. 22) 8) 3 22
Wily 2 4 123
Vile 5, ἢ sea enue es
ΠΥ Ὁ 131
viii. 2 . 36, 44, 120,
212

Vili. 3 300
villi. 6 ait 22; 44
Vill. 9 20. 1.39
Vili. 9, 10 lxi
Vill. IO. 36
viii. II. 35, 30
Wilh: ἘΣ 38
vill. 14. 38
vili. 16. 38
viii. 16, 17 44
Vill. 17. « Ae
Vill. 13-6 , #203, 264
vili. 26 . 44
Vili. 26, 27 31
Will, 23a * 190
Vib. 204) οὐ Sopa
Vill.. 32.4) E4, 26, 30
Vill. 2 τὰ oh Osean
Wil. 37 ai οἰ eae
ee eae en 8
χε ae, gee
1χ. 21:- ade eas ὃ
ΧΙ. 22. «᾿ (Re
Xi Few . Ὁ:
ΧΙ ΘΝ ς ‘ 6
Kit, 5,0 38
Kil; QO ς 50
Xi, Res 128
pe Pi 7 » 128
xl, 07, 21 99
xll. 19 128, 198
ΠῚ Oy 2 « 2370
ΧΗ. 4 dhe a SO
Xi. 10.4... 177/244;
270

Hil. DP ον, See we
Xi. £3 τὸ does (MGS
xiv. I aya 0
xiv. 10. .128, 235
iV; BBE, κι 1:
xiv. 21 128
xv. 16 a 212
XV. 29 22
XV1. 25 «) ae
KVL. 27 en diye ee
t Cofs1..9 7,438
is πον II
i. 20 26
i, 21 xlii, 41


BASIL.


334
PAGE
BCor.i..24 +. xii, 9; 14) 29
276
1; 27, 29) 645. 130
i, 20 xlii, 5
i. 30, 31 es
li. 4 41, 52
ii. 6 . 49, 263
li. 7 akg hl
ii. ὃ ioe!
ME TO 4) 5 (te 7; 24
li, ‘10, 11 35
ii. 11 26, 32, 45
1.1.2 36, 139, 150
1.1 go ἀπ ον 45
ill. 9 Aas gee
ΤΠ 2 oe hs Ws’) 22
W116. pil MSA,
Ula γα: aso
IVE: hin this ite 12
iv. 3 243
iv. 5 onl a,
iv. 6 aE oe
iv. το. 20
iv. 16. 227
ν.4 - ες 43
Wialh. 31, 43
Mish) = REKIX, 159
Ws TO τ ix, SO, 121
WiksGi 214
ViLWIG τὸ. 227
Vii 20 πως 214
Vib. 3. 53, 214
Vil. 34 . - 50
Vii. 39 . 311239
Vii. 40. 40
Vili. 5, 6 117
Vili,’6 6 4 Ὁ ἢ
viii. 12 253
ix. 19 128
Axi 21 pe LAE
ἾΧ. 25 ἜΝ ἘΠ RZD
ix) 27 ν Mv, 225
~ ἡ 19, 21
xe 5 KM It, τὸ
x. ALO 128
ΧΟ 203, 260,
294
x) 16". Ixxiil
KOE. Gon | ARIS, 128
MAL we ot, wee
mA: | δ + 45
Ray ee wie) Rl
XA; ἢ , 28s
ΧΙ Fs - 248
MAES vs VG, ἢ» 20
xi, 16 . ae
ΧΙ 23 = Ixxill
KiB. EG, 24, 20
xii. 6 he! eG
xii ἢ ye... 89
BA DS >a) te ie 7
ΧΙ, 8-IO . 244
ΧΙ, τ 23,25," 26,
138
xis 12), Ἐπ 20
κι 18. ae)
KI. 21 5 38, 283
ἘΠῚ 25 s ef a
Kil. 26% 39, 129
xi. 27 > ERK
ΧΙ, 28 . 25, 70
xiii 1-3 245


PAGE
1 Cor, ‘xis 455 hs 6 RSS
ἈΠ Gt ah eee ah ἜΣ
Mit 16901 159
ΧΙ 75 OP 163
KIO. Bis! nla 275
R11.) 10 ie 275; 275
XL ES. FEO, 120
xa 277! as ey eu
ΧΙν 2 te ibs 39
xiv. 24, 25 23
χυ Tag Pee eee
ΧΥ 19. 17
KV 220 \0hs 20
ΣΧ 26. 128
KV. 24 119
Χν 27 . 8
°XVa 28 XXXVI, 120
XN. 30% 37
xv. 41. ° 35
XV. 4I, 42. 25
VGA oo ORO ae
KV. 40. 30
XVE47 5» 30
xv. 48, 49 xl
χν. 49. 20
χὺς 52. 84
Xvi. 13 292
2iCorsi. 124. 29
1.22 5 Ὁ
τς ει} |
1} δὰ ὁ 9 tea
11. 68... ς . 206
ee Gees 39
ΤΠ τς 40
1156. ν΄ τς 36
Hig το 4s 35
ili. 8,9 ὁ 30
Hl: 9) 4 35
Hic ὙΦ, 005 39" 5.33
Wis 17. Ὁ 35
His τὸς ὃς 34
Wed 4s II
NO τὸ τς 284
iv. 10 20, 263
Wt τό οὖ: lvill
ok! MS - 203
ee en a a
Vv. 5 52 20
v. 8 bt
v.10 Σ Klin, 235
v.14 . ixxill
v.-17- .lvili, 31, -121
Vv. 21 120
5 ire ee ne fee cy
Wis © <5 UR See
A. 10]. ΕἾ 598
Mbit <6 145
111. δι τς 130
ΧΟ ἐς δ 23
X. 32 = Seas
ΧΙ Zé. hl, ERO
Kis} wih) ἀπάτα Ὁ
EL. se 4 20
X27 46 1 263
Mls 26. . 568
ΣΙ 4°. . 27
xii. 4,5,6 . 23
Pc ly pale * 290
SU. Ora Mie 0) OG
mail. τὸς ge
ΧΟ Se Ρ ἘΣ
SUM 95 τ ες 195


PAGE
2 or. Kua ns. Nie i ae
Galata, 83). ta - XXKIN
ὦ Oe ἢ 10
111. 243 Ve « 275
ALIS col ἢ ei ae
ca Ee oe 14
1: 10.,.ἡς 20, 300
111. 27 18, 316
ἷν. 4. 5 Jy goo
iv. 6. cys 21; 30
1γὶ γι. ΟΣ 7
iv. 9. 275
Vie) Wi ts 17
iy Mie Bo) WS ie! Ny a
v. 19, 20, 21 2973
ΝΕ 23... πὸ tng liv
Mi es s/o We 22
i τη τὴ δἰ ς 5.839
vi. 8. . . 7
vi. 10 ee 4
Ephalit7, 18% 38
eee Wy, ee8 Ae 6
1 eae A ΡΟ; 2ΕῚ
ae γον ΚΟ aD ν
TSB Hott 4 : « ae
Me hg Ret ie
ay Cae Sm mo 1ὺ]
eT ἐς ΤΣ ae, Paton
WAS ἃς. 10, 37
11. 0] 5 Wy “ep ae
11 9. τ ἘΠῚ 7
MAS? 10 ὄν αν πατῇ
Wes. .o Σ 222
iv. 5. > 22, “260
iv. IO ΕΣ 9
he 0 5: 6°
lv. 30 : 25, 31
ivi: 31 me 128
Wer τς το ας at eee
Wie : 128
Le οτος ΝΣ 304
eae, PPS 12
Vi 4. oe Teg
vi. 10 Le) ee
Vie 12 ; 139
ey a 21
Phil. i. eae |
1 2B: FO) 2 eee
i. 23. a 44
1.23, 34. ἐπ 11
1: Ὁ ees. (Ee eee
UR. ee Ne rae
AES Bia? Mote Ne ais
i. 6. fe) eae
Ear ete, 400
ii, S .‘xxxix, 74, 146
il. Q . XXXVi, XxXxvili
II
WMG, αι 0 Ρ 2
τα ον 85
111: 5 8... τοῦ; 177
11. 3,4. . © 44
τ. {δὺς εξ SG
ili. 10; 11 . at
Ili. 13 oh et Re
iy ΦΡΎ 1. Pas
TH. Ge og SS, 20
lil: 29° ὩΣ ΊΟΣ; 262
111. 265% ft ee
Ve AG ΣΉ 125
γν: π; 0. 269
IV. 9s 30


PAGE

Cel 1422 « oe ΟΣ
1. 22,013" ne ee
i, 152)". oO, "6b, tag
1: 10%. xi, ΤᾺ 25
24, 54

1: 16,117) ones 6
1:17. SNe) ft ea oe
᾿ς OT RRND ΤΙΣ
1 Οὐ ΕΓ 229
ALE, 2 ὙΠ
i 8S NS ae eee
it. 16 (ae. 19]
19g ens 6
ae ὸς ἢν
Hs Be a ΤΟΣ
111: 5 x? es Ὁ 20) ia
Ty Ὁ; 10. οὶ tees
lit, Ζ 301
Ti EG tee 5
1 Thess, Wits. τ
ro erie tek Sh

it. 12; 234 4 oe

Wa τ eae

iv. II .128, 269

iW: 2 eS Sires
ἀν, ὙΦ᾽ <932, 162

iv. ὙΠ 44

Vo 1 ss | 0

¥. 21 τ Ὁ oe

νι 23. 5. hee
ΦΊΡΗΘΞθ. 1. : ae 7,19
His antes 203

11. 15 ἫΝ gS

1. τοὺ 6 ge

111. δ eeepc

ili. το . lili, 128

1 ΤΙ 1.93 ἘΠ 200
1. Ὁ; TO", <x ie
1.5.0 Ὁ ΡῈ 20

1. 10 16
LTS 2. Sage

1. ΟΣ ΡΝ ΤῸ
1 20} Ὁ τ 220, 11
re na + 2a
UR gee 128
eae eae 272
ih ae ea 128
111: Ὁ ἘΣ 253
τ. 3 τ Ὁ ΟἿ
Hit: ΤΟΝ "4" a ae
Widou, he) ee
WG ge 21
iv, 13.1 ct eee
V. 11, 122237, 236
VV. 20." Ὁ ὙΠ}
2D ἘΝ ee
Wie 12 2147, 140
VI, EZ «Veo 4 ye
Vis Th 6 ae
Vi. TO. Ὁ 17
Wi ISS ΝΣ ἘΝῚ
Vi. 20%." 2, Fo) τὸ
2 Tim: Lag ‘6S See
1, Ze «© ὁ 19
ii: δος τῷ = 209
1:9 » ὼς Ἰῆ0
Win. τὰ » 2972
SZ ae ae
1 EG: ) w 210.,2:2
Be Te a 275


Wa i) ane 12
Til. ek ik ae ee


ae Ae ἊΝ


Se a οὐδ δὰ σύσων ϑὲ δα,


PAGE


2. Timi. ΠῚ 16. .. 34, 145
ἀν 2) |. 120, 244


ie ee Oa oF |
ἵν. | ον τω 41
Site 0s τς | Al
10 νιν: 272
Bee) oot ve, 128
le tas ai a TOS
ΠΡ ke hela 4 va BAO
a ὦ π 118
ΠῚ Ce IE aa)
Me ED si shice , ΧΠΙ͂Σ 25
He LG ee eo) 428
B24 ὡς 128
SEO at ah ies ope, ROO
Me | ie 12
πιο νον |v: a) 272
iii. 10 129


Heb. i... τα


6, II, 39, 190


PAGE


Hebi ΝΠ ΠΣ


:»-


106


- 3 .9,13,14, 106,140


W234) s,) (ee ΤΥΧΧΥ͂Ι


Het, s 120,


62
120
128
121

21


INDEM EO) TEXTS:


PAGE

Heb, ΧΙ As τ΄ ΟἿΔΟ, 251. 1 Pet m2 sah ss
x. 6. Pm 271 lil. 8.
ΧΙ. 13 262 lil, 16, 17.
KA a ee at a ee 11, 21. τ
ΣΙ 50. 27 203 iv. I
ΧΙ 350 oe τ EO Wei 2
ΧΠ FAY Φ 57 Ἵν 11 τὸς
ΧΙ 22,21... ὦ xiv 5 ke AR
Ki, QQcig 102 Vis Gy vee
vot Ee eae ANZ POU, τος

James i. 1 τ 3 262 |1 Johni. 20. .
Le BPS, νὰ: 14 eae A ie
VO) ee ee ΕΖ29 lil 242. ὺς
ἦν. PD aia oe ee Oe Sem
δ, ne τὴς 7125 Vi 20-5. Ὁ

1 Petit. 2 τὸ ches) Se) Gear 2) oe eae
By EE) Salil sata Ὁ. 30. weena BN g Merit
1:1 bap ae ae τὸϑ xi. 6) τὰ Ὁ
li,.17h. ὧν 2 10. 128 xxi. 18, 19 .


e e e e ΓῚ e e e e e e


ACCORDING


<
=
woe δ᾽ “Sh cer [Ὁ fe ee Cea Se eS


7 © ὦ ἃ ©@ δ᾽ 6 ο΄ © δ @ δ᾽ 8) © €& « 8


MTs. Ais
XXii.
XXlil.
XXIV.
XXV.
XXVi.
XXVili.
XXViil.
TEC
ΧΧΧ. μ
oy 1 ᾿»
xXKil.
ΧΧΧΙΙΙ.
XXXIV.
KX:
KEXV1.
XXXVIl. ὁ
XXVlil..
XeKIX. 4
xi:

ὙΠ ee
xliii. [sic]
xliii.
xliv.
XIV.
xlvi.
xlvii.
xlviti.
xlix.

eee

li.
ae


Φ Φ . Φο Φ Φ e Φ Φ Φ. 6S © oe 8


See go το, 10. es τ᾽ Ὅν} ον


e Φ Φ e Φ Φ e e Φ Φ Φ Φ 9 Φ Φ Φ ee e Φ


Φ Φ Φ e e e e e


PAGE
109
110
112
113
113
114
115
115
122
123
124
124
124
12:
125
125
126
126
126
127
127
127
129
130
130
131
131
132
133
134
134
134
135
135
136
136
136
137
141
142
142
143
146
146
147
149
152
153
153
153
154
155


LETTERS OF


TQ ‘THE


lxvii.
Ixviil.
]xix.
TKS 16
Ιχχὶ.
Ixxil.
]xxill.
xxiv.
Ixxv.
]xxvl.
Ixxvil.
xxviii.
Ixxix.
Ιχχχ.
Ιχχχὶ.
Ιχχχιὶ


Ixxxili. .
Ixxxlv. .


Ixxxv.


bxxxvir %
Ixxxvii. .


Ixxxvlil.


Ixxxix.
ΧΟ.
KCl. Ὁ
ΧΟ.
XClil.
XClV.
KV. «
XCVi.
XCVil.
XCVlil.
ΧΟΙ͂Σ.


LN Τὰ


PLACE THEY OCCUPY.


PAGE
E56 | ΟΥ̓ κι .r
157 | cvi :
: ¢. 455) CVI) % ἀν ἢ
oad eae ΚΔΟΝ ΝΣ .
ΝΥ Ὁ} ἴθ a.
οι a ESO ee :


6 = nt Gh ERS Se i "
ον et ee gaa as ape Pe eX
A) gs hele aaa NESTE, ARN ας 3
ΤΩΣ ΠΡΟΣ προ ee as
5) ge) AER ὍΣΟ: Cat Siteu Re
: 162 | exvi. | .
CO es Ge
ΤΟ 2, CEVA sy eo
TOA) ΣΙ τ τς
ΤΟ ΤΟΣ Ὁ ah ve


Φ Φ e e
»
Ov
No


oe. εὐ 05. ὌΣΣΙ: ὝΨΗ
ον ΡΠ. TORN Se ἦν ΔΕ πὶ ἃ
Ἦτο τυ ae ae ee
oe ΠΟ) MOREA ates dee
= lly ie GB Emaar τὸ ἢ ἧς
ς᾽ ὦ’ OS ὌΚΣΥΙ: :
Se a SO) eave ii
og) ae (EOS CRUE Ao) 01 tote
ae DEP CRATE ete, et owes
sg de 171 | cxxx. “ert
078) CRRKE a Gs Gig’ ee
a sg: SM ΡΟΣ ΧΙ Oooh Ue arn te
- 72 | CXXXilt,
172} CERI.
ETS \NGRENVS. a cs eee
13 ΌΧΙ ΟΡ:
ἐπε Ἢ ORIEN Ty! “Flic a oe
Ξ 174) ΟΣΧΧΨΙΝ τον
τὰς METI, CRI ΠΡ ee re


of ES Oma we Soria

er es ΠΣ τὐ
oh SO | eR sa
ἐν 7} ΧΙ Πα yes
a ὙΠ ΣΝ ΚΣ

ot EQ ΠΟΣΊ Στ δὴ τ᾿ :

> RRO ΣΙ νον


Ξ 180 | cxlvii. ee Sareea
: 196: ΟΣ τ. δ;
-ς TSE A ΣΙ πον τ:
‘ 182 | cl. Se ihe
182 | cli. iL li tat: Cae

oie 184 | clii By Σ

Sd 184 | cli. . BW ὡς
185 | cliv Me ne ee
1.9 185 | οἷν Se Be ree ον
155 | Cli 6 er sae ale

(336)


of, BAST.


IN THIS. VOLUME.


PAGE
186
186
187
187
187
188
188
188
189
190
190
IgI
IgI
192
192
192
193
193
193
194
194
196
196
196
197
198
199
199
200
200
200
201
201
202
203
203
204
205
205
205
205
206
206
206
207
207
209
209
209
209
210
210


clvii. .
clviii.
Clix.
clx.
clxi.
clxil.
clxii,”* ς
Cixiv,. a
ΟἸΧ τ is
οἶχν - is
clxvil.)
clxviii. .
clxix: >
rb, ae
c]xxi.
Clsxit, ς
c]xxilil. .
clxxiv. .
clxxv.
clxeyi. «
c]xxvil.
clxxviii.
claxix. .
clxxx.
clxxxl. .
c]xxxii. .
c)]xxxiii.
clxxxiv.
CIXxxkv. .
clxxxvi.
clxxxvil.
clxxxviil.
clxxxix.
CXC.
CXCl.
CxCil.
Cxcill.
CXCIV. -
CXCV.
χοῦ.
ΟΧΟΥ..
ΟΧΟΥ. «
CXCIx.
ce;

cci
ΟΠ. cae
Celi.) as
ΠΟΙ Me
Ce tie
COVE) bs
δον. ἧς:
σον. Β


Φ. . . e Φ Φ e .


eee 6@, C8 Set ewe Je “es


. . Φ e Φ e . Φ . . Φ


PAGE
211
211
212
212
214
215
215
215
216
217
217
217
217
218
218
218
219
219
220
220
221
221
221
221
222
229
222
222
232
22%
223
223
228
252
233
233
233
234
234
234
234
235
236
240
241
241
241
243
245
246
.246
248


ae Ὡς αν


ee ee :,


CCix. ᾿ς:
ῦχο ς ς
Ce ἦς
ΟΣ... ος
Cexill, ς
Gexiv: Ὁ
CCXV: Φ
BEXVIs τς
GEXVilo. ς
CORVILL. ς
ἜΈΣΙΧ. .
Coxe.
COxxi. ὶ
CCXXI. «
CCXXill. .
CEXxIV. .
ECKEV.) s
CCXXVi. .
CCXXVil.
CCXXVIil.
ΠΟΧΧΙΧ,. .
ΘΌΧΧΧΟ «
ΟΟΧΧΧΙ, -
ΟΟΧΧΧΙΪ.
CCXXXill.
CCXXXiVv.
CCXXXV.
CCXXXVi.
‘CCXXXVIi.
CCXXXViil.
CCXXXix.
Οχ τ,
ΘΕΟΣ τ ὦ
δΟχι πε ἐς
ecxliii.
ecxliv. -<
Beaty.’
ecxive -
Gexlvii; .


PAGE
248
248
251
252
252
253
254
255
255


259 |


260
260
261
261
262
265
267
267
270
270
271
271
272
272
273
274
274
276
279
279
280
281
282
282
283
285
289
289
289


INDEX ACCORDING: TO: PLACE)


ccxl viii.
σοχχος
Bel. νος
ΟΠ Ὁ:
Cem. ἢ
ΘΙ: . 5
ΘΟ νος
a ν᾿ ος
celvi;.- ς
ΠΟΙ ας
cclvilil. .
Gc. ἦς
CCl. 4
cela |
ὉΟΙΧΙ τ
ΟΟἸΪΧΙΙ. .
CCIXIV,
ΕΙΣ. *:
eCelxvi. ><
cclxvii. .
cclxviil.
ΘΌΪΧΙΧ <
CCIRXs- |e
eclxxi. .
ΘΙ ΧΙ. <
cclxxili.
cclxxiv.
cclxxv. .
cclxxvi.
cclxxvil.
cclxxviil.
cclxxix.
GCIEKX. <
cclxxxi.
cclxxxii.
cclxxxiii.
cclxxxiv.
cclxxxv.


cclxxxvi.


PAGE
290
290
290
291
292
292
293
293
293
294
294
296
296
299
301
301
393
309
305
306
307
307
308
308
3°9
310
310
310
310
311
311
3211
312
312
312
312
312
313
313


ccl]xxxvVii.
cclxxxviil.
cclxxxix.
COX: | ig
CERCI ἢ
CEKCH. :
Cexen. .
CEXCIY:. -
CCECY.. ἢ
CEXCVIs ς
ΘΟΧΟΥΪ. Ὁ
CCXCVIii.
CERCIXA:
CCE. τς
CcCcl. :
CECILY “so
eccih. . ας
ccciv. .
ἘδΈν τ
cccvi,
ΘΟ Ὁ
CCCVlil. .
ΠΟΘΙ A
ecexs Ὁ
Geeta):
CCCKi. >
CCCXIL. -
CCEXIV.:s
CECKV A 5
CCCXVi. .
CEEXViI2 -
CCCXVIil.
GCCKIX. -
COCKE 2
COCERT 2
CCCXxXli.
CCCXXiil.
CCCXXiVv.
CCEXKV. :


PAGE


313
313
314
315
315
316
316
317
317
317
317
317
318
318
318
318
318
318
318
318
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319
319


CCCXXVI.
CCCXXVii.
CCCXXViil.
CCCXXix.
CCCXXX; ὁ
CCCXXX1.
CCCXXXIl.
CCCXXXIil.
CCCXXXIV.
CCCXXXV.
CCCXXXVI1.
CCCXXXVil.


CCCXXXViil.


CCCXXXix.
ecexi... 2
eccxli. .
CECKiit, 2
eccxliii.
cccxliv. .
cccxlv. .
cccxlvi. .
cccxlvii.
cccxlviii.
eccxlix. .
eect hs
cece’!
ccclm. ς
ecchin. .
eccliv. .
σον ῖς
ccclvi. .
ccclvii. .
ccclviil.
eeclix: ς
eeclx, ἢ


ccclxi. to ccclxv. spu-


rious, and


printed
ceelxvi. .


not


237


PAGE
319
320
320
320
320
320
320
320
320
320
320
321
321
322
322
322
323
323
323
373
324
324
324
324
324
5
325
325
525
925
929
325
325
326
226


226
326


LETTERS OF ST. BASIL.


INDEX OF THE PERSONS WHOSE CORRESPONDENCE, WITH


oT. LBASIL IS


PRESERVED.


[THE NUMBER OF THE LETTER IS IN ROMAN NUMERALS. |


Abramius, bp. of Batnze, to, cxxxii. | Ascholius, bishop of Thessalonica, to, | Eulancius, to, ccviii. 248.


199.

Aburgius, to, xxxiil. 135: Ixxv. 170:
cxlvli. 206: cxcvi. 234: clxxviii.
220% ecciv. 318,

Acacius, Aetius, Paulus, and Silvanus,
to the very well beloved and
reverend brethren the _ presby-
ters: the deacons Silvinus and
Lucius, and the rest of the
brethren the monks, Basil, the
bishop, cclvi. 293.

Accountant, to the prefect’s, cxlii, 205.

Accountant, to another, cxlill. 205.

Aetius, presbyter (Acacius, etc.), to,
celvi. 293.

Alexander, Eulogius, Harpocration,
bishops of Egypt, in exile, to,
eclxy.: 303.

Alexandrians, to the, cxxxix. 303.

Ambrose, bp. of Milan, to, cxcvii. 234.

Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium, to,
elxi. 214 > clxxvi..220 0xe,.232 ;
ὍΣΟΙ 2333. 60, 240: Cel. ΘΟΙ 242
CCHVMINL..260's CCRNXL: ΟΟΧΧΧΗ 272:
CCXXXIM, 273: CCXXXIV. CCXXXV.
274: CCXXxvl. 276: ccxlviii. 290.

Amphilochius, concerning the canons,
to (Canonica prima) clxxxviii.
223: (canonica secunda) cxcix.
236:
255.

Amphilochius, in the name of Her-
aclidas, to, cl. 207.

Ancyra, to the Church of, consola-
tory, xxix. 133.

Andronicus, a general, to, cxii. 188.

Antioch, to the Church of Antioch,
exl. 203.

Antioch, to the presbyters, ccliii. 292.

Antiochus, to, cxlvi. 206: clvii. clviii.
2022 clxvill. 217.

Antipater, the governor, clxxxvi. 223.

Antipater, on his assuming the gov-
ernorship of Cappadocia, cxxxvii.
201.

Antipater to Basil, clxxxvii. 223.

Arcadius, the bishop, to, xlix. 153.

Arcadius, imperial treasurer, xv. 125.

Arinthzeus, to, clxxix. 221.

Arinthzus, the general, to the wife
of, consolatory, cclxix. 307.
Ascetics under him (Basil), to the,

CCXXVi. 267.


(canontica dertia) ccxvii.


cliv. 209: clxiv. 215.
Assessor in the case of monks, to thes
cclxxxiv. 312.
Atarbius, to, lxv. 162: cxxvi. 196.
Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, to,
Ixi. 161: Ixvi. 163: Ixvill. 164:
lxix. 165.
Athanasius, bp. of Ancyra, to, xxv. 130.
Athanasius, father of Athanasius,
bishop of Ancyra, to, xxiv. 130.


Barses, bishop of Edessa, in exile, to,
celxiv. 303.

Berzeans, to the, ccxx. 260: ccxxi. 261.

Bishop, to a, cclxxxil. 312.

Bosporius, to bishop, li. 154.

Briso, to the wife of, cccii. 318.

Ccesarzeans, to the, viii. 115.

Ceesaria, to the patrician, concerning
communion, xciii. 179.

Ceesarius, brother of Gregory, to, xxvi.
151.

Callisthenes, to, Ixxili. 168.

Candidianus, to, ili. 112.

Canonica prima, clxxxviii.
secunda, ὈΧΟΙ͂, 236:
CCXVil. 255.

Canonice, to the, lil. 155.

Censitor, to a, ccxcix. 318.

Chalcis, to the people of, ccxxii. 261.

Chilo, his disciple, to, xliii. 143.

Chorepiscopi, to the, lili. 156: liv. 157.

Colonia, consolatory, to the clergy of,
CCXXV1l. 270. ὁ

Colonia, to the magistrates of, ccxxviii.
270.

Comes Privatarum, to the ccciii. 318.

Commentariensis, to the, cclxxxvi.31 3.

Consolatory, ci. 184.

Cyriacus, at Tarsus, to, cxiv. 190.


223%
ter tza,


Demosthenes, as from the synod of
bishops, to, ccxxv. 267.

Diodorus, the presbyter of Antioch,
tO, CXXKV..200s Clk; 212.

Dorotheus to the presbyter, ccxv. 254.


Elias, governor of the province, to,
xCciv. 179.

Elpidius the bishop, to, οον. 245:
ccvi. 246.

Epiphanius the bishop, to, cclviii. 294.


(338)


| Eulogius, Alexander, and Harpocra-


tion, bishops of Egypt, in exile,
to, cclxv. 303.

Eunomius the heretic, against, xvi.
125.

Eupaterius and his daughter, to, clix.
212.

Euphronius, bishop of Colonia Ar-
meniz, to, cxcv. 234.

Eusebius, bishop of Samosata, to,
XXVil, 121: XXX, EX. 1345 ΣΤ
135: xlvii. 152: xlvilil. 153: xcv.
180: xcvili. 182: c. 184: Cxxvii.
CXXVili. 196 : CXXXVi. 2OI : CXXXVili.
202: cxli. 204: cxlv. 205: clxii.
205: elxvi. clxvil, 217% -cxcyil,
235: CCKKXVIl. 279% CCXRXIX. 2p
cexli. 282: ‘cclavin, S67...

Eusebius, my comrade, to recom-
mend Cyriacus the presbyter, to,
cclxxi. 308.

Eustathius, bishop of Himmeria, to,
clxxxiv. 222,

Eustathius of Sebasteia,
Ccxxili, 262.

Eustathius, bishop of Sebastia, to,
Maxi: 171: ex. 162:

Eustathius, the philosopher, to, i. 109.

Eustathius, the physician, to, clxxxix.
228: cli. 209.

Eveesze, to the people of, ccli. 291.

Evagrius, to the presbyter, clvi. 210.


against,


Faith (a transcript of the) as dictated
by Saint Basil, and subscribed by
Eustathius, bishop of Sebasteia,
Cxxv. 194.

Festus and Magnus, to, ccxciv. 317.

Firminius, to, cxvi. 191.


Gaul, to the bishops of Italy and,
concerning the condition and
confusion of the churches, ccxliii.
283.

Gauls, to the Italians and, xcii. 177.
Genethlius, to the presbytez, ccxxiv.
265. ᾿

Governor, to the, Ixxxvi. 174.

Gregory, to, ii. 110: clxix. 217; clxxi.
218.

Gregory, to his brother, concerning
the difference between ovova and
ὑπόστασις, Xxxvili. 137.


Gregory, his friend, to, xiv. 124.
Gregory, his uncle, to, lix. 160: Ix.
161.
Gregory, my brother, to, viii. 159.
Gregory, my friend, to, vil. 115:
120: Ixxi. 207,


Harmatius, to the great, cclxxvi. 310.

Harpocration, Eulogius, and Alex-
ander, bishops of Egypt, in
exile, to, δοῖεν: 303.

Heraclidas, to Amphilochius in the
name of, cl. 207.

Hesychius, to, Ixiv. 162: Ixxii. 167.

Hilarius, to, ccxil. 252.

Himerius, the master, to, cclxxiv. 310.

Hyperectius, to, cccxxvili. 320.


Innocent, to bishop, Ixxxi. 172.

Innocet, to the monks Palladius
and, clix. 296.

Innocentius, to bishop, ]. 153.

Italians and Gauls, to the, xcii. 177.

Italy and Gaul (to the bishops of)
concerning the condition and
confusion of the churches, ccxliii.


283.


John, to Macarius and, xviii. 126.

Jovinus, bishop of Perrha, to, cxviil.
192.

Jovinus, to count, clxill. 215.

Julian to Basil, xxxix. 141: xl. 142.

Julian, Basil to, xli. 142.

Julianus, to, ccxciii, 316.

Julitta, to the widow, cvii. 187.

Julitta, to guardian of the heirs of,
cvili. 187.


Leontius the sophist, to, xx. xxi. 127.


Libanius,, Basil to, ¢ccxxxv. 320:
SCCTERNTL (S202 ‘CCCKEXIX, 322':
ecexili. -cetxliv. $23: cecxlviii.
001: 5 5227.: ¢celi.’ ὍΘΙ: .ceclvi.
25: creum. 220:

Libdnius to Basil, cccxxxvi. 220:
Ccexxaven 221:. ¢ccxl, cccxhi.
Ἴ22.. ΠΟ ΟΣΧΙ ΙΝ ““ecexly, 423:
ΘΟΟΧΙΝ. ctcxlviis ccexlix,, 324:
ecein. δον. “eecly.. .cceélvii:


cecclviil. 325.
Lucius, deacon, etc., to [Acacius],
cclvi. 293.


Macarius and John, to, xviii. 126.

Magistrate, to a, lxxxill. 173.

Martinianus, to, Ixxiv. 168.

Maximus, to, ccci. 318.

Maximus, to the learned, cclxxvii. 311.

Maximus the philosopher, to, ix. 122.

Meletius, bishop of Antioch, to, lvii.
150; levili.. ΤΟΣ > lexxix. 175 : Cxx.
102: Cxxix. 1972 cexvi, 255.

Meletius the physician, to, cxclii. 233.

Modestus, to the prefect, civ. 185:
ex. cxi. 188: cclxxix. 311: cclxxx:
cclxxxl. 312.

Monk, to a lapsed, xliv. 146: xlv. 147.

Monks, to, ccxcv. 317.


INDEX ΘΕ PERSONS.


Monks harassed by the Arians, to
the, cclvii. 294.

Monks, to the rest of the brethren
the, [Acacius], cclvi. 293.


LEA Ry fo, V. LEZs ctxe. 375;

Nectarius, to the wife of, vi. 114.

Neoczesarea, to the church of, con-
solatory, xxvili. 132.

Neocesarea, to the governor of, Ixiii.
162.

Neoczesarea, to the clergy of, ccvii.
246.

Neoceesarea, to the notables of, ccx.
248.

Neocesareans, to the, cciv. 243.

Nicopolis, to the clergy of, ccxxix.
271:

Nicopolis, to
ΟΣ χα 271,

Nicopolis, to the presbyters
CCXRXVIEL, 279: ecxl, 267,

Nicopolitans, to the, ccxlvi. ccxlvii.
289.


the magistrates of,


of,


Oath ought not to be taken, that the,
ἸΣχχν 74:

Officer, to the prefect’s, cxliv. 205.

Olynipius, to, iv. 117: Xi. ἘΠῚ 1243
CXXXL. 1902 CCXT. 25,1,

Optimus the bishop, to, cclx. 296.

Origenes, to, xvii, 126.

Otreius, bishop of Melitene,
Cixxx, 222,


to,


Palladius, to, ccxcii. 316.

Palladius and Innocent, to the monks,
clix i 296.

Paregarius the presbyter, to, lv. 158.

Parnassus, to the church of, lxii. 162.

Pasinicus, the physician, to, cccxxiv.

19.

Patrophilus, bishop of Ζέρε,, to, ccxliv.
285: ccl. 290.

Paulus, presbyter, etc., to [Acacius],
cclvi. 293.

Pelagius, bishop of the Syrian Laodi-
céa, to, celiv. 293.

Pergamius, to, lvi. 158.

Petrus, bishop of Alexandria, to,
CXXxlll. 200: cclxvi. 305.

Phalirius, to, cccxxix. 320.

Philagrius Arcenus, to, cccxxili. 319.

Poemenius, bishop of Satala, to, cxxii.
193.

Poeonius, to the presbyter, cxxxiv. 200.

Pontic diocese, to the bishops of the,
cclii. 292.

President, to the, Ixxxiv. 173.


Samosata, to the clergy of, ccxix. 260.

Samosata, to the presbyters of, clxxxii.
222:

Samosata, to the senate of, clxxxiii.
. 222.

Satala, to the citizens of, cii. 185.

Satala, to the people of, ciii. 185.


Sea coast, to the bishops of the, cciii.] Without address.


241.


339
Sebasteia, to the governor of, cccvi.
118. ᾿
Silvanus, pre byter, to [Acacius],
cclvi. 293.


Silvinus, deacon, to [Acacius], cclvi.
293.

Simplicia, to the heretic, cxv. 190.

Soldier, to a, cvi. 186.

Solitary, to a, xxiii. 129.

Sophronius the bishop, to, clxxii. 218.

Sophronius the master, to, ΧΧΧΙΪ. 134:
Ixxvi. 170: xcvi. 180: cIxxvil.
2215 elxxx, 221: celxxtk 300,

Sozopolitans, to the, cclxi. 299.


Tarsus, to the presbyters of, cxiii. 189.

Terentius, to count, xcix. 182: ccxiv.
253.

Terentius, the deaconesses,
daughters of, to, cv. 186.

Thecla, to; ceexxi.. 310.

Theodora the canoness, to, clxxiil.
210.

Theodorus, to, cxxxiv. 194.

Theodotus, bishop of Berea,
clxxxv. 222,

Theodotus, bishop of Nicopolis, to,
Οὐχ; O21. CXKX. 108.

Theophilus the bishop, to, ccxly. 289.

Timotheus the chorepiscopus, to,
eoxel, Ὑπὸ

Trajan, to, cxlviii. 206: cxlix. 207.

Tyana, to the senate of, xcvii. 181.


the


to,


Urbicius the monk,
cclxii, 301:


to, Cxxill.
ceclxvi. 326.


193:


Valerianus, to, cclxxvili. 311.

Valerianus, bishop of Lllyricum, to,
XH 17.

Victor, the commander, to, clii. 209.

Victor, the ex-consul, to, cliii. 209.

Vitus, bishop of Charree, to, cclv. 293.


West, to the holy brethren [86 bishops
of the, xe, 176.
Westerns, to the, ccxlii. aay eclxili.


301.

Widow, to, 8, x» 123: clxxiv. 210:
eclxxxili, 212: «ΟΟΧΟΥ cexevit
i7.

Without address, xxxv. xxxvi. xxxvil.
130: xx, 1663 cxvil ΤΟΙ: ceix
24S: Gem. \ ead. cebainy:


cclxxxvil. 313: Ccxceviii. 317: ccc.
cccv. 318: cccvil. cccvili. cccix.
CGcx. CCCRi. Cccxii, CCCxii, cecxiv,


CCCXV. CCCXV1. CCCXVii. CCCXVili.
CCCXiX. CCCXX. CCCxxii. CCCXxVI.
310: CCCXXVil, ΘΟ: ΘΟΌΣ ΧΑ,


ΘΟΌΧΧΧΙΙ, CCCXXXIli. 320.

Without address. To some friends,
ΧΙ. 124.

Without address. On the perfection
of the life of the solitaries, xxii.
127.

(On behalf of

Dorotheus), Ixxxvil. 175.


340 BASIL.
οὐ δ δυο ee Sa ---.-


Without address, on the subject οἱ Without address. Excommunicatory, | Writer, to a, cccxxxiv. 320.


the exaction of taxes, Ixxxvill. 175. cclxxxVill. 313.
Without address. In the case of a| Without address. Concerning anlyouno ad sn 46 the, AG. WAG
trainer, οἷν. 210. afflicted woman, cclxxxix. 314. OUng, RemOMiCE το πος ee
Without address. Commendatory, | Without inscription: about Therasius,
ccxlix. 290. Ixxvil. 171. Zoilus, to, cxciv. 234.
Without address. Concerning Hera,| Without inscription, on behalf of
cclxxiii. cclxxv. 310. Elpidius, lxxviii. 171.


\
ee ee Se ὦ ΥΝι μδ.,


ΙΒ ΘΙ Τὰν


INDEX OF AUTHORS QUOTED.


fElian, 90, ΟἹ, 93, 97, 98, 99, 100.

fEschines, 290.

Atschylus, 21, 139.

Alexander of Alexandria, 13.

Alexander of Constantinople, 13.

Alford, xlii. 9, 122, 323.

Ambrose, lxv. 5, 31, 80, 99, 100, 112.

Ammianus Marc., xv. xx. xxiv. xxi.
127, 134, 141, 182, 206, 200,
221, 265, 289.

Amphilochius, xxxix.

Anakreon, 100.

Anaximander, 96.

Andersen, 98.

A post. Can., 228.

Apost. Const., 42.

Aquila, 55.

Aratus, 84.

Aretzus, 78.

Aristenus, 257.

Aristophanes, Ixviii. 49, 54, 83, 112,
142, 320.

Aristotle, Ixvili. 4, 8, 12, 13, 19, 24;
27, 32, 38; 53, 54; 55» 56, 57, 58,
69, 70, 73, 90, 92, 93, 96, 97, 98,
99, 100, IOI, 105, 116.

Arnold, 125, 228.

Athanasius, xxil. xxxvili. li. 9, 12,
13, 15, 16, 25, 27, 38, 40, 45, 54,
66, 118, 120, 123, 155, 157, 195,
228, 250, 295.

Athenyaras, lii.

Augustine, xxxiv. xlvi. lix. Ixi. Ixxiii.
τ τ 257550; 02, 785, δή; 125:
200, 210; 214, 220, 223; ‘224,
263.

Aulus Gellius, Ixvili. 112.


Balsamon, 256, 257.

Baronius, xix. XXiv. xxv. 172.

Basil (Cees.), xvii. xviii. xx. xxii. xxiv.
ΣΧ Ho16,,-26, 2.25; 32,33)
34, 37, 39, 41, 46, 61, 99, 118,


160,
192,
221,
232,
239;
257)
280, 288,
318, 324,

Bengel, 9, 225.

Bentley, lix.

Bergier, 41.

Bias, 112.

Bibl. Major, 272.

Bibl. Patr.5 199;

Bion, 64.

Bohringer, xiv. xxi. xxxiii. xliv. liv. 52,
104.

Bollandists, xix. xxxii. 184.

Bossuet, 60, 63, 82, 96.

Boswell, 71.

Bright, xxx. 17, 48, 228, 285, 292.

Browne (Bp. H.), Ixxi. 30, 40, 46,
118.

Browne (Sir Th.), 67, 98, 105.

Browning, 61.

3ull, 41, 120.

Bulteau, 11].

Burke, 71.

Butler, 230. |


166,
205,
224,
2355
250,
259,
295;
326,


163,
203,
222;
233;
247,
258,


184,
220,
257;
238,
256,
279,
315,


175,


207,
225,
236,
252,
275»
299;
327.


179,
209,
226,
237:
255»,
278,
305,


Ceesarius, xlix.

Callimachus, 34.

Canisius, Xxxiii.

Can. Isaact, 179.

Carlyle, xxxii.

Carr, 258.

Casaubon, 40.

Cassian, xvili.

Cassiodorus, xliv. xlvi.

Cassius, 88.

Cave, xxx.

Ceillier, xxi. xxx. Xxxli. Xxxili. xlv. xlix.
li bxiv, ἴχν. Ixix, Ixxs 142.


119, 138, 154, 155, 165, 173,|Chrysostom, xxxix. Ixx. 33, 214, 218,


180,

300. -
Basil, JZez., Ixxi. 285.
Basnage, xxxill.
Bayle, 61.
Beausobre, 61.
Bekker, Ixiii. Ixviii.
Bellarmine, xxxiii. 41.


210, 222, 247, 257, 265;


265, 285;

Cicero, xv. Ixvi. xviii. 41, 53, 54, 58,
59, 66, 81, 82, 104.

Claudian, 72.

Clement of Alexandria, xl. xlii. 8, 52,
68, 82, 146, 224, 300.

Clement of Rome, Io, 45.

Clinton, 37.


Ben. Edit., xlix. 2, 5, 7, 8, 11, 14, 16,|Clough, 273.
33, 38, 41, 56, 63, 92, 109, 115, Cod. Alex., 236.


119, 123, 127, 137, 138, 141, 142,,


143, 149, 152, 153, 156, 157,


Cod. Colb., 92, 94.
Cod. Theod., 157, 318.


(341)


Coleridge, 97.

Combefis, 111. liv. 14, 16, 119, 144,
153, 255.

Congreve, xlvi.

Conybeare and Howson, 259.

Cranmer, xliii.

Cudworth, lix. 58, 59, 61, 92.

Cyprian, xl. 143, 157, 179, 210, 224.

Cyril of Alexandria, 272.

Cyril of Jerusalem, 22.


Darwin, 97.

De Broglie, xvii. xxi. xxiv. xxv. 11].

De Div. Nom., 61.

De Joinville, xxvi.

Delitzsch, 88.

De Wette, 88.

Dick Biv. ΙΝ Az:

Dict. Christ. Ant., xxiv. xxx. lit. Ixxii.
42, 46, 124, 156, 158, 228, 258,
272, 308.

Dict. Christ. Biog., xiii. xv. Xvili. xxi.
XXV. XXVill. xxx: xxxie xl. ΠΡ Or,
113, 425, 207,. 246, 250, 100.
320.

Didaché, 282.

Didymus, 25, 31.

Diodorus Sicul., 67.

Diogenes Laert., Ixvii. Ixviii. 53, 66,
70, 85, 96, 98, 170.

Dion Cassius, 81.

Dion Chrys., Ixvi.

Dionysius Hal., 35.

Dionysius of Rome, 27.

Dioscorides, 77.

Donne, 94.

Dorner, xxxiii. xxxvii. 38, 155, 250,
286.

Dryden, Ixviti.

Du Cange, 35, 125.

Du Duc; Ισσ.:

Du Pin, xxxiii.


Eagar, 81.

Ellicott, 214.

Empedocles, 96.

Epictetus, 12, 62.

Epiphanius, xl. 25, 123, 240, 294,
296.

Erasmus, Ixviii. 40.

Eulogius, 41.

Eunomius, 26, 28, 120.

Euripedes, Ixvii. 123, 162, 214.

Eusebius, lix. 22, 27, 45, 47, 163, 166,
223, 236, 296.


|Eustathius, 100, 236.


342


BASIL,


Evagrius, 258, 292, 299.
Evelyn, 90.
Ewald, 88.


Fabricius, xv. xix. 320.

Fellows, 259.

Fessler, τ τη, Xiix. lil, hii, lxxi. ΕἸ;
109, 118.

Fialon, xvi. xxi. xxiv. xxvii. xxx.
me ely. Mi. div. xxiii. 28, 54;
52, 54, 60, 61, 63, 66, 70, 82, 84,
87, 91, 96, 100, 104, 106, 141,
ΖΕ:

Friedlander, ᾿χν].

Fronton du Duc
Ixvii. 7.

Froude, xxxii.


lxvi.


(Duczeus),


Galen, 78, 100.

Garnier, xlix. liv. Ixx. xxi. 100.

Gesenius, 120.

Gibbon, xxv. xxxii. 228, 232.

Gieseler, xlv, 28, 193.

Gore, 276.

Gospel of Peter, 300.

Gregory Naz., xiii. xiv. xv. xvi. xvii.
KVill. RIX; XX, ΧΧΙ. ΧΧΙΙ. ΧΙ, xxiv.
XXV. XXVil. XXVIii. XXX. XXX1. XXXili.
ΧΙ HEX, 111: Ixx Ixxiit, 11, 16,32,
46, 62, δὲ; 92, 123, 134, 141, 142,
157, 180, 209, 250, 258, 265, 278,
279, 290, 292.

Gregory Nyss., xiii. xv. xvi. xviii. xxi.
XXIV. XXVill. 22, 40, 42, 47, 61, 62,
118, 120, 123, 130, 145, 199, 210,
241, 249, 250, 279.

Gregory Thaum., 37, 206, 249.

Grote, 228.


Haeckel, 76, 96, 99.
FIAni 1.

Hamilton, 38, 55.
Hardouin, xxxiii. 258.
Harnack, 28.
Haynoccius, Ixv.
Hefele, xx. xxx. xl.
Helyot, lii.

Herard, 258.

Hermas, 158, 238, 257.
Herodotus, Ixix. 73, 105, 214.
Herzog, xxxviii, 28.
Hesiod, 93, 112.


Jerome, xxv. xxxiii. xliv. lii, 31, 71,
IOI, 157, 105, 179, 194, 223, 294,
295.

John Dam., 39, 40.

Johnson (Sam.), 71.


Optatus, 224.
Origen, xxxv. xl. xlix. 11: Τὰν 96) 31,


41, 46, 54, 55, 61, 62, 66, 71, 87,
299.


Orpheus, 63.


Johnston, xviii. xxiii. 4, 7, 10, 11, 16, Ovid, 78, 89, 101, 102, 104, 139, 206,


25, 26, 28, 29, 31, 37, 40, 49,
88.

Josephus, 52.

Julian, 141.

Justin Mart., xlix. lii. lili, 41, 49, 52,
129, 179.

Justinian, xxxiii. 33, 46.

Juvenal, lxiv. 17, 34, 67, 89, 96, 106,
223,


|
|


Keble, 23,174
King, Ixiii.
Kingsley, xxxii.


Labbe, Ixx. 46, 158, 222, 293.
Lea, lit.

Le -Clerc, xxv.

Leutsch, 122.


Liddon, 120. |


Lightfoot, xl. Ixvi. 1, 7, 14, 17, 28, 39,
Al, 45.525, δ, 159) 105: 207,

Littledale, 210.

Littré,. τ

Livy, 35, 100.

Lucan, 66, 86, 87, 104, 139.

Lucian, Ixvi. 57, 84, 90, 113, 122,
150.

Lucretius, 53, 70.

Lumper, 45.

Lyell, 79.


Macrobius, 66.

Mai, 286, 326.

Manilius, ΙΟΙ.

Mansi, xix. xxx. xxxili. 137, 193, 279,
202.

Maran, xili. xiv. xv. xvi. xviii, xix. xx.
ΧΙ. XXii. xxiii, xxiv. XXV. Xxxili. xl.
xliv. liv. 135,136, 141, 142, 148,
162, 169; 177, 182, 192, 196, 210,
22:

Marcus Aurelius, 62,

Martial, 81, 90.

M’Caul, 64.

Mela, 102.

Menander, 214,


223. $20,


Pagi, xxx.
Pandects, 256.


Pausanius, Ixviii. 170,


Pearson, 29, 36, 63.
Perowne, δ,


Persius, Ixvili.
Petavius, 299.
Philaret, 40.

Philo, 4, 52, 82, 232.


Philostorgius, xvili, xix. xxxili, 153,


216,203.
Photius, lii. 41, 46.


Pindar, 323.


Pittacus,. 112.
Pius, 1x. 41.


Plato, Ixviii. 5, 11, 19, 39, 53, 54, 56,


61, 66, 72; 82, 84, 98, 118, 142.

Pliny, 10, 63, 67, 70, 73, 74, 77. 87;
89, 90, 93, 94, 97, 98, 99, 100,
102, 105, 205.

Plotinus, 54, 56.

Plumptre, 42.

Plutarch, Ixv. Ixvi. Ixvii. Ixviii. 4, 12,
58, 63, 67, 68, 76, 87, 88, 89, 93,
96, 99, TOO, ‘104, 112,123). 349,
170, 3009, 323.

Politian, 223.

Polycarp, 282.

Posidonius, 53.

Prodicus, Ixvi.

Prudentius, 105.

Pythagoras, liii.


Quest. Mise., 13.


Ramsay, xiv. xxi. xxvi. 218, 268, 272,
279, 285, 291, 299, 311.

Reynolds, xxviii.

Robertson, xviii. 38.

Rough, 79.

Rufinus, xvi. xxv. lil. 46, 51, 55, 173.

Ruinart, 216.

Ruskin, 71.


Sage ry Fee


ὲ
{
᾿
“I
.
4
Γ
ὑ


Heurtley, 1.

Hilary, 13, 155.
Hippocrates, xlix.
Hippolytus, xl. 37, 228.
Hitzig, 120. Montalembert, 111].
Hole, Ixxii. Montant, xiil.
Homer, Ixv. Ixvi. Ixvii. ‘59, 72, 102, More, xxi.

109, 280, 324. Mosheim, lix. 59, 61.
Hooker, xxix. 13, 40. Mozley, 320.
Horace, Ixiii. 55, 70, 88, 96, 104, 123, Miiller, 70.

169. Muszeus, 99.
Howard, 58.
Huxley, 56.
Hyginus, 125.


Salmon, 46, 61, 300.

Schaff, 16, 28.

Scavini, xxiii.

Schroeck, xx. 61.

Seneca, 67, 87, 113, 144.

Shaftesbury, 41. .

Shakspere, 32, 66,01.

Sever, 320.

Skeat, 58, 121.

Smith, xvii. 111. 104,

Socrates, xv. xviii. xix. xxiii. xxv. xxx.
ΧΧΧΙΙ, xxxiv. xliv. 17, 41, 46, 49,
123, 153, 173, 179, 209, 219, 268,
286, 291, 295, 296, 303.

Solon, 66.

Sophocles, xliii. 10, 33, 34, 288.

Sozomen, Xv. XIX. XX. XXI. XXIV. XXV.
Iu, liv: 22). ΤΡ 185. dee does
179, 180,184, 219, 268, , 282,
291, 292, 293, 294.

Speaker’s Commentary, 55.


Mill, 26.

Milman, xxv. xxx. lii. liv. 33, 282.
Milton, 58, 63, 64, 66, 78.
Mommsen, 228.


Newman, xix. xxvii. xxxi. 7, 47, 176.
341.
Nicephorus, Ixx. I, 258.
Nomocanon Photii, 220.
Leet. At, 52, Norman (H. W.), 51.
locrates, x1. Northcote and Brownlow, xxxii,
Trenzeus, xlii. lxxi. 16, 27, 146, 236, Novatian, xl.
258, 300.
Tsidore Pel., xiv. lxv.’


Ignatius, 39, 41, 282.


Oppian, 93, 123.


. INDEX OF AUTHORS QUOTED. 343


»


Stanley, xxix. 172, 258: 156, 157, 177, 179, 180, 192, 202,| Valesius, 265.
Stilting, xix. 203, 206, 209, 214, 218, 228, 247, | Venables, xxi. xxxi. 158.
StOkes, 27. 261, 278, 282, 284, 286, 293, 296,| Vergil, 45, 66, 78, 34, 88, 97, 100,
Strabo, 53,69, 73, 74, 86, 170. 203. 23.
Suetonius, lxvi. Theodostus, Code of, 239. Vogler, 61.
Suicer, 41, 258. Theognis, lxvi. 91.
Suaidas, lil. 142. Theophrastus, 93. Wall, xvi.
Swete, xxxili, xxxiv. xliv. I. Theophylact, 77. Walch, 61.
Synesius, 113. Thomasius, xxxvili. 4, 28, 29, 41, 155, Waterland, xxxviii.

286. Westcott, 9, 45, 117.
Tacitus, 228. Thucydides, 125, 170. Wiclif, xliii.
Waylor (Jer.); xan. Iii. Ix. 22, 40.) Tillemont, xiv. sv, xix. -xxvi.) SKKUL Wordsworth, 177, 120.
Tenneman, 56. Ixxili. 63, 113, 135, 136,176, 192, Wright, 42.
Tennyson, 59, 139. 217, 228, 232, 233, 255, 279, 282. | Wuilcknis, xxiii.
fertullian, xf. xiii. Ixvi. 22,23, 28, 41,| Trench, 12, 14, 223.

42, 146, 179, 228, Tyndale, xliii.
Theatres, 98 το
Theodore of Cant., 258. Ullman, xv. xvi. xxi. ath Garin eat 7
Theodore Mops., 214. Ussher, Ixxi.
Theodoret, xxiii. xxiv. xxv. xxvilil. xxx.| Usuard, xxxii. Young, 82, 220.


MXM KKKN. XXX ΧΙ: xl. Ivi. lix,
Ixvi. 22, 23, 28, 41, 42, 146, 153,| Valerius Max., 113. Zonaras, xxiv. 256, 257.


ol. BASIL,


INDEX OF Oi ΘΕ ΟΣ ΟΣ


Abduction, how punished, 239.
Abortion, produced by women and
drugs, 225, 227.
Abraamius, bp. of Batnee, xxix. 177.
joined Basil in the letter
to the West, 177.
Abraamius, bp. of Urimi in Syria,
177 πὰ:
joined Basil in the letter
to the West, 177.
Abramius, bp. of Batne, letter to, 199.
Aburgius, letters to, 135,170, 200,
221, 234.
layman, compatriot of Basil.
15: π|: 170.
Abyss of evil spirits, 61 n.
Acacians, xviil. 49 n.
triumphed in 360 at Con-


stantinople, xviii. 288,
288 n.
Acacius, the one eyed, bp. of Czesarea,
130 n., 291.


opposed to Cyril, bp. of Jeru-
salem, 130 n.
leader of.the Homoeans, 130


n.
thought highly of by Basil,
130 n., 254.
called by Basil “our very
dear brother,” 254.
Acacius, presbyter from Berea, 261,
293, 293 n.
perhaps carried a letter to
Chalcis, 293.
probable identification, 293


n.
Achelous, the daughters of, 323.
Actiacus, deacon, 309.
Adam, traditions regarding 7.
Adamantius, letter-carrier from Greg-
ory Nyss., 155.
Adulterer, had 15 years excommuni-
cation, 256.
Adultery, laws regarding, 149, 150,
THES 237,255, 230.
different in husband and
wife, 237, 240.
only with a
woman, 237.
/Eacus, and the other judges, 323,
23 n.
Agee identified, 285 ἢ.
“gean sea, 74.
Egon, 69.
fElfric abbreviated Basil’s Hexae-
meron, 51.
fElian, heretic, 251.


married


Aetians, 49 n.
Aetius, heretic, xviii. xxxiii,
favoured by Eudoxius of Ger-
manicia, xviii.
banished by Constantius, 3 n.
suggested ἀνόμοιον, 116,
tius, presbyter, 293.
Africanus (Jul.), his works, 46, 46 n.
᾿Αγεννήσια, 274 n.
"Ayévvytoc, Αγενητός, 39.
‘Ayiaoua = sacrament and sanctuary,
256n.
Alcinous and Ulysses, 169.
Alcmeon, story of, 125, 125 n.
Alexander, bp. of Alexandria, edu-
cated Athanasius, 173.
Alexander, Egyptian bishop in exile,
letter to, 303.
Alexander at Curydala, bp. but late
monk, 259.
Alexander the Great, anecdotes of,
Ixvil. 180, 180 n., 309.
Alexandria, persecutions in, 203.
’AAAa, its Scripture use, xlili. n.
Allegorising in Scripture interpreta-
tion, IOI, IOI ἢ.
much used by Origen,
IOI n,
Allegory used in Scripture, xliv. sg.
Altars of the spiritual service deserted,
284.
Altars, in opposition to tables, 291.
Alypius, friend of Libanius, 321.
Amasia, state ofits church, 291, 291 n.
Amber, 80.
Ambrose, bp. of Milan, letters to,
234, 255 n.
his archiepiscopate, 234 n.
his character given by
Basil, 234, 235.


admitted Theodosius
within the sanctuary,
Xxiv. ἢ.


was borrowed from by
Didymus, xliv.
Amphilochius, bp. of Iconium, 207 ἢ.»


Amphilochius obtains a theol. state-
ment from Basil,
220 ἢ.
close friend of Basil,
XXVlli. 272 sg.


a meeting contem-
plated between
them, 241.


his legendary life of
Basil, xxi. n.

Basil’s canonical let-
ters addressed to
him, xxviii.

Basil’s De Sp. Scto.
suggested by his
talks with Amph.,
XXVill, xliii.

Ανάδειξις, as belonging to the Eucha-

rist, 41 n.
"Avapyot, as related to the Divine
Unity, 30 n.

“Avap voc, a word how used, 13 n.

Anathemas of the Nicene Creed, 195.

Anaximenes on the “ elements,” 116 n.

Ancyra, consoled for the loss of its

bishop, 133.
Andrew of Samosata, in the Arian
controversy, 10 n.

Andronicus, General, letter to, 188.

asked Basil to deal kindly
with Domitianus, 188,
189.
Angel, the Apostate, 32.
Angels, their creation, 23, 54, 62 n.
their nearness to God, 24.
associated with the Father
and Son, 18, 19.

created before the world of
matter, 54, 62.

their hierarchies, 62.

allies, tutors, and guardians
to men, 19.

faithful witnesses to the truth,
19.

“‘ angel of peace to help and
accompany,” 124.


214, 215, 232,272 sg.| Anger, cautioned against, Ixiii.
cousin of Gregory Naz.,| Animal life, different in different an-


ΙΧ. 1.207 π΄.) 215.
addressed by Basil, 2,
16 ἢ-, 214, 220) 244;
his history, xxviii. 207
ὭΣ 214, 272:
Basil’s letters to, 207,
254, 220, 292, 255.


imals, 95.
created in developments,


95-
three kinds, 96.
as moral teacher, 103.
adaptations in form to
living, 104.


240, 241, 259, 272,|Annesi, identified, xiv. n., xvii. xxviii.


273, 274, 276, 290.
(344)


175 n., 248 n.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


345


Annesi, church in honour of the Roce Abcwttectaes as a creative art, 55.


Martyrs, Ixx. n.

Anomeean heresy, xxxiv. 45 n., 106 n.
107. 116,522,250, 252,°276.
Anomeeans, their disorder and con-
tempt of authority, li. 287.

Ant, the, as a teacher, and questions

upon, 103, 125.
Anthimus, bp. of Tyana, xxv. xxvii.
159, 181 n., 193, 250, 250
n


called an Arian, xxv.
estranged from Basil, xxv.
159 n., 193, 250 ἢ.
his claims to jurisdiction,
χχν. ΧΧΥ POF 03
consecrated Faustus_ to
Antioch, xxvil. 192 n.,
93-
resisted Basil’s taking the
monastic revenues, ΧΧΥ.
joined Basil in the letter
to the West, 177.
Antioch, John of, 292 n.
Antioch, letter to the presbytery of,
292.
creeds of, 49 n.
need of the church’s union,


295.
had three bishops at the
same time, 295 n.
disorders in the church, 164,
165, 166, 192. 193.
its church in affliction, 204,
25 3,:253 ἢ 254:
Antiochus, nephew of Eusebius, 206
Π., 217 ἢ.
letters from Basil to, 206,
211. 217.
Antiochus, presbyter, 280.
Antipater, governor of Cappadocia,
letters to, 201, 223.
letter from, to Basil, 223.
Antiquity, venerable as a teacher and
witness, 45, 46, 47, 132.
Anysius, 280.
᾿Απαύγασμα, Xxxvi. Nn.
᾿Αφέλκονται, ἐφέλκονται, 265 ἡ.
Apollinarius, heretic, 197, 199, 264 n.,
266, 302, 303.
approximates to Sabel-
lius, 198, 266.
how connected with
Basil, xv. 264, 266,
286, 326.
denied the ψυχῇ λογικῇ
in Christ, 276 n.
a book writer, 302.
fragments of his works,
286 n., 302.
Apollonius Thaum. of Tyana, 250 n.
Apostasy, how penanced, 257, 258.
its character, 17, 239.
through torture, 17.
Apotactitze, a Manichean sect, 240,
240 n.
᾿Αψευδὲς στόμα, christian, 288 n.
Araxes, 68.
Arboriculture, 78, 79.
Arcadius, bp., letter to, 153.
Arcadius, imperial treasurer, letter to,


125.
Archetype as applied to Deity, 141.


Arian schism, 48, 288.
creeds, xxxiv. 49 n., 288.
questions upon the Incarnation,
XXXIV. Sg., 299, 300.
warchwords and tests, x«xvi. Ix.
ὃ n., 116.
Arianism, its character, Ix. 48 n.,
49 n., 178, 198, 302.
ditheistic and polytheistic,
49 n., 285.
its cliffusion, 178, 198.
laid hold on the church,
XViii.
bold and shameless, 302.
refused by the people, 283.
Arians,» xix, xxx../XXxxiv. 574, 10 n.,
29 N., 37 πο 130;0305-
their own scissions, 48 n.,
49 Ὁ.
made Christ a titular deity,
49 ἢ.
their real aim, 49 n.
appeal to Scripture, 17 n.
their shiftiness, 287, 288.
their creeds, xxxiv. sg. 288,
292. |
were charged with re-ordain-
ing, 199 n.
accepted Homoousion
their own sense, 254.
harassed the monks, 294.
disturbed Sizopolis, 299.
attacked the Ariomaniacs,
306.
urged Valens to oppress
Basil and Cappadocia, xxiii.
Ariminum, creed of, xviii. 49 n.,
ΠΡ 1, 123 0.
Arinthzeus, wife of, 184 n.
letter to him, 221.
letter consolatory to his
widow, 307.
Ariomaniacs, 306, 306 n.
Aristotelian philosophy and formule,


in


38, 200.
Arius, his heresy, 1, 106 n., 176, 245,
264, 286.
condemned at Nicza, 48 n.,
176.


Armenian Church visited by Basil,
XXVil. 184.

Arts, their purpose, 55.

“As far from you to me, as from me
to you,” 123.

Ascetic, his duty, 112.

his life and character, xvii.
RV. DIZ N.,.249:


name covered _ anchoret,
monk, and_ ccenobite,
112. ἢ,
as represented by Basil, xvii.
XViii.
Ascetics, letter to the, 267.
spread rapidly through


Pontus, xviii.
Basil’s account of them, I. sg.
Ascholius, bp. of Thessalonica, letter
to, 209, 255, 216.
notes of his history, 209 n.,
210 n.
much commended
Basil, 209, 216.


Ascholius, trainer of
210 n.
Asclepius, martyr, 290.
Asia, Basil’s, is Asia Minor, 109 n.,
259, 260.
Asterius, bearer of the feigned letter
to Basil, 159.
Asterius, heretical teacher, 165 n.
Astrologers blame the Creator, 85.
Astrology and nativities, lix. 84, 85,
86.
take away responsibility,
86.
Astronomy and its results, 54, 84.
Astydamas, the boastful playwright of
Athens, 142, 142 n.
᾿Ασύγχυτος, 278 τ.
Atarbius, bp. of Neoczesarea, 162,
162 ἢ., 220 ἢ.
perhaps kinsman of Basil,
XXVill. 162, 250.
at variance with Basil,
XXVili. 162, 163, 220 n.
slanderer of Basil, xxviii.


the martyrs,


243 n., 246 n.
called to account by Basil,
196.


letters to, 162, 196.
Athanasius, bp. of Alexandria, xxix,
I, 194 n., 210, 227 n.,
245, 253:
his place in the Arian
controversy, 16 n.
was honoured in the
West, 163.
mediated between East
and West, xxxi. 176,
| 245, 253-
was “the boy bishop,”
173 n.
favoured and promoted
monasticism, 109.
was satisfied with Diony-
sius’ orthodoxy, 45 n.
letters from Basil, 161,
163, 164, 165.
appealed to by Basil,
XXib. | SKIKY.163,;;, 105,
E71, 172, 2405-25 3-
was refused communion
by Meletius of An-
tioch, 176, 176 n.
gave notice of an excom-
munication, 161, 161 ἢ.
asserted the Nicene faith
to Jovian, xix.
died. As D437 3, :‘ χχὺς
163 n., 200, 203.
much honoured alive and
dead; \xxix.-xxxi. (163;
164, 165, 171, 179 Ny
245.
his letters to Serapion
published, xix.
Athanasius, bp. of Ancyra,
130 n.
letter to, 130.
reproached by Basil for
a hasty judgment, 130,


130,


1591:
Athanasius, bp. of Cornth, 327 n.


by| Athanasius, father of Athanasius of


Ancyra, 130, 130 n.


Αὐτοάγιος,


346


Athanasius, letter to, 130.


consoled under calumny,
130.


᾿Αθέσμῳ γάμῳ, 238 n.
Athlete in the circus, 81, 322.


type for the ascetic, 112.


or Moschus, 53 n.


BASIL.


Barachus, a bishop, signed the letter| Basil, his natural disposition, xvii.


to the West, 177.


Barachus, a brother, 215.


Atheists believe, at times, on God, 82.| Barlaam, a Diocletian martyr, lxix.


Barses, bishop of Edessa, banished,


49 N., 303.
letter to, 303, 306.


Atomic theory, attributed to Mochus| Barsumus, bishop, signed the letter to
the. West, 177.


divisibility and indivisibility | Basil, bishop of Ancyra, xviii. 3 n.


considered, 55.


letes, 81.
Aurelian is appealed to, 155 n.
αὐτεξούσια, αὐτοζωῇ,
REXIX. ὩΣ


Bactrius, 68.
Baptism, its formula, li. 16,17, 18, 38,


43, 45, 46, 47, 121, 156,
196, 212, 250, 260, 292.
water blessed for, 22, 42, 46.
its ceremonies, 18, 21, 42,
124, 240, 276.

trine immersion, 17 n., 22,
AZ; 273.

its renunciations, 17 n., 18,
42.

the anointing, 124.

its essentials, 17 n., 18, 240.

when valid or invalid, 17,
17 Nj 223, 224, 240.

in the Name and not names,
250.

insufficient in the Name of
the Father, 18.

insufficient in the Name of
the Spirit, 18, 19.

insufficient in the Name of
Christ; 17m,

heretical baptisms con-
sidered, 17 n., 223, 224,
240.

repeated on some heretics
believing, 240.

an obligation to believe
rightly, 17, 22, 43, 292.

symbol of the soul’s cleans-
ing, 21,22; 46.

effective by the Spirit, 17,
18, 22, 49 n.

means of grace for regenera-
Hon, T7308, 21, 22.

setting the seal to our assent,
18.

established through faith, 18.

Old Testament types of, 20. .

‘‘ into water,” 21.

of salvation is one and a
covenant, 22, 177, 186.

its meaning, 17, 18, 21, 22,
212.

three invocations of, 22.

“water baptism ” only, 22.

second name given in, 124,
124 n.

forgiveness in, 237.

emerging in, 276 n.

of martyrdom, lIxxi. n., 22.

often hurried, 255 n.

whysometimes deferred, xvi.
Ixiv,


Atoms, in the theory of Creation, 53.) Basil,
Audience in sympathy with the ath-


——<—<————— ee _—0e>O_NOeeeeererrF ere e—_—r ek ——s—se ee


is banished, 3 n.

bishop of Cvesarea, his paren-
tage and relatives, ix. xiil.
Sq. 249, 249 n.

chronological table of his life,
xi. xii.

date and place of birth, xiii.
Xiv. 115 n.

his education, xiv. xv. xvi. Ixix.

had the rudiments of religion
from his grandmother Ma-
crina, xiv. Xv. Xvi. 245, 249.

account of his youth, 249.

was at Athens and its uni-
versity, Xv.

his connection with Julian, xv.
xv. ἢ.

his connection with Apolli-
narius, Xv.

his equipment for his life-work,
xvii ixix:

was unacquainted with Latin
and Hebrew, xvi. n., xliv. sg.

returned from Athens _ to
Ceesarea, Xv.

was teacher at Czesarea, xVl.
249, 249 Ὁ.

was invited to teach at Neoczs-
area, XVi.

his deferred baptism performed
by Dianius, xvi. 45, 45 ἢ.

was ordained Reader, xvii.

date of ordination to the priest-
hood unknown, xviii.

his ordaining bishop unknown,
XVili. xix. 45, 45 i, 48 ἢ;
152 ἢ.

his presumed diaconate, xix. n.,
3 in:

reconciled with Dianius, xviii.

his early relation to parties,
XVill.

compiled the Phzlocalia from
Origen’s works, xvill.

his J/oralia (ἠθικά) pub-
lished, xix.

wrote against Eunomius, xix.
Xxxili. 574 xiii, 33 π᾿, 49'n.,
127.


-his place in fixing theological


terms, 5 n., 104 n.

his intellectual championship,
xxiii. 16 n.

was obliged to Origen, xviil.
46 n.

Hexaemeron described and esti-
mated, xliv. sg., 51, 52.

preached extempore, xxiii. 51.

his defective geography, 69.

was abreast of contemporary
science, xxili. 52, 126 ἢ:

literal interpreter of Scripture,
xlv. IOI n.


ΧΙ. ἢ. XVili, XX. XXV. XXVi.
KER.

as the metropolitan, 196, 202
Ti, KX. ἘΠῚ 7; ARVN

description of himself and
habits, xvii. xvili. xxxi. 207,
244, 245, 262 57., 285.262,
295.

origin of his bad health, xvii.
XViil,

always in sickness and com-
plaining, xili. xvii. xviii. 132,
134, 136, 153, 158, 161, 170,
184, 188, 200, 201, 202, 203,
204, 215, 233, 234, 236, 240,
241, 253, 255, 259, 288, 306.

visited Syria and Egypt, xvii.
109.

was at Alexandria, 109.

visited the Holy Land, xvii. 145
n., 148 ἡ.

retired to Pontus, xvii. xviii.
xix, 110. 115 Ὡς; [24,142 ἢ.
154 ἢ.

lived at Annesi, xiv. xv. xvii.
Tt2.

story of the robbery at Annesi,
112.

inclined to Stoicism and abste-
miousness, xvii. 111. n., 113,
143.

promoted asceticism and mo-
nasticism, lii. ἢ.

presided over a ccenobium,
ΧΡΉ. 115 ἢ.

went to Gregory Naz., xv. xvi.
xviii, xxv. 115 n., 116, 167 n.

was attacked by Eustathius,
124 n.

reproached Athanasius of An-
cyra for misjudging, 130,
101:

wished to visit Samosata, 132,
134. 136 m4 202, 215.

was much opposed, xxii. xxiii.
EXV. XXK, 134,154, 160. Loy,
170, 184, 193, 196, 197, 198,
199, 228, 229, 241 Sqg., 255;
262 5ζ., 285 Sq.

was much written to, xxix. 136,
158, 209 sg.

was written to by Julian, xix.
141. 142.

replied and upbraided the
Emperor, 142, 143.

his letters, 109 sg.

list of correspondents, xxix.

came from Pontus to help
Eusebius at Czesarea, xx.
I52n.

why he left Czesarea, xix, 154 1.

estrangement from Eusebius
his bishop, xx.

how elected to Czesarea, xxi.
ΧΧΊΣ 152. πὶ

his designs for peace to the
church, xx." xxl. 159 ‘Ns 173
sg.. 196, 241, 242.

his relation to Dianius, xviii.
154.

was opposed by his suffragans,
xxll. 159 n., 167.


ee ee τ ee eee, ΨΟ ἂν


ἂν τὸ δὼ. ee ee er


oe δι."


a Se ως


Basil wished reconciliation with his'


uncle Gregory, 160, 161.

quarrelled with Gregory Naz.,
XVil. XX. XXV. XXVi. XxVil. 167,
167 n., 250 n.

defended the language of
Gregory Thaum., 250, 250n.,
251.

was called Homoousiast, 269,
288.

avoided calling the Holy Ghost
God, xxiii. 278.

had troubles at Nicopolis, 196.

his efforts for the Nicopolitans,
XXVil. 286 sg.

stood by the one Nicene faith,
xix. 194, 195, 245, 292.

appealed to Rome and the
West, xxii. xxx. 177,

his replies from the West slow
and cautious, xxx.

his influence felt by even the
Emperors, Xx. XXili, XXiv.

was denounced to the gover-
nor, ΧΧΙΪ.

was congratulated by Athan-
asius when made bishop,
XI.

his hospital and
charity, xx. xxi.

pleaded on behalf of the or-
phans, 173, 174.

defamed for reticence on the
Holy Ghost, xxiii. xxiii n.

in contact with Valens, xix. sg.

invited to pray over Valens’
SON, Χχῖν. XXV.

opposed the division of Cappa-
docia, XXxv. Xxvi.

consecrated the Gregories to
Nyssa and Sasima, xxv. 169


works of


n.

handed on the truths from
Gregory Thaum., 243 n., 245.

his connection with Atarbius
of Neoczesarea, xxvili.

was suspected of Sabellianism,
XXViil.

disavowed Apollinarianism,
XXVil. 197, 199, 264 5g., 286.

his efforts for Caesarea, xx. xxi.


YOO; 870, V7 Lib 72017 3,24 3,,


Basil claimed investigation,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


243-5,
246-8, 267 sg.

was summoned to the court by
the heretics, 253.

his connection and quarrel with
Eustathius, xxvii.

was in communion with Eusta-
thius, xviii. 180, 180 n., 183,
196 n.

conferred at Nicopolis
Eustathius, xxvii. 183.

was slandered by Eustathius,
XXVll. 57. 198, 241, 248 57.
268 sg., 288.

defended himself against Eus-
tathius, xxvil. 262 sy., 26759.,
285 59.

his position with respect to
Meletius, 295.

sought explanation with So-
phronius, 309.

was maintained out of the
family estates, 137.

retained his proprietorship, xvii.
115:

his friendships, xxviii.

his death and funeral, xxxi.
xliv.

estimate of Basil, xxxi. xxxil.

gives no information on public
events, xxxi. 7

probably not understood or
appreciated, xxxl.

his personal appearance, xxiv.

his own medical treatment,
XExK1 201, 292, 222.

his commemoration and relics,
XXXii.

his statue in St. Paul’s, London,
ΧΧΧΙ].

his writings, xxxii. sg.

his Homilies and Exegesis,
xliv. sg.

Commentary on Isaiah doubt-
fyuly xliss

Ascetic and Moral Treatises,
1:

Rules for religious guidance,
111. sg.

Homilies, lv. sg.

his lost writings, xxiii.

editions and MSS., Ixxiv. sg.


with


347


Bees, highly praised in Scripture, 97.
Beginning, as used by St. John, 8.
as belonging to all things,
53> 54» 55:

its moral significance, 55.

Begotten, an unwelcome term, 116.
as a theological idea, is out-
side human reason, 156.
Belief as related to knowledge, 274,


275.
Berzeans, letter to the, 260.
were disposed towards
peace, 260.
Bianor, presbyter, blamed for his


oath, 236.
Binding and loosing, 258, 258 n.
Birds, their place in the creation, 96
5.
a "πὰ link, 96.
their forms and habits, 96, 97,
98, 99, 100.
great variety of, 96, 97, 100.
nearly all may be tamed, 97.
aquatic, their forms and habits,
100,
as moral teachers, I00,
had the*same origin as the
fishes, 228.
Bishops, do not impose taxes, 324.
were driven from their sees,


aa το τὰ
are sometimes objects of
contempt, 280, 282.


care should be exercised in
their selection, 232.

a court of appeal and
justice, 244, 250.

were sometimes appointed
before baptism, 255 n.

those of Italy and Gaul
were addressed by Basil,


177;
Bithus, or Vitus, of Carrhae, signed
the letter to fie) West, 177.
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,


44.

Bs V. M., slur om her faith, 299;
299 Nn.

Body, the celestial, 66.

Boethus, bp., signed the letter to the
West, 177.

Bosporius, bp., of Colonia, 154 n., 204.


Basil, had letter from Basil of Cesa- friend of Basil and of

appealed to Athanasius, xxii. rea, 293. Gregory Naz., 154 n.
163, 164, 165, 171, 172, 245. | Basil, bishop of Raphanea, xv. letter to, 154.

often was slandered and mis-| Basilides, bishop of Gangra, 268, 268] Botany, teachings on, 76-9.
represented, xxvii. sg., 198, τ» 291. Breathing upon the face, 25 n
199, 241 5ζ., 262 sg., 285 sq.| Basilius, 5. Basil’s father, xiii. Britain, isle of, 73.

accused of heresies, 228 sg.,|Basilius, friend of Eustathius and| Britons, 87.
243 5g. opposed to Basil, 192. Brutes, how they differ from man, 95,

wrote in exculpation, 180, 243) Bassus, signed the letter to the West,
5.2.5 287 Sq. hy 2

visited Armenia and wished to perhaps Barses
provide bishops, xxvii. 183, Edessa, 177 n.
184. Bat, the, 99.

acted in Armenia as Metropoli-| Bear finds its specific and cure, 113.
tan, 184. Beauty in nature, 71, 89, 90.

was opposed by Gregory of a testimony to God, 82.
Nyssa, 184 n., 228 ἢ. Becket, Thomas a, his murder and

called Atarbius to account for canonisation, xix. n.
disorders, 196, 243 n. Bede, as commentator, 51.

had connection with the Semi-| Bees, their habits and commonwealth,
arians, XVii. XVili. xx. 243. 97:


244, 245.


95 Τὶ. ae
how they show their instincts,
bishop of 1Q3.
Burial, in baptism, 21.


Cabbage, pickled,
223. ni
Ceesarea in Cappadocia, its archie-

piscopate, xv. 152, 159. .
in trouble, 159, 159 n., 169,
170, 241, 241 n. 248 57.
church and hospital at, xxi.
5g. 180, 180 n., 208,


as a. diet 222)


348


BASIL.


Ee δα HA a secs at νυ νὰ


Cesarea at the deposition of Elias
the governor, 181.
its relation to the early life
of Basil, xiv. xv. xx. xxi.
identification of its site, xxi.
its position as a city, xxiv.n.
suffered from the Carnival
indulgences, lxii. ἢ.
Cesarius, letter to, 131,
his life, 131 n.
his executory caused Greg-
ory Naz. much trouble,
135.
Cain, a question upon his punish-
ment, 296-8.
Calendar, the Julian, and its adjust-
ments, 87 ἢ.
the Greek, 87.
Callisthenes, friend of Basil, 167, 168.
letter to, 168.
had been set upon by
slaves, 168.
Calypso’s island, 124.
Camel, a type of revenge, 95.
Canaan, why made a servant, 32.
Canal through Egypt, 73.
difference of level imagined as
an obstacle, 73.
the Suez, 73 n.
Candidianus, governor of Cappadocia
letter to; 112.
friend of Basil and Greg-
ory, 112 n.
praised for his open
courts, 265 n.
Canonice, 155 n., 219 n.
distinguished from nuns
and deaconesses, 2I1gn.
questions as to marriage,
iss ἢ,
calumnies regarding, 155.
letter to, τ ΡΣ 210:
Cappadocia, its division opposed by
Basil, 168, 169, 170,
182.
abounded with altars
and martyr memorials,
241 n.
persecutions
268, 261. ἢ
oppressed by Basil, xxiii.
divided by Valens, xxiii.
XXV.
why it remained so ortho-
dox, xxix. n.
Cappadocians, character of the, 153,
1532 ἢ,
several sent by Basil
to Libanius. 320 sg.
‘the three Cappado-
cians,” xiv.
Captivity, ransoming from, 166.
Carthusian silence, 128 ἢ.
Caspian sea, 74.
Catacombs, rearranged by Pope
Damasus, xxxii. n.
Cataphrygian, 223 n.
Catechumen, one for baptism blessed,
42.
his name registered, 17.
the renunciation and
professions of faith,
17 ἢ.


in, xxiii.


——————$ SSeS
nn HR Ἴρ,,εοὁορέιιωιτι«ι«: τ᾽... ς---


Cathari, followers of Novatian, 223,|Christ, purpose of His incarnation,


223 n.
their baptism, 223.
were schismatics, 224.
Catholics, persecuted by Arians, 152 ἢ.
Cattle, prone by nature, 102, 104.
their digestive organs, 104.
Caucasus, Mount, 68.
Causality, 56n., 92 ἢ.
Cause, four kinds of, 4 n.
six given by Basil, 4 ἢ.
the Supreme, 5, 56, 68.
voluntary in God, 56, 59, 60.
Celebration of Eucharist at home
forbidden, 236 n.
Celts, 69.
Censitor, letter to, 318.
as assessor of taxes, his
work unpleasant, 173 n.,
318.
Censure, gentleness in, 111.
Cetaceans, produced from the water,
99, OI.
Chalcis, letter to the people of, 261.
Chaldzean star-reading, 84, 85, 93.
Chamanene, 175
Chance did not create the world, 55,
92 ῃ.
χαρακτῆρ, 14 τι.
Chariot with three riders, 233.
Charity, administration of, 208.
Chastity, how honoured, 257 n.
χειρόγραφον, 17 τ.
χειροτονητή, ἐχειροτονήθη, 231 n.
Children, on what condition admitted
into monasteries, lii. liv.
Chilo, disciple of Basil, letter to, 143.
Chinese silk, 100.
Choaspes, 68.
Chorepiscopus, 130, 156 n., 157, 205,
210, 268, 315.
his duties under the
bishop, xxi. 157.
his district, 315 n.
if accused of simony,


156, 157.
had charge of the
hospital, xxi.


Chosroes, bishop, signed the letter to
the West, 177.
Chremetes, 69.
Chrism, only if blessed, 42.
Christ, names and terms applied to
Flim, 11, 12.
His incarnation for us, 12, 21.
His glory in redemption, 11.
as the Word, 24.
His body real and not as a
spirit, 7.
bore witness to purity of life,
34, 122.
His body in the unity of the
Spirit, 38.
to be glorified with the saints,
41.
to be our judge, 10.
if neither honoured nor feared,
48.
held by Arians as only a titular
deity, 49. ῖ
His Eternal Generation, 13.
His incarnation true and per-
fect, To, 27, 104 Ὡς


21, 104 n.
the image of God, 15.
His pattern life for man’s per-
fection, 21, 104 n.
perfect as our pattern, 21.
His relation to birth sin, 104 ἢ.
His ceconomy, 117.
is God, 117, 138.
interpretation of his words,
122 ni
He made all things, 138.
Saviour, with the sinner to
return, 147, 152.
the pattern of duty, xxxix. 241.
His self-limitation, 276 n.
His Not-knowing discussed,
XXKVEHL 276, 277.
our Redeemer, 300.
His prayer in the Agony,
ΧΧΧΙ͂Χ.
His brethren, xli. ἢ.
Himself the Vine, xxxix.
χριστέμποροι, 282 τι.
Christians, made such in baptism, 18.
some apostatise, 17, 294.
proper Christian behav-
iour, 127 sg., 284, 290,
294.
unworthy, have no good
from the name, 239.
made on the pattern of
Christ, 241, 294.
some only traffickers in
Christ, 282.
all require fortitude in
their calamities, Ixii.
Christmas and Epiphany, xxiv. n.,
272 Nh.
χριστοφόνοι, 16 n.
Chrysippus of Tarsus, 54.
Chrysostom, his death in exile, 284 n.
Church, one body in Christ, 39, 189,
211, 241, 242,245, 257.
preserves the tradition of
teaching, 40 sg., 132.
like a battle field, 48, 290.
like a battle at sea in a tem-
pest, 48, 242, 282.
as pictured in Basil’s experi-
ence, 48, 49, 50, 178, 216,
294.
an object of beauty, 75, 216.
her public worship, 75.
falling into a worse condition,
163, 178, 189, 190,268, 280.
her unity most desirable, 189,
190, 211, 241, 242, 245.
persecuted in Egypt, 203,
303 sg.
its picture in peace, 216.
as Catholic, 224, 245, 283.
in schism, 223, 224.
funds and treasures of, 267.
only one communion in, 245,
283.
in persecution, 268,
281 sg., 290, 294.
her mutual sympathy, 282,
283.
her assemblies deserted
through persecution, 284,


290, 294+


280,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


349


Church, her authority, 313, 314.
her ministrations described,
285, 290.
officially recognised, xiv.


for the church, 281.
to a widow losing her
husband, 308.


Church-building with relics of mar-|Constans, the Emperor, 49 n.


tyrs, 153.


Constantine, the Emperor, 218 n.


claim against civil authority, | Constantinople, its situation, 109 n.


2.1.2.
Circles, seven in the heavens, 66.
Circumincession, 139.
Circus, its customs, δὶ.
Cleanthes of Assos, 54 n.
acts of an admirer, 113.
Lydian Stoic, 113 ἢ.
Clement, bp. of Rome, gives the story
of the Phoenix, 45, 52.
Clergy, a court of appeal and justice,
244.
may be slandered, 244.


its ecclesiastical con-
dition, 153, 153 n.
its council of A.D.
360,.287 n.; 292:


Contemplation, its place and value,


Continency honoured, Ixvii. 257.


letter upon, 326.


Conversation, a matter of tact and


skill, 111.
rules for, 111.


Corydala, identified, 259.


how penanced, 218, 236, 238,/Council, of Nicaea (A.D. 325), 41 π.,


25M.
may turn traitors, 294.
Clerical, duties to the world, 180, 236.
guides and escorts, 180 n.,
οε΄, 236.
exemptions, 186,
crafts, 235 n., 236.
discipline, 236, 238.
degradation for offences, 218,
239, 257, 257 Ὦ.
Clinias a follower of Pythagoras,
Ixvii.
Cock, his early watchfulness, 100.
Coenobium, its size and arrangements,
liv.
Collyridian heretics, Ixxi. n.
Colonia in Armenia, letters to clergy
and magistrates, 270.
troubles in the church, 270,
2.1:
Commentariensis of prisons, letter to,
315:
Communion, holy, received four times
a week, 179.
taken privately in per-
secution, 179.
taken by the solitaries in
the desert, 179.
reservation practised in


Egypt, 179.


was received in the
hand, 179.

different kinds of, 198,
198 n.


“communion of the
good thing,” 256.
Communism, how limited in the early
church, 208 n.
Conception, the immaculate, 99.
natural illustrations, 99,
99 n.
Confession in baptism, 16, 17.
Congregation, how and when unlaw-
ful, 223, 224.
Conjurors and their bad influence, 73.
Consolations, to bereaved parents, 113,
saw Baye
in Christian faith and


123, 154, 155, 158, 172,
176, 189, 190, 194.
of Constantinople (A.D.
BON jee) 17. πὶ
of Ephesus (A.D. 431), 46 n.
of Chalcedon (A.D. 451),
220 n,
of Alexandria (A.D. 362), 1.
of Ancyra (A.D. 314), xxx.
156 n.
(A.D. 358), xviii.
302, 302 n.
(A.D. 375), 249
n


of Antioch (A.D. 264, 269),


155 n.
(A.D. 363), 48 n.

of Ariminum (A.D. 359),
XV111. 20.

of Constantinople (A.D.
366), xk. 125 π᾿, Tee Ὡς,
287 1, 201 te

of Cyzicus (A.D. 376), 287 n.

of Illyricum (A.D. 375?),
XXX. 1407 mi; ΕΠ ΤΣ

of Lampsacus (A.D. 365),
XX. 123. Ds, 264,: 264 i,
268 n., 287 n., 291, 292.

of Laodicea (A.D. 375),
157 Ns 280 Ππ|; 235 0.

of Neo-Cezsarea (A.D. 314),
156 ἢ.

of Nicza (A.D. 787), 326 n.

of Nike (A.D. 359), xviii.
115 τς, 123 n., 154 n.

of Paris (A.D. 360), xix.

of Saragossa (A.D. 380),


179 n.

of Seleucia (A.D. 359), xviii.
292, 302.

in Sicily (A.D. 367), 269 n.

of Trent (A.D. 1545-63),


41 n.

Trullan (A.D. 680), 236 n.,
227 N.,.230 Ds

of Tyana (A.D. 366), xx.
269, 287 n., 302.

of Zela (A.D. 418), 292.


hope, 184, 185.

to a church losing its
bishop, 132, 133.

to bp. Elpidius on losing
his grandson, 246.


Country people handing on traditions,
10 n.
Crab, its cunning and habits, ΟἹ.
its moral teaching, Οἱ.
Crane, its habits, 98.


Re θὉΘῦΘῦϑῷϑΧ2Κ56565ὉθῦθῦὃΘθὃΘπ6ΠτΠππ-ππππ|͵|-1...-Πρὖθ1-.΄“ΠΠΠΠΡΠΡὖ΄΄΄΄΄'͵.͵͵Ἑ͵Σ...ὄἧἘἘςἘν.-΄ο΄ῆῦὔΠ5-Ὸ-0Φ6{Φ«ΦΦᾧἜιραἄἴαάαο΄΄“΄Π“ΠὅΠὅΠὅΠὅΠὅΠὅΠ“ΠὅΠὅ5ς΄-“΄“ρ΄΄. .


Consolations to churchmen in trouble/| Creation, its order, 23, 52 59. 59, 72,


81, 82, 92 n., 94.

by the Three Persons, 23,
121.

as only a change, 31, 95 n.

of heaven and earth, 52 sg.

in divine wisdom, 55, 58,
59, 60, 80, 81, 88, 94.

in essence and form, 60,
95 0.

Ἦ g00d,. ὁ 5.,..,08,,.,71;..78;

Ι. :


was beautiful, 72, 75.

an object worthy of study,
SI 5ζ., 94.

not by chance, 92 n., 102.

Creator, God, 53 sq., 103.

Demiurge of the world, 54.
is ever present with His
creation, 103.
Creed, an Arian, 4 n., 366.

of Aetius ana Euzoius, xxxiv. n.

of Ancyra, 288.

of Antioch (Dedication), xx.
288 n.

of Ariminum, 49 n., II5 n.,
123. ἢ. ΤΟ ἢ 207, Big 25 8 ΠΡ

of Constantinople, 288, 288 ἢ.

of Cyzicus, 288.

of Eunomius, xxxiv.

of Lampsacus, 288, 288 ἢ.

of Nica, 154, 178, 189 n,,
T9O, 194, 195, 204.

of Nike, 288, 288 n.

of Seleucia, 288.

‘ Sirmian blasphemy,” xviii.

from Basil’s De 7ide, li.

the Macrostich, 8 n., 49 n.

multiplicity of Arian creeds,
48 n. 49 n., 288 n., 289.

Criticism, rules for, 244.

Croesus, anecdote on, 189.

Cross, signing with, a tradition, 41.

prefigured by the serpent on
the pole, 20.

its symbol, a favourite and
frequent study, xlix.

Crow, its habits. 98, 99.

Crustaceans produced from the water,

go.

Custom, unwritten, its force, 213.

Cyprian, on heretical baptism, 17 n.

Cyriacus at Tarsus, letter to, 190.

Cyriacus, presbyter, 227, 227 n.

with letter commendatory,
308, 309.

Cyril, bp. of Alexandria, 4 n.
anathemas against Nestorius, 16.
was condemned by Eastern

council, 292 n.
Cyril, Armenian bishop, reconciled by
Basil, xxvii. 184, 193.
Cyrus friendly to Croesus, 180.


Δαιμόνιον μεσημβρινόν, 1111. n.

Damas, martyr, xix. 220 n., 292.
Damasus, bp. of Rome, xxxii. 153 n.,
253 n., 306.
letter probably to,166,166 n.
asked on behalf of Antioch,

166, 253 n., 306.
rearranged the catacombs,
XXxii.


350


BASIL.


Damasus, his important synodical let-
ter, xliv.
Daphnus, bishop, signed the letter to
the West, 177.
Darkness at the Creation, 60, 62, $3.
symbol of evil, 61.
not a power opposed to
good, 61.
only a condition, 62, 83.
separated from light, 83.
Darnel, a true grain, its symbolism, 78.
Darwin, his theories on natural law,
76 n.

David’s kingdom did not fail, 277.
Day, word used of creation, 64, 65, 72.
how used in solitude, 111.

spoken of by Christ, 118, 119.
the Lord’s, 179.

Dazizus, letter to, published every-
where, 287.

Deacon, one used as messenger, 168.
distinct degree, 217, 218 n.
punished for fornication, 225.

Deaconess, how to be penanced, 239.

Dead are returned to the Lender, 114.

Dearth at Czesarea, 132, 134.

Death, consolations‘on, 114, 187, 219,

307, 314.
its anticipation to a fallen
virgin, 151.
Decomposition of meat in moonlight,
88, 88 n.

Demiurge of the Universe, 54.
Democritus of Abdera, an atomist,
53 ἢ.
taught of many heavens

and worlds, 66 n.

Demoniacal influences, xlix. xlix. n.

Demons, Gregory had power over, 47.

Demophilus, Arian bp. of Constan-

tinople, 153, 153 n.

Demosthenes, Vicar of Pontus, letter

to,. 267.
notes on his life, xxv.
XXVll. 267 n.


summoned heretical
synod in Galatia,
207 Ai.,.2 70.

“fat sea. “monster,”
perhaps also “ old
muleteer,” 272.

violent against the
Church, πεν xxx
279


acts against the church
in Nicopolis, 279.
was against Gregory at
Nyssa, xxx.
Demosthenes, Valens’ cook, xxiv.
Demosthenes, story of him as Chora-
gus, 112.
Deposition from the ministry, xxxiil.
257, 387, 388.
Deprivation of the ministry, 218.
Δησερόρων, δεσερτόρων, latinisms,


307 n.
Desertion by the husband or by the

wife, 2309.
Design in creation, 54, 55, 60, 63, 68,

82, 100, 102.
argument from, 80 n., 81, 82.

Destruction and palingenesis, 70.
Devils, said to enjoy rich feasts, xlix.


Devils, promoters of physical evils,
Ixv.
Dew, whence produced, 88, 88 n.
Aca, its grammatical force, 117 ἢ,
Διάβολος, 121 n., 242 n., 243 ἢ,
Διακοσμησις, how used, 12 ἢ.
Dianius, bp. of Capp. Caesarea, 45 ἢ.
204 n., 288.
baptized and possibly or-
daingd Basil, xvi. xviii.
AS ith: BPS Ἢ:


Discipline regarding fitness of candi-
dates, 157.
examination and election,
ΤΠ:
presentation to the bishop
for ordination, 157.
Divination and diviners. 221, 249.
Divorce for fornication, 227.
Doara, bishopric ἴῃ Cappadocia,
RXVL./ 272m.
its church in trouble, xxvi.


signed the creed of Arimi- 272, 280.
num, Xvilil. 45 n., 115 ἢ.» Docetism, 300 ἢ.
154,154 n., 204 n. Dog, his reasoning powers, 104,


spoken kindly of, by Basil,


Xv. 45 Π., 154,155.
was succeeded by Eusebius,


104 ἢ.
his fidelity,
teacher, 104.


and ἃ moral


152 ἢ: Aoyua, distinguished from κήρυγμα,
admired and loved by Basil, 30 n., 32 n., 41 n., 42.

XV. XVIil. decree, or ordinance, 41 n.
quarrelled and was recon- doctrine, secondary sense,

ciled with Basil, xviii, 41 ἢ:


his death, 154 ἢ.
Didymus, blind master at Alexandria,
xliv.


venerable in hoary antiquity,


45.
as applicable to ἃ heretical
borrowed from by some tenet, 252 ns 300'n.
fathers, xliv. xliv. n. Domitianus, friend of Basil, 188, 189.
Digaiay and its general discipline,| Domninus, a brother, carries letter to
22.5228, 237, 238. Barses, 303.
excludes from the ministry, the name common, 303 n.


528. Dorotheus, deacon, 164, 165, 166,

Dilemma proposed by the Arians, 173, 175). 30:
XXXVI. to be sent on a message
Diocese, also a civil division, 292, to Rome, 164 sg., 175.
202 1, attached to Meletius at


Diodorus, bp. of Tarsus, 200 n.
his writings destroyed by
the Arians, 200 n.
account of his services, etc.,
286 n.
Diodorus, presbyter, 183, 286, 286 n.
letter to, 200.
Diogenes, acts of an admirer of, 113.
Διοίκησιες, a jurisdiction, 292 n. held tenancy under Basil, xvii.
Dionysius, bp. of Alexandria, 45,|Dorotheus, the presbyter, letter to,
166 “nl, (223,223 ἫΝ 2


Antioch, 165, 175, 211.
sent by Basil to Athan-
asius, 165, 166, 282 n.
brings message from the
West, 280, 306.
had his corn carried off,


174, 175.
Dorotheus, foster brother of Basil,


54:
224. bears a letter from Basil,
called the Great, 45 n., 285.


Doxology, form of the, 3, 37, 43, 44,
45, 46, 58, 65, 71, 76,
δι». 89,° ἼΘΙ, 107, 120:
177, 250.


has no written authority,


224.
his orthodoxy doubtful,
ΡΠ 122, 225,
approved by Basil, 45 n.
on heresy and schism,
2212. 224,
Dionysius, bp. of Corinth, 166 n.
Dionysius, bp. of Rome, 45, 123 n.,
166, 166 n.
Dionysius, the Areopagite, 62.
Dionysius, renamed at baptism, 124,


44.
used at the lighting of the
lamps, 46.
Dracontius unwillingly made bishop,
227 i
Dreams used for divination, 249, 251.


124 ἢ. Dress and dressing important, 112.
Dionysius of Milan, held as martyr, yet only subordinate, ]xviii.
179 n., 235. Drunkenness pictured and denounced,


Ixiv.
Dry land, its meaning in Genesis, 74.
Dryness, a quality of earth, 75.
Dualism, 27 n., 60, 61, 239 n.
Δυνάμεις as translated, 25 n., 38.
Dying unbaptized, 17.


his relics wanted back to
Milan, 234 n., 235.
value put upon his relics,
235:
Diotimus at Limyra, 259.
ὶς κράμβη θάνατος, 223 n.
Disciplina arcant, 42, 45.
suitable for the church’s
condition, 202.
Discipline in the church, 109, 157,


225 87,313, 384.


Eagle, its habits, 99. |
Earth created, 53 sg., 66, 72, 76, ΤΟΊ
its essence unattainable, 56.


how supported, 57.


4


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


351


Earth floating like wood on water,

Se) Ge

rooted in infinity, 57, 57 n.

in rotation, 57 n.

sustained by the
power, 57, 95. ΠΣ

reasons given for its immo-
bility, 57.

in the centre of the Universe,
57, 68.

was invisible and unfinished,
59, 60, 61, 72.

waiting for the Creator’s order,
60, 95.

by the Creator’s fiat, 60, 72,
75, 95-


fertile by Divine command, 76,


Creator’s


ae ‘¢bring forth ” and “ after
its kind,’ 76, 77, 95, 101,
102.
its products objects of grati-
tude, 77.
produced germs, 78, 95.
was condemned in her pro-
ducts, 78.
still producing living creatures,
102.
some questions as to its shape,
IOI.
East, prayer towards, a tradition, 41.
its meaning, 42.
Eastern Church, and Western in sym-
pathy, xvili. sg., xxx. 163,
164, 176,177, 282 50.
305.
condition pictured, 176, 282.
its importance in the fourth
century, xiv.
interested in Meletius and
Antioch, 164, 165, 166,


175.
appeals to the West, xxx.
177, 282 Sq.
Eastern Counci!, 292 n.
Ecdicius bp. of Parnassus, 162 n.,
268, 268 n., 280.
succeeded Hypsis, 162 n.
held in much contempt by
Basil, 280 ἢ.
Kchinades, 125.
Ἔχθροι, perhaps Arians, 214 n.
Economy, of Christ as the Son of God,
118 [see οἰκονόμια].
as used in preaching, xxiii.


Xi. Ts
Education gradual in nature and
grace, 21.
how regarded by Basil,
lviii. Ixv.


Ἡγέμων Σεβαστείας, who? 318, 318 n.
Egypt imagined lower than Red Sea,


73:
persecutions in, 203, 303, 304,


305.
Egyptian Gulf, 91.
ascetics, 247.
Eixwy, its right use as an illustration,
28 n.
Ἔκθεσις τῆς πίστεως of Gregory
Thaum., 250 n.
of Eunomius, xxxiil.
Elements, as created, 506.


Elements of the earth, their number,| Essence of heaven and earth, 59,


58, 116, 116 n.
in composition, 58.
the theories of Greek phil-
osophers on, 116 n.
Elephant, its form and habits, 105.
used in war, I05.
Eleusinius, “the reverend,” 171.
Eleusius, bp. of Cyzicus, deposed,
XXxiii.
Eleuthera, a widow, 123 n.


57s 53, 6o.
if equal to Substance, 117.
the same in Father and Son,


117, 229.

like in, without any differ-
ence, 123.

do we know it? 274, 275,
276.


Eternal Generation, 13 n. [see Son].
Eternity more glorious than time, 82.


Elias, governor, xxi. 173 n., 174 n.,| Ether, 63 n.


179.
removed from office at Czesarea,
180, ISI.
letters possibly to, 173, 174, 175.
Elpidius, intruding bishop of Amasia,
291, 291 n.

Elpidius, bishop, letter to, 245, 246.
consolatory from Basil, 246.
unknown, 245 n.

Jost his grandson, 246.

Elpidius (or Helladius), written to by

Basil, 162.
“ My worthy brother,” “ our
venerable friend,” 162, 171.
capable in administration,
171.
brother and deacon, 202.
messenger from the Synod
of Illyria, xxx.

Embolismus, 28 n.

Emmelia, how much to Basil, 114 n.
his mother, xill. 134, 134 n.
erected a chapel at Annesi,

xiv.
her death, xxi.

Empedokles, thought the
rotated, 57 n.
thought the sea was
‘the earth’s sweat,

70 Nn.
on elements, τό ἢ.
Encratiteze, 224, 239, 240 n., 277.
Envy reproved, Ixiv.
Ephrem Syrus, if referred to by Basil,
63 n.

Epicurean doctrine of ἀπειρία κόσμων,
66 n.

Epilepsy and demoniacal influence,
SItx. ice


earth


"Exivéunowc, its later use, 157 n.,
158n.
Epiphanius, bp. of Salamis, xliv. I,


294, 294 Ὦ.
letter to, 294.
his writings and travels,
294 n.
his Azcoratus
ΧΙ ΧΙ ne
Epiphany, xxiv. n., 272 n.
Episcopate, discretion required for,
239;
Erasmus, on the Arians, 16 n.
held back from publishing
Basil’s Commentary, 1.

Erinnys, a fury, 125 n.

Essence, as distinct from Person, 5 n.,
220, 274 sq. 278 [see
Hypostasis }.

difficult to discuss and define,
56, 274 5.
its discussion unedifying, 56.


issued,


Ethiopia, 69.

Eucharist, as ἀνάδειξις, 41, 41 n.
notes from Basil upon, |xxiil.
exclusion from#as penance,

237, 238, 239, 240.
explanation in, 118.
Eudemus, bp. at Patara, 259.
Eudoxius,. Arian, xxiii. 7 Ny, 257;
200.4. 20T,
his teaching to be enquired
into, 3 n.
made bishop of Constanti-
nople, xxxiil. 153 n.


deposed by the Semi-
arians at lLampsacus,
268 n.


his death, 268 n.
Eudoxius, of Germanicia, xviii. 8 n.,


49 n.

favoured the Arian Aetius,
XVill,

appropriated the see of


Antioch, xviil. 357-
Euippius, xxiv. 165.
against Meletius’
χχίν, 165, 287.
Basil separates from him,
197, 280, 287.
a deposed bishop, yet conse-
crates another. 387, 383.
the children and grand-
children of, 288.
his see unknown, 288 n.
an Acacian, xxiv. 291.
inconsistencies in his posi-
tion and parties, 291.
Eulalius, bp. of Amasia, extruded,
201 n.
Eulancius, letter to, 248.
Eulogius, Egyptian bishop, letter to
him in exile, 303.
Eunathius, commended to Sophronius,
221.
Eunomians used one immersion in
baptism, 17 n.
Eunomi-Eutychians baptized into the
name of Christ, 17 n.
Eunomius, bp. of Cyzicus, Anomcean,
EXXIli. 2 Diy 4 Thy 125.0
Arian leader, 16 ἢ.
made only one immersion
in baptism, 22 n.
written against by Basil,


party,


Kix. XXBUi. 57.5 33, ty
AS πὰ 327;
his Liker Apologeticus


criticised by Basil, xxxiil.
125 n.
his life and history, xxxiil.
Eupaterius and his daughter, letter
to, 212.


352


Euphemius and his wife, friends of} Eustathius


Basil, 210.
Euphronius, bp. of Colonia in Arme-
nia, letter to, 234.
removal to Nicopolis,
why occasioned, 270,
290 Ny 271. 272.
Eupsychius, martyr, commemorated,
MIX. XXKil, 184, 184 n.,
205, 240, 241, n., 292.
feast of, 184 n., 220, 292.
account of, xix. xix. n.,
292.
Europe, 69.
Eusebius, bp. of Czesarea, succeeded
Dianius, xix. 152 ἢ.
possibly ordained Basil,
152 n.
was unbaptised layman
when elected, xix. 152 ἢ.
his election tumultuous,
xix,
promoted
xix,
quarrelled with Basil, xx.
Eusebius, bp. of Constantinople, 302.
Eusebius, bp. of Samosata, 49 n., 192,
307.
as perhaps referred to by
Basil, 63 n., 209, 221.
notes of his life, 131 ἢ.)
241 n.
exiled to Thrace by Valens,
XKVHl) KXIX. 132 N 102;
217 ἢν 222; 222 n., 261
n., 284 n.
present at Basil’s ordina-
tion, 152 n.
signed the letter to the
West, 177, 192.
friendly with Basil, xvii.
ΧΧΥ]. KXVill, 196, 197,
202) 215.
reckoned δὴ Ariomaniac,
306, 306 n.
acted as mediator,
XXVil. XXVill.
was commended by Basil to
Sophronius and Aburgius,
221.
his death, 132 ἢ.
letters: to, 131, 125; 152,
153, 154, 180, 184, 187,
196, 201, 202, 204, 205,
215, 217, 235, 279, 280,
282; 307.
Eusebius (unidentified), letter to, 308.
probably a_ schoolfellow,
308, 308 n.
Eusebius of Nicomedia, 45 n.
Eustathius Afer, translated
Hexaemeron into Latin,


“per saltum,”


XXV.


the
51,


56.
Eustathius, bp. of Sebaste, xviii. xx.


13 ED. 171 n.,
152) 183; 194, 197,
2


had from Basil a sum-
mary of heresies, 16 n.

disciple of Arius, 302.

persistent heretic, xxvid.
71 Nn. 104. ‘S74 252,
286 sg., 291, 302.


BASIL.


took part in the council
at Lampsacus, xx.
was opposed to Basil,
XXVil. 124 n., 198, 241,
248.
was in communion with
Basil, xxvii. 180 n.,
182, 183, 192, 194, 286.
his ascetic character
admired by Basil, xviii.
XXVil.
his inconsistency οἵ
action, xxvii. xxx. 288,
288 n., 291.
was banished, 3 n., 302.
went to Rome on Semi-
arian deputation, xx.
his violence in Paphla-
gonia, 291.
was ordained by Her-
mogenes, 302.
was deposed by Euippius
at Melitine, 291, 302,
302 n.
was expelled from Con-
stantinople, 302.
condemned the Ho-
moousion at Lampsa-
CUS, XXX. 302.
was at the council at
Seleucia, 302.
was restored to his see at
the council at Tyana,
302.
signed the letter to the
West, 177.
was leader of the Pneu-
matomachi, 302.
preached Sabellianism,
304.
procured the deposition
of Gregory at Nyssa,
XXX.
account of his history,
XVill. xxvii. n., 302.
the philosopher, letter,
109.
called ‘ presbyter
Antioch,” 109 n.
was special friend of
Basil, 109.
visited Egypt, Persia,
and India, I sg., 110.
Eustochius mentioned by Basil, 168.
Eutyches, a Cappadocian, 216, 216n.
Euxine Sea, 68, 69, 74, 92, 93.
Euzoius, his place i in Eustathius and
Basil’s quarrel, 265 n., 269,
290 n.
an Arian, 290 ἢ.
Evaesae, 291, 291 n., 311, 311 ἢ.
letter to the people to whom
Basil relates his troubles,
291.
ordained by Eustathius,


Eustathius,


of


Evagrius,


153 n.
banished by Valens, 153 n
returned from Rome, 202.
different from the histo-

rian: his history, 202,

202 n.
consecrated by Paulinus,

202 nN.


.
a -΄“6ὖῆ΄ὖΠ΄ Πρ ΄..Ἑ-ἙἝἙἙ--Ἐ-Ἑ-.-ς-ςςς- --- “΄“Ἕ“Ἕ“͵Ὑ͵ ““΄'΄ ΄΄ ῬῬῬῬ Ἑ..-.͵.Ἐς-ς-ς


πον σαν SSS aE ee SS eS


Evagrius, letter to the presbyter
Evagrius, 210.
Evening and morning at the Crea-
tion, 64.
called one day, 64.
symbolical meaning, 64.

Evil and good in contact, 61.
not from God, lvii. 61.
astrologers lay it on God, 86.
from voluntary falls, 62, 86.
its definition, 61.

Evils, physicat apart from moral, 62.

Evolution, and by natural selection,
96 n., 98 n.

Examination of candidates for the
ministry, 158.

Examples in Scripture, 111.

Exarch, his ecclesiastical position,
292 n.

Excommunication for a period, 1. 256,
313, 314.

᾿Εξομολόγησις, ἐξομολογούμενος, peni-
tential system, xlix. 257, 257 n.,
258 n.

Exegesis and its principles, xliv. sg.

different schools of, xlv.
Exucontians, xxxvii. n.


Fable, the wolf and the lamb, 229.
Ulysses and Scylla, 206.
Faith, its relation to knowledge,

274-6.


Family, grief and consolation, 113, :


114.
attachments, 144.
authority and προοίμια
in the father, 32, 310.
Famine, and exhortations upon, Ixiii.
Farewell gift and amulet or charm, 46.
the custom, 46 π.
Fasting considered by Basil, lxi. Ixii.
commended by Basil, 148.
Fate in human affairs, 97, 109, 110,
276 n., 278.
Father, human, his power over a
child, 32, 310.

Father, in relation to Son and Spirit,
XXXIV. ον KEKVHL 3 57.
23° ὃ... 58. 89.5 45. Sg Play
¥20, 127. 99... 180, 105,
230, 231, 251:

the Creator, 15, 23.


created through the Son, 15,


138, 139.

greater than the Son, xxxviii.
120.

Cause and origin, 120 n.,
138, 139.

His Hypostatis, 141, 251.
Faustinus, bp. of Iconium, 202, 214 ἢ.
Faustus, irregularly consecrated to

Antioch, xxvii. 192, 193.
Festus, letter to, 317.
Fickleness and __ pliability

avoided, 92.

Fig tree, its cultivation and moral

lesson, 80.

Figures as used in Scripture, xlv. 9, 10.
Filiogue controversy, 30 ἢ.
Fire, necessary for the universe, 68,


to be


69, 74.
spread in all the ether, 74.
even in stones, etc., 56.


Se ee ee ee eee eee


—-


INDEX OF SUBJECTS. Ri INDEX OF SUBJECTS aa
Fire, its place in nature, 74, 75. Gambling, under the devil’s guidance, | God, not the author of evil, lvii.
Firmament, at the creation, 65. IOI. God- -bearing flesh, 7.

spherical and concave,| Gauls, and the church appealed to by|God, man made, 16 n.
69: the East, 383. Good, as in contact with evil, 61.
a firm body and resist-|Geese defended Rome, 100, none good but One, xl.
ent, 67. Gehazi gained only leprosy, 144. Gordias, martyr, account of, Ixx.
its relation to the waters,)Gelasius got a creed from Basil’s 241 n.
67, 68. enemies, 266, 286 n. Gossip to be avoided, 144, 314.
why called heaven, 70,| Generation, Eternal, of the Son, 13 n.| Goths and Huns, xxxi. 289 n., 307 ἢ.
99. [See Son]. Grace, in the Spirit, 15, 19, 22, 39, 40,
Firmilianus, bp. of Caesarea, 47, 224. |Genesis, book of, and_ scientific 44, 59.
Firminius, young soldier, letter to, knowledge, 52. its help, 19, 58.
Igl. Genethlius, presbyter, letter to, 265. |Grace, before and after meat, 112.
drew back from asceti-|Tevyroc, γέννητος, discussed, 39 n. Grass, made to germinate, 76, 78.
cism, 191. TO γέννημα, XxxVi. π., xli. n. not all seed-bearing, but pro-
probably his answer in γέννημα ἀνθρώπινον, Ἰχχί. π. ducing “after its kind,” 76.


one blade a world of teaching,
77°

Basil, 32]. in demeanour, 112. Grasshopper, 100.

Firminus, perhaps father of a stu-|Geographers before Basil’s day, 69. |Gratian, emperor, restored the Catho-

dent, 321. George of Laodicea, xviii. 29 n., lic bishops, xxx. 283 n.

Fishes, created from the water, 90. 154 n. Great Sea, 74.
their animal economy, 90, 9I. reconciled to|Gregory (Naz.) the elder, 135 ἢ.»
tamable or untamable, 90, the Aca- 152 n.

go n. Et. ans’, letter probably to, xxvi. n.,


their habits, 91, 92, 93, 94. 154 n. RAVEN. REI 215:
their food, 91, 92, 93. George, named in a letter, 232. adopted monastic life,
their moral teaching, 90, 92,| George, bishop of unknown see, 291. 135 n.
93, 94. Germination from the earth, 76. signed the letter to the
Flesh and blood, mystical sense of|Glycerius, deacon, centre of disorders, West, 177.


eating Christ’s, 118.
Florence, council of, 28 n.
Food for preserving the health, 112.
Forgiveness, its excellence, 189.
question of, discussed,


ἌΣΨΙΣ τ. 217: promoted Eusebius’ elec-
account of his actions and tion to Caesarea, xix.
Seandal> xxix. xiv. 217, also promoted Basil’s, xxii.
218. died A.D. 3745 wax.
letter to, 218. Gregory (Naz.) the younger, xiii. n.,
God, the Creator, 5259., 59, 60, xliv.1, 8 π: 595 ΤΙ F52m,
65 sg., 82, 106. 182 n., 217 n.
Demiurge of the world, 54, 59. his family connections, ix.
created by reason and design, was obliged to Origen, 46.
55» 50, 59, 65, 68, 77, 80, δι, friend of Basil, xiv. xv. xviii.
82, 100. Xxi. XXll. 115, 124, 125 n.,
is voluntary agent, 56. 152 Di, 25 ἘΣ
formed as He willed and praised the Hexaemeron, 51,
thought, 60, 65, 106. 134, 135.
spirit of God, the Holy Spirit, letters from Basil to, I15,
62. 124, 126, 167.
had trouble as Czesarius’ ex-
ecutor, 131, 131 mM, 134.


297-9-
a virtue of the Pythag-
oreans, 323.
Form in matter, 38, 59, 60, 141.
Fornication, how penanced in canon-
ical persons, 226, 256,
250: D257, 257 Ne
by girls, 239.
Forty martyrs of Sebaste, xiv. Ixx.
Psxie lexi. πὶ
their chapel
and relics,
xIV.


command, voice, and _ such,


letter cxvil. 101. ov γέννημα ἀλλὰ κτίσμα, xl. n.
Firminus, friend of Libanius G in blame, 112 n.
express the will of God, 63,


their feast and 64, 81, 90, 102. quarrelled with Basil, xvii.
commemo- made by God, and good, 63, 68. ΧΧΙ ΧΙ CLOVE Toye tae
ration, made the beautiful, 71, 81, 82, 250 n.
Ιχχὶ. ἢ. 90, 102, 106. visited Basil, 167.
Fox uses specifics, 103. known and glorified in His his hurried consecration for
Fronto, friend of Basil and a witness, works, 82, 93, 106, 114. Sasima, XXv. XxVi. XXVi. IL,
196. an ever-present Providence, 182 n.
consecrated to’ Colonia by 93, 102, 114, 115. his flight explained, 255,
the Semiarians, 270 ἢ.» the giver of instinct to ani- 255m.
279 n. mals, 104. reconciled to Basil and Eu-
severely censured by Basil, wiser and kinder than we are, sebius of Czesarea, xx.
280. 110, 114. withdrew from Sasima, xxvi.
signed with Basil and others, Great Steward of the Uni- XxVi. n.
XxVil. 286 ἢ. verse, 112. estimate of his character,
succeeded Theodotus at Ni- true Consoler, 113, 114, 115, xliv.
copolis, xxix. Mp ee 139. Gregory, bp. of Nyssa, 5 n., 51,135 ἢ.»
Fruit-trees produced, 78. one in Godhead, xxxiv. s¢., 182 n., 250, 254.
many named, 78, 79. 229, 278. praised the Hexaemeron of
in their season, 124. the mind part of God’s image Basil, 51.
Funeral to be allowed and expenses, in man, 273. consecrated to Nyssa, xxv.
319. knowledge of God, what it is, 159 n., 169 n., 177, 182 n.
xlii. 274, 275, 276. bishop by the people’s de- .
Gabriel, how able to foretell, 24. his essence, xxXiv. 5Φ., 274. sire, 182 n.
Gadeira, 73. truly incarnate, xxxiv. sg., 300, forged a letter, xxii. 159,
Gallus, emperor, xv. n.


301. 159 n., 184 n.


354


BASIL,


Gregory, letter to him doubtful, 159,
159 n.
probably signed the letter
to the West, 177, 177 n.
opposed Basil, xxii. 184.
was driven out by the Arians,
XXV. N., 272, 279, 280.
deposed by factious synod,
aX,
perhaps finished the Hexae-
meron, xliv.
Gregory Thaum., bp. of Neoczsarea,
46 n., 243, 245.
Calkedus Pare
ατοαὶ," 46 n.,
243, 240.
brother of Basil,
124
his lofty character,
46, 47, 243, 245,
247, 248, 249.
his thaumaturgic
power, 47.
his authority in
. the church, 47,
243, 245, 247,


249.
founded the church
at Neoceesarea,
132, 132 ἢ.
was honoured. at
Neocesarea after
death, 179 n.,
245 Sg.
said to have used
τς Sabellian — lan-
guage, 250.
was summoned be-
fore a court, 267,
267 ἢ.
Gregory, bp. of unknown see, uncle
of Basil, xiii. xxii
letter forged to his name,


gen friend of Basil, letters to,


xiii n., xxii. 160, 161.
124, 152.


Habit, 38.
Halcyon, its habits and moral teach-
ing, 98.
Harmony of the spheres, Pythago-
rean, 24n., 56, 66.
lost on accustomed ears, 67.
Harpocration, Egyptian bishop in
exile, letter to, 303.
Health, definition of, 103.
Heat, required in nature, 68, 77.
Heathen speculations, 45.
refinement of meanings, 5.
old practices and ceremo-
nials, xxix.
philosophy and divine reve-
lation contrasted, lxv. ἢ.
examples of virtue, Ixvi.
Ixvii.
Heaven, speculations upon, 54.
and earth created, 54 s¢.,
66, 99.
its composition, 58.
created in essence and form,
philosophical reasonings
upon, 66.


Heaven, one or more, 66.


Hilarius, bp. at Telmessus, 259.


beautiful to contemplate, 72,| Hilarius, old school-fellow of Basil,


90, 99.
why called οὐρανός, 70, 99.
Hedgehog, 103.
Hell, the going down into, 249.
Helladius, friend of Basil, 312.
Helladius, much defended by Basil,
187.
in the prefect’s household,
187.


252

Hillenius, surveyor of taxes at Naz-
ianzus, 182.

Himerius, the master, letter to, 310.

his lectures attended by
Basil, xv

Hippias, his character as a writer,
200.

Hippocrates, his physical theories, 70.


letter to Count Helladius, | Hippodrome, its meaning, go n.


187.


factions in, 252.


appealed to on behalf of] Historians, as estimated by Basil,


Julitta, 187.
Hellespont, 74, 109.
Helvidius, Arian, written against by
Jerome, xli. n
Hera, a brother commended by
Basil, 310.
Heraclea, bishops of, 292 n.
Heraclidas, friend of Basil, 207 ἢ.
Heraclitus, held fire to be supreme,
68.


on the elements, 116 n.
Hercules, story about, lxvi.
Hercus, catechumen, has martyr’s
baptism, 22 n.
Heredity, evil in, 97.
Heresy, the word critically examined,
ΤΣ ΘΕ (223, 22370,
evil effect on the church, 48,
177, 168, 178, 251.
Heretical refining, 5, 8, 198.
seductions and sophisms,
17, 198.
attacks on the church, 226.
parties, their inconsisten-
cles, 286 sg., 291, 292.
Heretics, received on repentance at
death, 226.
were given the Nicene
creed, 194.
pervert right words and
statements, 194, 198.
Hermit, as anchoret, monk or cceno-
bite, 112 n.
Hermogenes, bp. of Czesarea, 172,
204 n., 288.
perhaps was at Niczea,
172 n., 288.
read the creed at the
council, 288, 288 n.
opposed to Arius, 288.
ordained Eustathius of
Sehaste, 302.
Herod, the king of Judea, 277.
Herodotus, at fault in astronomy, 86 n.
Hesychius, letter to, 162, 167.
Basil asks his aid in a dis.
pute, 167, 168.
Hexaemeron of Basil, 51 sg.
its Anglo-Saxon abbre-
viation, 51.
translated into Latin,


5.
translated by Diony-
sius Exig., 51.
adversely criticised, 52.
of Ambrose, 51, 74.
of Hippolytus and of
Origen, 51.
Hierarchy, angelic, 62 n.


Ixvi.
Holy, how true of creatures, 23, 24.
saints and holy days, 179,
179 ἢ.
Holy Ghost, in relation to the Trinity,
i, 8/33, 1806, ‘295.
false teaching on, 1
not a creature, I, 180,
190, 212.
in relation to the Father
and the Son, 3 sq., 8,
23, 189.
inseparable from Father
and Son, 23.
blasphemy against, li.
47 N., 180, 212, 224.
is God, 116, 212, 278,
278 n.
source of holiness, 116,
186, 189, 212.
the Paraclete, 269.
questions raised upon,
205.
ascription of glory to,
295.
ceconomy ἴῃ teaching
upon, xxill. xxiii, ἢ.
Homer, an authority, 124.
Homicide, varying in guilt, 226, 228,
2506.
penances for intentional
and unintentional, 256.
Homeeans, 130.
Homoiousion, accepted at Ancyra,
302 n.
Homoousion perverted by Marcellus,
194.
Arians received it ina
sense, 254.


rejected for the Homoi- )


ousion, 288 ἢ.
accepted by the council
of Paris, xix.
Honour giving, 77.
Honey and the cells, 97.
ancient beliefs in, 97 n.
Hope, its power universal, 126.
Horse-racing, its evil influence, 73.
Hosius, ignorant of Greek, 288 n.
Hospitality, joined with frugality and
moderation, lii.
Hospitals, claim for exemption from
taxation, 205.
Basil’s hospital at Cees-
area, xxxi. 208, 220,
220 fi.
Human trials and sufferings, 114.
Humility preached, Ixv.
Hymetius, his wealth, 309.


Hymn at lighting of the lamps, 46,
n.
of Athenogenes, 46.
Hypatius, sae of Basil, xxviii. n.,
134, 134
Hyperbole, εν by Christ, 243.
Hypostasis, as a theological term,
SXEVi gee Dh, 25, Ὧν,
123, 137, 156, 166, 195
N., 249-
as different from Ousia, 5
Hy, 23 Thy (ROG E87) Sz.
179 n., 194, 229.
as related to Ousia, 23 n.,
25 n., 123, 123 n., 137
5.» 2B N., 194, 229,
254, 278.
as es to the Mon-
archia, 27, 29, 30.
as related to Person, 156,


179 Π., 249.

three yet undivided, 45,
179 N.,'249.

defined etymologically,
137 N., 195 n.

of Father and Son, 141
166, 194.


of Jesus Christ, 194, 254.
varied in meaning, 195
H., 250; 250 n., 254.
doubtful language
250.
illustrated by the pris-
matic colours, 140, 141.
Arian view of, 254.
Hypsis or Hypsinus, bishop of Par-
nassus, 162 n.
expelled by the Arians, 162 n.,
2
succeeded by Ecdicius, 162 n.,
279.
Hyrcanian Sea, 74.


on,


Iatrius or Otreius, bishop of Mitilene,
signed the letter to the West,
177, 1770

Thas, bishop of Edessa, 292.

Ibora district, xiv. n., xvii. 318.

the place of Basil’s retreat,xvil.

Iconium, an episcopal see, 202.

Idolatry, 277.

‘lepatixoi, how defined and limited,
147, 157-

Ἱερεύς, history of the word, 147 n.

Ignatius as Theophorus, 8 n.

Ignorance as attributable to Christ,
276.

Image of God in Christ, 15 n.

in man, 16 n., 150, 273.
spiritual, 150 "ἢ

Images of saints honoured, 326.

Immaculate conception, xxiii. 41 n.

Immersions in baptism, three, 22, 42.

Imposition of hands, 256.

“ln,” its teaching, 36, 37, 38, 40 57.,


3s 44.
Incarnation “ not by confusion,” 14.
one purpose of, 16, 21.
a reality in Jesus Christ,
117, 300.
denied by Sabellius, 249.
“ceconomy of salvation,”


272, 299.


INDEX OF


INDEX OF SUBJECTS. ὁ ὁ6ὃ 355


{
Incarnation, Arian questions upon,
299, 300.

not by turning the God-
head into flesh, 300,
301.
Incest, how penanced, 257, 258.
Incomprehensibility of the Spirit, 34
Inconsistency of heretical parties, 288.


Joseph, bishop, signed the letter to
the West, 177.

Joseph, teaches chastity, 111.

Jovian, Emperor, xix.

Jovinus, bp. of Perrha, letter to, 192.

Jovinus, count, letter to, 215.

Judah, the tribe did not fail, 277.

Judaism, akin to Sabellianism, 49,


Indian Ocean, 91. 229, 249.
Indiction, 157. allied to Monarchianism,
Infant exposure, how dealt with, 256. 49, 49 n., 106.


Infanticides, how to be punished,
225.
Innocent the Italian, 295.


renewed by Sabellius and
Eustathius, 304.
Judas, lost his opportunity and all,144.
letter as perhaps superior to Basil’s
monk, _per- contemporaries, 281.
haps the same, | Judge, his impartiality, 180.
296. Judgment, the final, 25, 58, 220, 249,
Innocentius, bp. of Rome, 153 n. 265.
letter perhaps to, 153. |Julian, Emperor and apostate, xix.
Innocentius, bishop of unknown see, 141.
letter to, 172. letters to Basil, 141, 142.
Insects, described with the birds, 96. letter from Basil, 142.
their characteristics and their studied the Bible with Basil
transformations, 100. at Athens, xv. xvi. 141 ἢ.


to,


Inspiration, as ‘dictation of the confined by Constantius at
Spirit,” 52. Macellum, 141 ἢ.
gives “not one idle syl- had there only his own house-
lable,” 89. hold, 141 n.
Intention, a question in casuistry, 226, invited Basil to court, 142.
223; proposed to Basil the Persian
Invocation in the Eucharist, a tradi- expedition, 142.
tion, 41. demanded money to save


of saints, lxxi. Ixxi. n., 326.
Tonian sea, 74.
Iosaces, bishop who signed the letter


Czesarea, xix. 142, 142 n.
his pedigree, 142, 142 n.
effects of his reign on the


to the West, E74. church, xix.
suggested as Isaaces of praised for his open courts,
Armenia Major, 177 n. 265 n.


Irenzeus, knew 8S. Polycarp, 45,45 n. Julianus, martyr, 285.
had nearest succession of| Julianus, letter to, 316, cf 127.
the Apostles, 45 n. Julitta, the widow, letter to, 187.
Isaaces, messenger from Basil, 201, in trouble over business, 187.
Isauria, its position and state, 232 n. letter to the guardian of her


Isaurian, episcopate and church, 233, heirs, 187.

28 10, 255- relative of Basil, and had one
Ister, 69. boy, 187.
Italy, church of, applied to ue the martyr, ]xix.

East, 283. honoured with a memorial


feast, 241.
Julius, bp. of Rome, 194 n.
Julius Soranus, relative of Basil, 210.
Jurisprudence, questions for, 226.


Jacob, how superior to Esau, 32.
his guilelessness _ peculiar,
92 n.
Jeconias, his want of succession, 277.
Jerome, mentions Basii’s Hexaemeron
I.
Be the obelus as a mark in,
criticism, 74.
his criticism of Basil probably
not genuine, xxv. xxv. ἢ.
his tract on the Perpetual
Virginity, xli. ἢ.
Jerusalem, real or spiritual, 148.
its divided state when it
fell, 178.
whether visited, 148.
Jews, their relation to the truth, 106,
Job, teacher of patience in adversity,
111.

Jobinus, friend of Basil, signed the
letter to the West, 177, 196.
John Erigena spread the hierarchies

westward, 62.


Κατασχεῖν, its meaning, xvi. n.
Κατακονδυλίζω, κολαφίζω, 290 n.
Κατεξάνθη, 281 π.
Κηρύγματα and δόγματα,
210 n., 308 n.
proclamation, 41.
appointed liturgy, 210 n.
Kingdom to those for whom it was
prepared, xliii.
Kingfisher, 98 n.
Kneeling, a memory of the Fall, 42.
Know, different senses of, 273 sg.
“ Know thyself,” author of, 106 n.
Knowledge, by Christ, under an zcon-
omy, xxxViii. 118, 119.
of earthly things, how
valuable, 125, 126.
different senses of the
word, 274, 275.


41, 155,


ν


356


BASE,


Knowledge as related to belief, 274,
275:
Krifw, I create, xli. xli. n.


Lacus Asphaltitis in Judea, 74.
Laity loyal to their bishop, 271.
Lakes, as gatherings of water, 73, 74.
Lallianus, bishop at Phelus, 259.
Lamech and his lamentation, 298.
Lamps, the light of, 273.

hymn at the lighting of, 46.
Aayurhvn, lampenz, lampana, 273 n.
Language inadequate for thought,


ris.

Lapsed among the clergy, penalty to,
256.

Latin, how far known in the East,
ΧΥΪ. Ts


Lausus, Julian’s tribune, 143.
Leo the Wise, Emperor, 258 n.
Leontius, bp. of Czsarea, 172 n., 204 ἢ.
Leontius, perzequator of Niczea, 235.
Leontius, the sophist, letter to, xxxiii.
127:
his character and _ attain-
ments, 127, 136.
received Basil’s writings
against Eunomius, xxxiii.
12:
Letter and spirit distinguished, 33.
Letters, difficulties in transmitting,
202, 204, 219, 235, 236.
Leucippus, an atomist, 53 n.
Libanian correspondence and its gen-
uineness, xv. 320 sg.
Libanius, bishop, signed the letter to
the West, 177, 307 n.
Libanius, the deacon, 307, 307 n.
Libanius, the professor, xv. 307.
Libanius, received student from Basil,
320,321;
Liberius, bp. of Rome, was misled,
123 n.
received Eustathius, 268 n.
Libyan governor excommunicated,
161.
“Light of Light ” decided at Nicza,


123.
Light, a symbol of truth and happi-
ness, 60, 61, 62, 65.
created, 63, 82.
its rate of motion, 63 n.
its beauty, 63, 64.
bodies bearing it, 83.
separated from darkness, 83.
created, as sun, moon, and
stars, 82.
why called great, 87.
Linnzus taught “ reproduction after
its kind,” 76.
Lion, his characteristics, 102.
his law of production, 104.

Litanies, 247, 247 n.

apart from processions,

247 n., 248 n.
Literalism in interpretation, Io1.
Literature, pagan, teaching upon, Ixv.
Liturgy of S. Basil, probable date, xx.
Ixxil.
different forms of, Ixxii.
Locusts, 100.
Logos defined, 38 n.
how found in Christ, 194.


Lights,


Longinus, presbyter, 227 n.

Lord’s day for communion, 179.

Lourdes, as a recent place of pilgrim-
age, xix. n.

Lucifer, bp. of Cagliari, 164 n.

Lucius, deacon, had letter from Basil,
293.

Luck, a heathen notion, 109.

Lucretius, Epicurean, and his fiery
ether, 69, 69 n.

Λυτρωτῆς, its meaning, 300 ἢ.

Luxury of the ancient world, Ikxii.
Ixiii.


Macarius, presbyter at Myra, 259.
Maccabees, mother of the, 115.
Macedonianism, xix. xxx. xlv. I, 16 n.
Macedonians, xix. I, 16 n.
Macedonius, bp. of Constantinople, 1,
255.
κα ἢ from his see, I.
Semiarian leader, 16 n.
Macellum, xv. n.
Macrina, Basil’s grandmother and
teacher, xiii. 245, 249.
taught him Gregory’s doc-
trine, xiv. xv. 245, 249.
brought him up at Annesi,
; xiv. xv. 249, 249 ἢ.
Macrina, Basil’s sister, xiii.
her influence on Basil, xvi. n.
Magic, or sorcery, 257.
its temples, 258.
Magnenianus, count, letter to, 220.
asks for a treatise on
the Faith, 220.
Magnus, letter to, 317.
Magusa and the Maguszeans, 295, 296.
Makrina, church, at Sasima, xxvi. n.
Man, in God’s image, 15 ἢ.» 16n., 106,
273.
is ae God in Christ, 16 n.,
106, 113, 114.
liable to changes, 76.
likened to the grass, 76.
his honour and privileges, 82,
106.
fell from grace, 103 n.
must return to grace, 103.
his cares in life, 110.
shortness of his knowledge, 125.
Manducation, spiritual, 118.
Manicheeans, 61, 224.
give the earth a soul,
95:
Manicheism, 61 ἢ.
Manilius, Stoic, his fiery ether, 69.
Marina described by Philo, 232.
Manuscripts and their readings, 18 n.
Marathonius, bp. of Nicomedia, and
Marathonians, I.
Marble, varieties of, ]xiii. ἢ.
Marcellians, 306.
Marcellus, of Ancyra, 165, 194.
his heretical opinions, 165,
165 n., 166, 194, 246,
247, 303, 305.
opposed by Basil, 165, 246.
was received at Rome and
at Alexandria, 165 n.
perverted the words of the
creed, 194.
called the Galatian, 246.


Marcellus, was followed in teaching
by Paulinus, 303.
his followers had to be
guarded against, 305.
Marcianus, bishop, signed the letter
to the West, 177.
Marcion, heretic and type of Gnostic,
61.
asserted two Gods, 61 n.
Marcionites, in heresy, 224, 240.
Maris, bishop, signed the letter to the
West, 177.
Marriage, its cares, l. 107.
its laws, 1. 149, 151, 212,
213, 214, 227.
offences against, 212 sg.,
225 67. 237 52:, 256 sq.
offences against, how pen-
anced, 225, 227, 237 sq.
256 sq.
of one man to two sisters,
213, 238, 258.
abominated by some here-
tics, 240.
third was not recognized,
240.
with deceased wife’s sister,
212, 213) 204.
second of a slave, how to
be treated, 256.
the prohibited degrees, 257,
257 1.
Mariolatry, Ixxili.
Marsyas, story about, Ixviii.
Martinianus, dignitary at Constan-
tinople, 168 n.
tried to use Basil’s in-
fluence with Valens,
168.
Martyrs, faithful even in small things,
Ixix. 2, 283, 284.
sometimes their baptism in
blood, Ixxi. n., 22.
how honoured, xiii. 210, 215,
216, 220, 241, 282 sg.
their relics preserved, 210 n.
‘the blood of the Martyrs,”
216, 290.
their sufferings described,
lxix. 216, 281, 284, 290.
feast in their honour, liii. 220,


241 n.

several named, xiii Ixix. Ixx.
241, 290

their honour to be sought for,
292, 294.


their commemoration to be
frequented for prayer, liii.
Mary, the Blessed Virgin, 300, 301.
the holy Mother of God, 326.


her perpetual virginity, xli.
xli. n.
as an object of invocation, lxxi.
n., [xxii
Mathematical body has three dimen-
sions, 67.


Matter and form, 38, 57, 58, 59, 60.
properties of matter, 74, 75.
Mauretania, men of, oI.
Maximus, governor, succeeded Elias,
182, 182 n.
in distress and recommend-
ed to Basil, 206, 207.


Maximus, letter to the learned Maxi-
mus, 311.
Μέχρι viv, its force, 268.
Mediation by Moses, and by Christ,
20.
Medical facts, 78.
Meletian schism at Antioch, xxii. 202,
NapSTD, 26s:
Meletius, the illustrious, 47, 253.
bp. of Antioch and ban-
ished, 49 n., 159 n., 164 n.,
102. ny She. 211. ἢ;
250, 253; 2ΖΟΙ n.,, 205 Ns
letters to, 159, 164, 175, 197,
ras
not in full communion with
the Catholics, xix. 159 n.
ins the Eustathian schism,
150 ἢν 164 n., £83, 192,
192 n., 253 n.
favoured Basil, 160 n., 180,
182.
his character as given by
Basil, 164.
refused communion
Athanasius, 176, 176 n.
signed the letter to the


to


West, F777.

accepted Eustathius, teach-
ing, 183.

soldier and friend of Basil,
240, 253, 295.

his relation to Athanasius
and Basil, xix. 295, 295 n.

reckoned an Ariomaniac,
306, 306 n.

sent a Semiarian manifesto
to Jovian, xix.

Meletius, the physician, letter to, 233.

Meletius, presbyter, messenger from
Basil, 245, 267.

Meletius, friend of Basil, 240.

Memnonius, between Basil and So-
phronius, 309.

Men, equal as free slaves to God, 32.
should be honest and manly, 92.
evolved from the fish, 96 n.
their erect position, 102.
should learn from the brutes,

103, 106,
master of the brutes, 105, 106.
made by-God in His image, 106.
Mesopotamia, ascetics in, 247.
church in Basil’s favour,
252.

Message, to be completed by mes-
Senger, 130, 150, LOI, 162, 164,
165, 167, 173, 175, 176, 177, 184,
185, 189, 192, 193, 196, 201, 215,
230, 240, 245, 246, 255 n., 261,
281, 289, 292, 307.

Messenger, difficult to find one pru-
dent and suitable, 235, 236, 240.

Μετάνοια, what repentance, 256, 259.

its penance, 256.

Μετασχηματίζεσθαι, discussed, 278 n.

Μετεωρολόγια, how defined, lix. n.

Meteorology and its signs, 84.

as depending upon the
moon, 89.

Mica, where found, 67.

Mice, field, produced near Thebes,
102.


=


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Milo, Athlete of Crotona, 322.

Mincio at Mantua, 125.

Mind, part of God's image, 273.

wonderful in its operations, 273.

primary function is to know
God, 273.

how as perverted, 273.

Minister, perhaps subdeacon, 257,

257 τὲ

Ministry, digamists excluded from,
228, 228 n.

open, on conditions, to a
usurer, 228.

degrees in, 256 n., 257,
260.

Miracles, called δυνάμεις, 38.

wrought by Gregory Thaum,


47.
Μνήμη, a church, and equal to Memo-
ria, 220 ἢ.
Modestus, letter to, on clerical ex-
emptions, 185, 311.
two letters on reducing
taxes at Taurus, 188.
letters:to, 311, 2312.
some favours asked, 211,
ΓΖ,
the minister of Valens’
severities, xxiil.
was met and refused by
Basil, xxiv.
Monarchia, 27 n., 30.
yet three hypostases, 27
SY.
Monarchianism, 49 n.
Monarchians and their heresy, 28 n.,
49 ἢ.
Monastic dress and habits, lii.
vows andrules of service and
worship, lii. lii. n., lili.
discipline, liii. liv. liv. ἢ.
Monasticism, promoted by Basil, xvii.
xvili. 1. lil. Io9.
promoted by Athana-
sius, 109.
spread rapidlyin Pontus,
XVlil.
its progress, as repre-
sented by Basil, 1. lii.
111. ἢ.
Monk, amount of his renunciation,
live ty 308, 3217:
found by Basil everywhere in
the East, 263.
were harassed by the Arians,
294. ᾿
their rules of conduct, 111. liv.
tv... 31:
lapsed monk, how invited
back, 111. 146, 147.
carefulness in receiving, lii.
237.
vows not from the outset
irrevocable, lii. n.
how to be penanced, lii.
their former history and aus-
terities, 148. ᾿
dress, 263.
Monks on Mount of Olives, dispute
among, 295.
Month, the intercalary, 87.
used by the Syrians and Mace-
donians, 87 ἢ.


357


Montanism,centred in Phrygia, xxix..n.
Montanists, counted as heathen, 17 n.,
223 n.
Montanus and Priscilla, 224.
Moon, her revolutions, 83, 87, 88.
her weather signs, 84.
marks out the year, 87.
her position and functions, 88.
as moral teacher, 88, 89.
her many influences, 88, 88 n.
causes the tides, 89.
how called Great, 88, 89.
idle tales regarding her, 89,
89 n.
her real size, 89.
Moral training impossible under as-
trology, 86.
from the brute creation, 103.
duties and questions, liii. liv.
Ixvii.
Mop¢7 Tov Θεοῦ, what it is, 14 n.
Mother’s sorrows and consolations,
114.
her death, what a loss, 134.
tried for infant exposure,
256.
Motions straight and circular, 53, 58,
66.
Mount of Olives, the monks of, 295.
Murder, degrees in, 226, 239.
by producing abortion, 225,


227.
Music, of the spheres, 66.
a cause of contention, 247.
Musonius, bp. of Neoczesarea, 132 n.,
249, 249 n.
Μυστήριον, its
41 τ.
Mystery guarded in the Church and
her services, 42.
unwritten, 45.
Name above every name, xxxviii.
Narcissus, Arian, 49 n.
Narses, bishop, signed the letter to
the West, 177.
Nativities, Chaldzean, 84, 85.
Nativity, feast of the, 272 n.
Nature, full of God and goodness, 53,
8


Christian meaning,


af eternal, 53, 54.

full of beauty, 71.

taught by God, 78.

condemned at sin’s entrance,

78.
its processes, 78, 79, 80, 92 n.,
IOI sq. ;

a macrocosm, 92 n.

Stoic conformity to, 104 n.
Naucratius, Basil’s brother, xili. 249 n.
Nazianzus, xxii. xxv. XXVi. XXVl. ἢ.
Necessity, not a Christian idea, 109,


110.
Nectarius, correspondent of Basil,
ΤΙΣ Fh:
consoled on the loss of a
son, II 3.


Nectarius, bishop of Constantinople,
113.0;, 255 τ
Neoczesarea, church of, 132, 247 n.
letter to, 132 Ὡς
received the tradition of
Gregory Thaum., 243
57.) 248.


358


BASIL.


Neoczsarea was rude to Basil, xxviii.,
2


55"
New Testament, a special study, 144.


Nicene Creed, quoted in full, 195.
important that it be
received, 194, 197,
204, 212)'245. ὦ
its anathemas, 195.
to be received in its
own sense, 197, 269.
brought to Czesarea


and defended, 204)


ni, 245.
brought fromthe West
by the Semiarians,
269, 287.
disavowed by _ the
Semiarian party,287.
Basil stood by it alone,
292.
not to be added to or
altered, 295.
Nicias, messenger to Basil, 185.
Nicopolis, place of meeting for bish-
ops, 182, 196.
its church troubles, 196,
270; 271, 272; 270; 290,
285 sg. 280, 201.
letters to its clergy and
magistrates, 271.
efforts of Basil for its
church, 286 sg.
Night and day at the Creation, 64.
marked by sun and moon, 84
5g.
on the Platonic theory, 87 n.
Nightingale, 99.
Nile, 69.
North Sea, 92, 93.
Novatians must be re-baptized, 240.
Νυμφαγωγός, what, 150 n.
Nyses, 69.
Nyssa in the Punjab, 110 n.
its bishopric and eccl. history,
RXV. XXV. 2h


Oaks replacing pines, 79, 79 n.
Oaths should not be taken in the
taxing, 172.
cause indifference or perjury,
174.
should not be sinful,
random, 238.
not to be taken at all, 248.
heathen and Christian, 258. .
Oats, their form of growth, 77.
Obelus, a mark used in literature, 74.
CEconomy of the Manhood, xl.
Office-hunting in the church, 49, 50.
Officiales, a class of clergymen, 235.
Οἰκονόμια, ceconomy, observed in
Basil’s preaching, xxiii.
applied to his speaking of
the Holy Ghost, xxiii.
Xxlll, n.
distinguished from θεολόγια,
SUK VG. 1,9 πὶ
sometimes the Incarnation
Xxli1. n., xl. 200, 326:
sometimes almsgiving, 278 n.
its definition, xxiii, xxiil. n.,
MPV. hs, LMS ms 25 ἢ
_n., 278 n.


Or 88


Οἰκονομικῶς, relating to the Incarna-
tion, 276.
Oil on the ocean surface, 63.
Old Testament, caution needful in
reading, 144.
Olympius, letters to, 124, 199.
sympathiser with Basil, 126
In, 100.
Ὅμοιον, Acacian, 49 n., 116, 116 n.,
130 ἢ.
suggested by Aetius, 116 n.
Ὁμοιούσιον, 1, 49 n.
Semiarian, 49 n.
‘Ouoovotov, 1, 41 n., 49 ἢ.» 117, 123 n.,
155, 176.
truly Catholic, 49 n., 117,
123. 958,
objected to as unscript-
ural, 17 n., 155.
Oracles of the Spirit, 16.
“Opyavoy, as a theological concept,
4.
Origen, as an expositor, 46 n.
not sound on the Spirit, 46 n.
perhaps misrepresented, 46 n.
others borrowed from him,
xliv. xlix. 46 n., 47 n.


Origenes, Christian apologist, letter
to, 126.
Orphan, on the Senatorial roll,


pleaded for, 173, 174.
Orphanene in Armenia, 311, 311 ἢ.
Osprey, its cruel habits, 99.

as a moral teacher, 99.
Otreus, bishop of Melitene, and his
history, 222, 222 ΤΙ:
Οὐρανός, its etymology and meaning,

70, 90.

Οὐσία and ὑπόστασις distinguished,

137, 270:

Ousia, its definition, 254.
as related to hypostasis, 254,
278.
Owl, 99.
Oxen and their instinct, 103.


Pzeonius, presbyter, 200.
Palladia, friend of Basil, 202.
Palladius at Mount of Olives, prob-
ably monk, 295.
letter to, 296.
Palladius, convert or penitent, letter
to, 316.
Palm trees, their fructification, and
teaching, 80.
Palmatius, perhaps connected with
the taxes, 182, 182 ἢ.
Palus Mzotis, 68.
Paraclete, 29 n.
if by a temporary proces-
sion, 303.
Paregarius, the presbyter, letter to,
158.
ae subintroduct, 158.
Paris, council of, accepted Homoou-
sion, xix.
Parnassus, a see in N. Cappadocia,
162, 279 n.
Παροικία, parochia, parish, 163 n., 244,
284 n.
as diocese, 279 n.
Παροιμία, how defined, lviii. n.
Parthenogenesis, I00 ἢ.


Pasinicus the physician, letter to, 310.
Patience, as a moral duty, Ixvii.
as a Christian virtue, Ixix.

Patripassians, 28 n.
Πατρίς, its force, xiv. n.
Patrophilus, bp. of Aégze, letters to,

285, 290.
Paul, signed the Jetter to the West,


177.
Paulinus, bp. of Antioch, consecrated
Lucifer, 164. n., 295 n.
was not supported by
Basil, 164, 253 n., 295 n.
account of his teaching,
303:
Paulinus of Tyre, received synodical
letter, xliv.
Paulus, presbyter, 293, 303.
had a letter with others, 293.
Peace and peacemakers, their bless-
ings, 210, 211, 260.
Pelagius, bp. of Laodicea, banished,
49 n.
signed the letter to the
West, 177.
letter to, 203; /203 ἢ:
Penance, applied to the clergy, 225,
256.
applied to the laity, 225,
236 sq.
for matrimonial breaches,
25.5.28, 288:
described 238, 256.
to the lapsed among the
clergy, 256.
for intentional homicide,
256.
for Peat i homicide,
250.
ona fallen virgin, 257.
on sodomy, 257.
on perjury, 257.
Penitence defined, li.
Penitential system (exomologesis),
225, 256 57:
Penitents, how dealt with, 256 sg.
Pentecost explained, 42.
Pepuzeni, their baptism, 223, 224.
in heresy, 224.
their baptismal formula, 224.
Pergamius, layman, letter to, 158.
Pericles, story about, Ixvii.
Perjury, the sin of, 174.
how penanced, 257, 259.
Persecution of the Christians, forms
of, "25 1} 28% .a1., 233,
284, 290, 303.
compared at different
times, 282 n., 307. *
heavy on the [astern
church, 280 sq., 290,
303, 307.
allowed for a period, 303.
its sufferers, xiii.
Perseverance, difficult, but blessed,


144.
Person, different from Essence, I, 5 n.,
254.

Peter, bp. of Alexandria, 200.
succeeded Athanasius, 200 ἢ.
was congratulated by Basil,

2Z2G0,
letters to, 200, 205.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


359


Peter, bp:
Basil, xili. 137 n.
Peter, brother of Basil, near Neocees-
area, XIV. χῖν, ἢ, XXVill. 249,
255:
succeeded Basil in Iris, 255 n.
Peter, clergyman, messenger from
Athanasius to Basil, 165.
Petrus, messenger to Eustathius, 192.
φάγος and φαγός, 278, 278 τι.
Phantasia, as a philosophic term, 8 n.
Phargamus, place of a synod, 180.
famous for a martyr’s
glory, 186.
Pharos at Alexandria, 172.
Philagrius Arcenus, letter to, 319.
Φιλανθρωπία, word how used, 12 ἢ.
Philochares. pushes on Gregory
Thaum. trial, 267.
Philosopher, his dress and habits, 112.


Philosophical speculations and for. |-


mulze, 38, 56, 56 n., 70.
Phocas, the Emperor, 228 n.
Φοράδων τέλεσμα, its character, 318 ἢ,
Photinus, heretic, xl. xl.n.
Photius admired the Hexaemeron, 51.
Φροντιστήριον, its use, Xx. Nn.
Phrygians, their natural character,
53
or Montanists, xxix. n.,
17-1
Φυλοκρινῶν, φιλοκρινῶν, 279 n.
Physician, importance of his science,
228,
Physiology of the ant inquired into,
126.
Φυσικοί were before Socrates, 57 ἢ.
Pigeon snaring described, 123.
Pilgrimages, 145 n.
Pillars, the, 69.
Pinna and its byssus, 94, 94 n.
Pisidia, clergy of, alarmed at Basil,
XXVlii.
Pisistratus at the seizing of the Acrop-
olis, 170 n.
Planets, their system and motions, 66,
85.
‘aaa in casting the nativities,
84, 35.
Plants, their reproduction, 80.
their variety, 79, 80, 81.
Plastic nature in the universe, 92 ἢ,
Plato, his theory of the earth, 58.
held four elements, 58.
on the grasshoppers and muses,
100 ἢ.
as a writer, 200.
Plutarch speaks of the Stoics, perhaps
in ignorance, 61.
Pneumatomachi, xliv. 1, 5 n., 16 n,,
47 δ 204, 192.
Eustathius a leader
of them, 302.


of Sebaste, brother of


Pcemenius visited Nicopolis and as-
sisted the church, 271.
Poetry made light of by Basil, lix.
lix. n.
Poison and its effect, 77, 78, 143.
Poisoners punished by Julian with
death, 143.
Polemo, presbyter at Myra, 259.
bp. of Myra, and present at
Constantinople, 259 n.
Polydamas, athlete of Scotussa, 322.
Polygamy, how penanced, 225, 258.
perhaps a fourth marriage,
258 ἢ.
Polytheism, largely Arian, 27 n., 49 n.,
285.


Pontic diocese, a civil division, 292.
Pontic Vicar, xxv. [See Demosthenes].
Pontus, description of Basil’s resi-
dence in, 124, 125.
the home of his friends, 255.
the clergy alarmed at Basil,
XXViii.
Pope, history of the title, 193 n.
Poverty described by Basil, 113, 208.
required in a monk, 208.
Prepositus pagorum, 318 n.
Prayer, offered to God in the Spirit,
247.
inspired by love, 111.
how to be unceasing, Ixix.
to the departed traced, Ixxi.n.
toward the East, a tradition,
41.
eastward position explained,
42.
standing at, and other pos-
tures, 42, 42 n.
Predicables, 26 n.
Prepositions, their force in English
and Greek, 3 s7., 36 57., 40 sg.
Presbyters and deacons, 186.
arrogating episcopal rights,
224.
Pride reproved, Ixv.
Private celebrations forbidden, differ-
ent reasons, 236 n.
Procopius, usurping at Constanti-
nople, xx. xxil, 134 ἢ.
Procession, the double, 30 n.
Prodicus, the sophist of Chios, Ixvi.
Proheeresius, early teacher of Basil,
XV.
Prophecy, a gift of the Spirit, 24.
Προπομπαὶ τῶν ἐξοδευόντων, inter-
preted, 285 ἢ.
Propontis, 74.
Protagoras, his character as a writer,
200.
Πρωτότοκος, its theological use, xl. n.
Proverb quoted, xxix, 122, 123, 130,
2254 5.10.
Proverbs, teaching by, lviii.


Podandus, stated οι S. Cappadocia, ; Pyrenees, 69.


given of in favour of
Tyana, xxiii.


Poemenius, presbyter of Sebasteia, |


183.
made bp. of Satala, xxvii.


185,155, 2.5271 ne


| Pythagorean, harmony of the spheres,


24 n., 66 n.
philosophy and its spec-
ulations, 27 n., 41 ἢ
giving and receiving for-

giveness, 323.


letter to him as peel Quality and substance, 56, 83.


193.


| Questions, their teaching value, 223.


Quintessence, 58 n.


Rain, accounted for, 70.
Rainbow, why called Iris, 139.
illustrates the Trinity, 140.
Rape, raptus, and its penalty, 238,
256, 308, 308 n.
Reader, rank in the ministry, 256 n.
penanced as in the ministry,
257.
Reason presided at the creation, 55,
58, 59.
Redemption, 300.
Red Sea, its supposed levels, 73.
Regeneration in baptism, 17, 21.
Relics of the martyrs, xxxii. lxxi. 153,
210, 210 n.
keeping them forbidden, 210 ἢ.
trade in forged relics, 210 n.
those of Basil said to be in
Rome, xxxil. n.
reverence for relics, lxxi. n.
Remora, detains a ship, 94, 94 n.
Renunciations in baptism, 42.
Reordination, practised by some
heretics, I199’/n.
charged upon
Arians, 199 n.
Repentance and amendment, 147 57.»
226.
always a call to mercy,
226,
Reproduction “ after its kind,” 76.
how regulated, 105.
Reservation of Holy Eucharist, 179,
179 n.
of great antiquity, 179 n.
as ruled in the English
church, 179 n.
Reserve in ancient teaching, xxiil, 202.
Reserved sacrament, 179, 179 n.
Resurrection illustrated, 100, 300.
a source of consolation,
114, 249.
Retreat, monastic, xvili.
Revelation of the Father by the Son,
274.
Revenge, forbidden to a Christian,
Ixvii.
Reverence shown in the church’s
services, 42.
Reward for intending to do good, 58.
Khone, 69.
Riches, warned against, Ixii.
Right hand, as place of honour, 10.
Righteous life must be continued, 144.
Ripzean mountains, 69.
Robbers, 256.
Rock crystal, how formed, 67.
Roman bishop appealed to, xxx. 165,
166, 287.
kind to other churches,
166 n., 254 n.
supremacy a modern
idea, xxx,
relations to the Roman
church, xxiii.
Romanism unknown in the early
church, xxx.
Rome, its rank in the fourth century,
IV. XX,
Rose, at first was without thorns, 7S.
as a moral teacher, 78, 323.


the


360


BASH.


Rule, monastic, xviii. lii. Jil. ἢ.
estimate of Basil’s, li.
Running in the stadium, 21.


Sabas, martyr, 210 n., 216 ἢ.
his martyrdom, 216.
Sabellianism, lx. 37 n., 196, 229,
249 57.. 304-
a Judaism in the Gos-
pel, 249.
taken up by Eustathius,
304.
Sabellians, 45, 243 n., 250.
taught the fatherhood of
the Son; 17 n.
Sabellius, 37, 122, 156, 249, 250, 254,
278.
his dates, 37 n.
if ai Libyan, 425,
246, 246 n.
his teaching, 123, 156, 251,
254, 278, 304.
erred by opposition, 123.
Sabinus, deacon, sent from the West
to Basil 275/977, 177 B.
Saccophon, a Manichzean sect, 239,
239 n.
Sagadares, subdued by Julian, 142.
Saints, the invocation of, and their
- images, 326.
Salaminia, Athenian ship of state,
221, 321 πὶ
Samosata, 132 n., 222, 222 ἢ’
church in trouble, 260.
letter to the presbyters,
229%
letter to the senate, 222.
letter to the clergy, 260.
Sanctissimus, presbyter, Basil’s mes-
senger, 192, 193, 198,
199.
probably
102 τι.
visited the East, full of
enthusiasm, 280, 292.
letters carried by, 292,
292 N., 293.
Sanctuary, Valens and ‘| heodosius
within, xxiv. n.
Sardinian sea, 74.
Sasima, why made a see, xxv. ΧΧΥΪ. n.,
250.
its location described, xxvi. ἢ.
Satala, visited by Basil, 184.
his letter to its citizens, 185.
its church put under Basil,
185.
his letter to its people, 185.
he makes Pcemenius their
bishop, 185, 185 n.
Saturninus, count at Antioch, 199.
Scandal of quarrels, 160, 161.
Schism, its description, 223, 223 n.,
224.
illustrated, 224.
Scriptures, their authority, 40 n.,
127 7.. 138, 220-
traditional interpretation
of, 40 n.
the oracles of the Spirit,
16, 220.
appealed to by heretics,
17. ἢ. 117 97.


125 A.,


a western,


Scriptures have “not one idle sylla-|Sylvanus, went to Rome and brought


ble,” 89.
study shows us our duty,
111.
examples of the virtues
in, 111.
received as
127 Sg.) 138.
to be carefully studied,


teacher,


144.

Scytale, Spartan staff for dispatches

1712, 112 Ὥ:
Scythia, 69.
Sea, beautiful, 75, 94.

in a storm, described, 73, 75.

its mysteries, 94.

sickness at, 110.
Seal, its theological meaning, 9 n.
Seas named, 74.
Seasons given by the Creator, 86.

marked out by the sun, 86 n.

Sebasteia, Arian factions at, 290.
Secret, the, in church teaching, 42.


back
287 n.
educated bishop Diodorus
of Tarsus, 200 ἢ.
Silvanus, presbyter, had letter, with
others, from Basil, 293.
Silvinus, deacon, had letter, with
others, from Basil, 293.
Simplicia, heretic lady, 190.
letter to, 190.


letters,. 2, τὸ.


her slave was consecrated -


bishop, 190 n. F
Simplicity of the faith perverted, 8.
Sin, its definition, and classification, li.
lil. 15 ἢ.
from personal choice, li. 86.
original, 104 n.
unto death, 239 n.
Singing psalms antiphonally, 247.
Sinner taught by agriculture, 80,
to be sorrowed for, Ixii.
Sirmian “ blasphemy,” xviii.


instructions conveyed by mes-|Sirmium, creeds of, xviii. 49 n.


sages, 159.
Secundus of Ptolemais, xxxiii.


“ Sitting,” for immutability and im-
mortality, 10.


Σεληνιασμός and émiAnwia considered, Σκεῦος interpreted, 214 n.


SSM
Seleucia synod and creed, 49 n., 292.
Semiarianism, 49 n.


Σκιαγραφία, what it is, 19, 19 ἢ.
Slanders easily uttered, 243, 244, 248,
249


Sq.
Semiarians, xviii. sg., 16 n., 243 n.,|Slavery, 32, 32 n., 168, 190, I9I, 237,


208, 268!" a, 269,
287 sq.
refused conciliar decis-
ions, 287.
their disorders, 286, 287,
291.
send deputies to Rome,xx.
had their bishops re-
stored, xx.


their shiftiness, 288.
were deposed at Constan-
tinople, 288 n.
were favoured by Mele-
tius, xix.
held synods at Cyzicus
and at Antioch, xxx.
Seraphim, taught of God, 24.
Serbonian lake, 74.
Serpent heals sore eyes, 103.
Severus, bishop, 227, 227 n., 286 n.
signed with Basil and others,
XxVil. 286 n.
Severus, chorepiscopus, 196.
Shadowless men (Askii), 86.
shadowed on one side
(Hetero-skii), 86.


shadowed on_ both)


sides (Amphiskii),
86.


Sicilian sea, 74.
Sight, how imperfect in representing
nature, 87.
Signs in meteorology, 84.
of the Zodiac, 85.
Silence as a discipline in a Christian
assembly, 128.
Silvanus, metropolitan of Tarsus, died,
xX. 136;
one of the best of the Ari-
ans, 136, 264.
troubles expected at his
death, 136, 136 n.


240, 256.
how viewed in the ancient
church, 33 Ὡ.» τοῦ; aon
240.
its moral condition, 240, 256.
Slaves, how men become such, 32,
ΙΟΙ.
one made a bishop, 33 ἢ.»
190 n.
in second marriage, 256.
Sleep, only a refreshment, 112.
Snow accounted for, 70.
Socinianism, 36.
Socrates, anecdote of, Ixvii.
Sodomy penanced, 257.
Soldier, letter to a, 186.
high principle may be shown
in, 186
Soldiers, as homicides, 226, 228.
wives marrying in their ab-
sence, 239.


life not incompatible with


true religion, 186.
Solitary, life of, requires pure aim
and perseverance, 148.
its duties and habits, 143 s¢.,
146.
its temptations, 145.
painfu! picture of, 145.
its value, 146.
Solitude, its value, 110, 129, 146.
beauty of its occupations,
111.
its necessary instruction for
profit, 129, 143 sg.
Solomon fell through one fault, 144.
Son in relation to the Father, xxxiv.
SERVI XKME. EL. 5. Ὁ» ta, Fee
14, 27 5g.. 38 δύω 117, 120,
138, 139, 155, 156, 186, 195,
230, 2314 250, 200:
One, and God, 28, 117.


--


ἱ
᾿


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Son by Eternal Generation, xxxiv. 13. |Spirit, the Paraclete, 15, 19 n., 30.


proceedeth from the Father,
CERI Rh ES Ay OHSS, 110.
taught of the father, 14, 106.
sense of ‘‘ Express Image,” 14 ἢ.
subject to the Father, xxxiv.
XXxViiil, 14,. 118, 120.
by Whom the Father made all
things, 106, 138, 139.
source of sanctification, 116.
consubstantial with the Father,
LIAS LIB 120, (PSRs (Th 5,
156, 170. 105; 212, 200.
His ceconomy of non-knowing,
ELS, 270, 277.
His dispensation an ceconomy,
118.
“ Wisdom,”
120 n.
not a creature, xxxiv. xl. 120.
as Homoousios, xxxiv. 269.
as appearing to the patriarchs,
300 n.
as confessed by Eunomius, xxxiv.
5.
as discussed by Basil and Euno-
mius, XXXIV. sq.
His Name above every name,
XXXViii.
His freedom, xxxix.
First-born of every creature, xl.
Soothsayers and their dupes pen-
anced, 257, 259.
Sophist, his character and ease in
writing, 127, 322.
Sophronius, the bishop, letter to, 218.
highly spoken of by Basil,
21S, (235:
Sophronius, carried a letter, 186.
perhaps disciple of Eus-
tathius, 192 n.
Sophronius, the master, letters to, 134,
170, 180, 221, 233, 309.
fellow-student of Basil at
Athens, xv. 134 ἢ.
friend of Gregory Naz.,
104. 0,135;
in favour with Valens,


as in Proverbs,


134 n.
quarrelled with Basil, 134
N., 309.
appealed to, for Gregory
Naz.; 134.
Sorceress and her spells, 89 n., 257 n.
Soul and life in quadrupeds, 95, 95 n.,
102.
different in cattle and man, 95.
transmigration of, 96, 96 n.
Sozopolitans, letter to, 299.
place identified, 299 n.
Spain, Western, 73.
_ Specifics found by animals, 103.
Spirit, a created essence, 54.
if beyond time, infinite and
- eternal, 54.
Spirit, Holy, the means of blessing,
25, 44.
as related to Father and Son,
1G) 175595, ΤΟΣ 23, 27 57.
35, 36 59-5 39, 40, 44, 121,
138, 156, 170, 186, 195, 212,
22G 210: 201:
how the Third Person, 23, 28.


enlightens, 15, 23, 29, 40.

His names, 30.

His operations, 15, 23, 30, 21,
44, 186.

Intercessor, 31.

called the Lord, 19, 23, 33.

unapproachable in thought, 15,
34, 54.

His glory in our numbering


His attributes, 15, 35, 36, 38,


39.

above the creature and nature,
15, 19, 23, 35, 36, 44, 120,
180,10. N.; 212.

above the angels, 19.

our gift from God, 23, 36.

ever present, but always oper-
ating, 38.

how spoken of as a place, 39.

the source of grace, 15, 19, 22,
39, 40, 44, 138, 186, 212.

the Prince of Life, 44.

passes all understanding, 44.

blasphemy against, and no
forgiveness, 17, 23, 44, 47.

His Godhead, 15, 16, 17, 18,
ΤΟ 23) 10; 120} 121; 156;


229 sq.

agent in baptism, 17 sg., 49,
49 n.

Scripture ideas suggested, 15,
19, 20.

proceeds from the Father, 15,
ΤῸ; 120, 138:

called the Spirit of God, 62,
156, 212.

proceeds through the Son, 138,
156


Holy and the source of holi-
NESS)! ΕΠ. 25, PIS; 21:

confessed with the Father and
the Son, Fg 18. 10; 212:

our means of restoration, 22,


23:
how regarded at Nicza, 195,
202.
brooded on the waters, and
moved on their face, 62, 63,
63 n.
how approaches the human
soul, 15.
Σπουδαρχίδης, its meaning, 49 nN.
Spurious letters attributed to Basil,
20.
Squid, its habits and teaching, 91, 92.
Stage in Basil’s day, Ixvi.
Star, the Evening, its beauty, 64, 66.
Stars, in their courses, studied, 54, 66,
85 τ. 93.
used in Astrology, 84, 85, 86,


93-
in their order and regularity,


02 ἢ.
Stephen, bp. of Rome, 17 n.
Stepmother, ancient dislike to, 214 n.
incest with, 258.

Στερέωμα, history of the word, 99 n.
Stoics, charges against them, 61 n.

in opposing parties, 70.

some atheistical, 70.

founded by Zeno, 113 n.

Stoic saying, 209.


361


Στολῇ, ecclesiastical garment, 218 ἢ.
Stork, its habits and teaching, 98.
its pious affection, 98, 98 n.
Strategius, presbyter, carries a letter,
285, 289, 290.
Strymon as seen from Amphipolis,


125:
Subjection of the Son to the Father,
118, 120, 120 n.
Subintroductze, συνείσακτοι, 158, 158 n.
forbidden by [ἴδε
church and coun-
cils, 158, 158 n.
Subnumeration, what it is, 26, 27, 30.
Substance, as a theological term, 3 n.,
FEZ} τὸ, 120) 122. 350,
254.
apart from quality, 56, 83.
distinguished from Hy-
postasis, 137 sg., 156.
difficulty of finding suffi-
cient terms, 254.
Συμμόρια, district for a chorepiscopus,


315 n.
Sun, how called great, 87, 88, 89.
a moral teacher, 89.
and moon created, 82.
their weather signs,
84.
Συνάφεια, its meaning in the Arian
controversy, 16 n., 269 n.
Sunday, first day of the week, 42.
Superintendents of small churches,
2325
Sympius, of Sirmium, correspondent
of Basil, xl. 233.
Syncletius, senator turned monk, xvii.
Synod [See Council] held annually as
a rule in dioceses, 184.
Swearing forbidden, 238.


Tabernacle, services fixed by Moses,
42.
Tamarisk, its properties and lessons,
81.
Tanais, 68.
Tantalus, tales of, 110.
Tarsus, see requiring a bishop, 136.
letter to its presbyters, 189.
Tartessus, 69.
Tatian, 224.
Tatianus, presbyter at Myra, 259.
Taurus, iron producing and taxed, 188.
tax too heavy, 188.
Tax, not imposed by bishops, 324.
one by a contribution of mares,
318.
assessing unpleasant, 318.
exemption for the clergy, 186,
205.
exemption asked for monks, 312.
exemption asked for hospitals,
205.
Tax-paying, 127, ἄνω 174,175, 166,
185.
not to be on oath, 174.
difficulty of, 175.
heavy on the Cappado-
cians, 169, 170, 174 n.
heavy on the mines of
Taurus, 188.
when paid in_ gold,
175 n.


362


BASIL.


Tax-paying, clerical exemptions, 186,
205.
Temperance, a moral virtue, lii. liv.
Temple is “a place cut off,” 121 n.
of Fortune, its destruction,
xix nN.
Terentius, the admirable, 162, 254.
orthodox, and in favour
with Valens, 182 n.
had three daughters
deaconesses, 182 n.
letters to Count Teren-
tius, 182, 253.
letters to the daughters,
deaconesses, 186.
was drawn away from
Basil, 255.
an early friend, xv
Terms involve the truth, 2.
valuable in definition, 3, 9.
dangerous in the using, 9.
Testaceans, from the water, 90.
Tetractys, Pythagorean number, 127,
127 n.
Textual criticism, 92 n., 117 n., 120 n.
Thalassius, signed the letter to the
West, 177.
Thales, on elements, 116 ἢ.
credited with a
122 n.
Theatres, an evil influence, 72.
their customs, 81.
Thecla, letter to, 319.
Theodora, ἃ canonissa, 155 ἢ.
letter to, 219.


proverb,


Theology, patristic meaning of the | Trinity, as conceived by Arius, 1, 23,


word, 7 m., 28 ἢ.
Theophilus, bp. of Castabala, 198,
286, 289.
went to Rome, xx. 287 n.,
289.
closely associated with
Eustathius, 289 n.
letter to, 289,
Theophilus, of Antioch, 51.
Θεοφόρος applied to mere men, 8 ἢ,
Theophrastus, deacon, messenger of


Basil, 159, 159 n.,
180


died on his journey,
180.
| Theophrastus, the philosopher, 200.
Θεός, its derivation, 121 n.
Theotecnus, friend ‘of Basil and Maxi-
mus, 311.
Θεότοκος, 326, 326 Nn.
Therasius, the presbyter, and the
relics of 5. Dionysius, 235.
Therasius, the great, perhaps gover-
nor, 171, 171 n.

Thessalonica, its spiritual condition,
210.

Thief, how penanced, 257.

Thrace, as place of exile of Eusebius,
257 nN.

Thrasymachus, his character as writer,
200.

Thunder, its cause, 67.

Θυσιαστήσια, altars, 291.

Tides dependent on the προς 80.


Theodore, of Mopsuestia, in the Arian| Time not applicable to God, 8, 54.


controversy, 16n.
Theodore, of Nicopolis, 160 n.
Theodoretus, signed the letter to the
West, 177.
Theodorus, sub-deacon, 260.
Theodorus, letter to, 194.
Theodosius, presbyter, sent from Ni-
copolis, 281.
Theodosius, emperor, baptized by
Ascholius, 209.
defended the Catholic
faith, xliv.
Theodosius, magistrate of Cappado-


cia, 326.
Theodotus, bp. of Nicopolis, xxvii.
177, 279.
signed the letter to the
West,.177.
wished a visit from Basil,
180, 183.


asked to draw Basil from
Eustathius, xxvii. 180
Ns, 18.
not quite friendly towards
Basil, xxvii. 183.
letter to, 193.
his death, xxix. 270 -n.,
271. 270.
Theodotus, bp. of Berza, letter to,
222,
Theodotus, bp., signed the letter to
the West, 177.
Θεολογία distinguished from οἰκονομία,
SXRVI.' 4.7 Ὧν
Theological terms, important, 2, 9.
difficult to trans-
late, 3,4.


begins and ends, 53; 72.
its nature, 54, 55, 72.
allied to change, 54.
“Time appointed,” 118 n.
Timotheus the musician, xviii.
Tomb-breakers, how penanced, 257.
Tortoise has his specific, 103.
Tortures for producing apostasy, 17.
Tradesmen addressed by Basil, 51,
65.
Tradition, a guide in interpretation,
16, 40 n.
our guide in sacrament and
ceremonies, 41 sqg., 212,
2133
unwritten in the early
church, 16, 45 το». 213,
apostolic, its value, 16, 213.
from such as Gregory
Thaum., 243 59.
Trainer of the martyrs, ἀλείπτης, 210,
210 π., 216.
Training necessary for all work, Ixviii.
Trajan, commander-in-chief, 206 ἢ.
letters to, 206, 207.
Transmigration of souls, 96.
Trees, some fruit-yielding, some not,


78,
their culture and variety, 79.
their sex distinguishes their

fruit, 80.
Trial needful for slandered clergy,
244.
Trials in the church as in life, 281.
ieee how Penpneetly 225, 240 ἢ:
258 n.
Trine immersion, 22, 42.


106 n., 285.
three Persons equal, xxxiv. 5 Ζ.,
13, 16, 23, 27 594 39, 43;
45, 49 n., 107, 138, 176,
186, 250, 268, 269, 278.
sophisms regarding, xxxvi. 3,
23, 27, 43, TOG; 0.
not related in time, 8.
denied by the Monarchians,
27 n.
how numbered, 23, 28, 49 ἢ.»
116, 138, 195, 251.
not divided, 23, 45, 106, 116.
Unity in, 45, 106, 116, 195,
326.
in Unity, dvapyoc, 13 n., 195.
the source of blessings, 23, 46.
not confounded, 49 n., 138.
not one under three names,
ΧΧΧΙΝ, Sg. 251, 326,
Arian view, Xxxiv. 5ζ.,) 254.
Sabellian view, 251. 304, 326.
called by Sabellius “ one thing
of many faces,” 249.
Apollinarian statement, 197.
baptism in the Name of the,
240, 250, 269.
earthly images and_illustra-
tions of, 23, 140.
Tritheists, 116, 229.
name given to the Catho-
lics, 229.
Troops equipped from the taxes,
175 n.
Tropici, heretical sect, 195 n.
Truth, most valuable to reach, 2.
in Yea and Nay, 2
requires defender as well as
accuser, 243, 244.
Turtle dove, as a moral teacher, 98.
Tyana, letter to the senate, 181.
troubles of its bishop, 181.
its position and status, xxiii.


250 n.
Types of baptism in the Old Testa-
ment, 20.
their value, 19, 20,
21.


Tyrrhene sea, 74.


Ὕλη, its philosophical force, 5.
Ulphilas, how converted, 216 πη.
Ulysses and the Sirens’ song, 109, 206.
fable of his history, 206.
Unbegotten was an unwelcome term,
116.
in what sense true, xxxiv.
57.
Unction of Catechumens, 42 n.
in baptism, 42, 42 n.
in confirmation, 42 n.
of sick, 42 n.
Unity in Trinity, 45, 106, 116, 195,
20,


in the church, its basis, 189.
Universe, how conceived of, .53 Ὧν


56.
God its maker, 53 sg.
the earth in its centre, 57,
68.
formed in wisdom, 58 sg.
bound in one, 60.


Universe created in harmony and
beauty, 71.

University life at Athens, xv.

Unwritten tradition, 41 sg.

Ὑπηρεσία and ὑπηρέτης, how used,
12 ἢ:

Urbicius, the monk, letter to, 193,
301; 220:

Urchin, sea, its habits and instincts,


Usurer is pictured, xlvii. xlviii. xlix.
Usury denounced in the ancient
church, xlvii. sg.
how regulated in the church,

228, 228 n.


Valens, the Emperor, as persecutor,
Mike KK. ΧΧΊ]. XIV. 2 n,,
152 πὸ ΤΟΣ πὶ, 163'n., 203
Ds, 205 ἢ. 221 ἢ, 201, 201
thy 2δ1 ἢ., 282 ἢ., 280 ἢ.
his accession, xix. 48 n., 282 ἢ.
came with Arian bishops to
Ceesarea, xxii. xxiv. 152 ἢ.
came with them also to Par-
nassus, 162 n.
divided Cappadocia, 169, 170.
his law of cases to be tried in
their own province, 267 n.
condition of the church at his
accession, xix. Xx.
stood in awe of Basil, xx.
ἜΧΗ XX. XXIV.
contributed to the hospital at
Coesarea, XXi. Xxiv.
his personal appearance, xxiv.
taken within the sanctuary,
XXIV.
partly reconciled with Basil,
XXXV.
his death, xxxi.
Valentinian heresy, a gnostic dualism,
61, 61 n.
its emanations, 61.
Valentinian, the Emperor, xix. xxx.


had a council held in
Illyria, xxx.
Valentinians, in heresy, 61, 224.
Valentinus, the heretic, 300.
Valerianus, bp. of Illyricum, 177.
was bp. of Aquileia at
Roman synods, 177 n.
Valerianus’ letter to, 311.
Valerius, probably bishop, mentioned
by Fasil, 232.
Venesa identified, xxix.
Versions of Scripture, 74 n.
Via media, 252.
Vicar, 267, 279.
Victor, the commander, letter to, 209.
Victor, the ex-consul, letter to, 209.
Vigils, 247.
Vine, a powerful teacher, 79.
Viper and lamprey, fable of, 93, 93 n.
law of reproduction, 104,
Virgin, fallen, 149, 236, 256.
invited back, 149 s@¢.,
218.
her exculpations, 148.
how to be disciplined, 217,
218, 236.
Virgin Mary, 300.


207,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


363


Virgin. Mary, her perpetual virginity,; Western Church, Semiarian deputa-


xli. xli. n.
as an object of invoca-
tion, Ixxi. n.
Virgins, how to be received from
heresy, 237.
increasing with the church’s
growth, 237.
sometimes from inferior
motives, 219, 237.
ecclesiastical definition of,
2377,
conditions of reception, 237.
their monastic condition, 1.
Virtue, moral health, 103, 104.


conformity to nature, 103,
104 ἢ.
Vitalius, Apollinarian bishop δἱ
Antioch, 295.


Vows, foolish, to be avoided, 238.
monastic, not always irrevoca-
ble, lit. i,
Vultures, 100.


War and its relation to homicide, 228.
Water blessed for baptism, 42.
Water, not said to have been created,
60.
floated on the earth, 60, 72.
supported the earth, 57.
moved upon by the Spirit, 62.
about the firmament, 67, 68.
diminished by fire, 68, 69.
superabundant, 67, 68, 69.
allegorised, 71.
its gathering together, 72 sg.
naturally seeks a lower level,
. 72» 73
its place and value in nature,
75» 90.
becomes wine or oil, 80, 81.
receives its life and adorn-
ment, 90, 95.
teems with life, 90, 95.
Wealth, right use of, 279.
Wedlock, its duties, 93.
Wednesday, Friday, Saturday, spe-
cially observed, 179.
Well-doing is crowned at the end,
143, 144.
Western sea, 68, 69, 89.
Western Church as a support to the
Eastern, $63,
τοῦ: τὸν, 175:
282.) 282 n:, 292,
301, 305.
appealed to by
letter, xxii. 176,
198, 282, 282 n.
asked to be cautious
in receiving East-
erns, 198.
dealt cautiously
with Basil, 202.
their letter carried
about, 253.
letter used against
Basil, xxx. 255.
their indifference
regretted, xxx.
282.
agreed with the East
at Niczea, 305.


tion to, xx.
position of the
church in the
fourth century,
XXX.
Whales, why called great, 94.
Whon, through, of, and with, 3 sg.
Widows and widowhood, 219, 237.
how dealt with in the church,
237, 220.
not to be supported in second
marriage, 238.
marry again without sin, 239.
Wife desertion, how penanced, 258.
Wife’s complaint against her hus-
band, 314.
Wine refused by some heretics, 240.
Wisdom of God a personal relation-
ship, 74.
that of the wise is worldly,


4.
eee in the creation, 55, 58,
59, 68.
of this world, 69.
Wisdom, Book of, ascribed to Solo-
mon, 122 n.
“ With,” its teaching, 37 sg., 40 sg.


43 S95.
Word, the, the Son of God, 24, 55,
106.
in the creation, 55, 106.
the Divine, 55.
pervades creation, 102, 106.
the Image of God, 106.
Words, must be weighed and verified,


244.
World had a beginning, 53, 54, 55»


56, 59.
not coeternal with the creator,


54:
the time and purpose of its
creation, 54, 59.
not formed by chance, 55, 68.
not its own cause, 56, 59.
its order, 57, 59, 68.
was invisible, 59.
a macrocosm, 92 ἢ.
Worship in the Spirit, 40.
the public, 75, 247.
its form and use, 247.
Writer, letter to a, 320.
Writers, caligraphist and shorthand,
xliv. xliv. n., 200.
Writing, as a profession, xliv. n., 200,
201.
in book form, 272 n.
directions upon, 320.


Xerxes, his canal across Athos, 322,
322 ni,


Yea and Nay embrace all truth, 2.
Year of the Hebrews and early
Greeks, 87.


Zela, 268, 292.
Zeno, bp. of Tyre, signed the letter
to the West, 177.
Zephyrinus, bp. of Rome, 37 n.
Zodiac in nativities, 84.
divided out for astrology, 85.


-
‘ . 2 Ἂ - c
ξ ξ i
i
ἢ . ‘ <
: ᾿- ;
” ᾿
» > x ’ 5
‘ ? "αὶ
᾿ ᾿
2
' ᾽ - ᾿ : owe ~—~ -....:-- ko — Sim a ~—- ve
— ‘ ᾿ ine ν
er °
2 z .
- . Ν
Ὁ . ts -
᾿
ν Ὁ ς
. - Ξ :
"
' . *
oo -* ~ - * -
.
. % cd . ᾿ *
i wm
.
κι ͵
‘
᾿
τ ΠῚ
-
= Ε
. a ᾿
" .
, - - . . » Ν


Ai
ny A 94
eas


as ν᾽


#


wv


{τὶ ων


™T 7 Gist


3 1197 20692 5411


Date Due


All library items are subject to recall at any time.


=)


Δ


Col


ih
AA ἡ ,) υ
MAK |
S


A 1 di mnt


ΠΆΡΕ 0 8 2011
MAR 2 3 7ΠΠ


Re sae
>>
+ A
ς ὰ


Brigham Young University


EAR 8 gn Lp


tars:


Tat
PTs Bas
οἱ ἡ" ¢ vale r)


eye


le : re,
ΡΥ ΤΩ


ἣ ahs ,


Siete
bees]


rath
ἊΝ
